Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following management’s discussion and analysis is intended to provide the reader with an overall understanding of our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and sources and uses of cash. This section also includes general information about our business and a discussion of our management’s analysis of certain trends, risks and opportunities in our industry. In addition, we also provide a discussion of accounting policies that require critical judgments and estimates. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements and our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those set forth in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Note About Forward-Looking Statements
This report includes estimates, projections, statements relating to our business plans, objectives and expected operating results that are “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. Forward-looking statements often discuss our current expectations and projections relating to our financial condition, results of operations, plans, objectives, future performance and business. You can identify forward-looking statements by the fact that they do not relate strictly to historical or current facts. See the section of this Annual Report titled, “Forward-Looking Statements” above for further information regarding forward-looking statements.
OUR BUSINESS
Townsquare is a community-focused digital media, digital marketing solutions and radio company focused outside the Top 50 markets in the U.S. We own and operate 322 radio stations and more than 330 local websites in 67 U.S. markets, a digital marketing subscription business (Townsquare Interactive) providing websites, search engine optimization, social platforms and online reputation management for approximately 22,750 small to medium sized businesses, a proprietary digital programmatic advertising technology with an in-house demand and data management platform (Townsquare Ignite), an e-commerce offering, and we own and operate numerous local live events each year. Many of our radio stations are considered market leaders and we also participate in the digital, mobile, video and social media arena. Almost all of our radio stations have local companion websites that utilize the station brands and are populated with proprietary, original content created or curated by our local media personalities. In addition, we create, promote and produce a diverse range of live events, including, concerts, expositions and other experiential events within and beyond our radio markets.
Our integrated and diversified product and service offerings enable local, regional and national advertisers to target audience engagement across multiple platforms, including on-air, online and at live events. Advertising revenue for our businesses is highly correlated to changes in gross domestic product (“GDP”) as dollars spent on advertising has historically trended in line with, and in our experience often lags, changes in GDP. According to the U.S. Department of Commerce estimate as of January 28, 2021, U.S. GDP decreased 3.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020. We believe our product and service offerings, combined with our leading market position in small and mid-sized markets, enable us to generate higher total net revenue per audience member than radio station owners focused on larger markets.
Our primary sources of net revenue are the sale of advertising on our radio stations, owned and operated websites, radio stations’ online streams and mobile applications. Our sales of advertisements are primarily affected by the demand for advertising from local, regional and national advertisers and the advertising rates we charge. Advertising demand and rates are based primarily on our ability to attract audiences to our various products in the demographic groups targeted by advertisers, as measured principally by various services on a periodic basis. We endeavor to develop strong audience loyalty and believe that the diversification of formats on our radio stations and websites helps to insulate
our radio stations and websites from the effects of changes in musical tastes of the public with respect to any particular format. We believe that the sale of our online and mobile advertisements, which currently have rates per advertisement that are less than those of terrestrial radio advertisements, has not negatively impacted our terrestrial radio advertising net revenue. Should a significant and sudden shift in demand for these products toward online and mobile occur, there could be a material adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations if we are unable to increase rates accordingly. However, we believe that as a result of our strong brands and high quality online and mobile offerings we are well positioned to increase rates as demand increases for these products.
In addition, we offer precision customer targeting solutions to advertisers through Townsquare Ignite, our digital programmatic advertising platform. Combining first and third party audience and geographic location data, Ignite is able to hyper-target audiences for our local, regional and national advertisers, providing them the ability to reach a high percentage of their online audience. Ignite delivers these solutions across desktop, mobile, connected TV, email, paid search and social media platforms utilizing display, video and native executions.
We also offer digital marketing solutions through Townsquare Interactive, on a subscription basis, to small and mid-sized local and regional businesses in small and mid-sized markets across the United States, including the markets in which we operate radio stations. Our digital marketing solutions include traditional and mobile-enabled website development and hosting services, e-commerce platforms, search engine and online directory optimization services, online reputation monitoring, social media management, and website retargeting.
Our primary source of live events net revenue is ticket sales. Our live events also generate substantial net revenue through the sale of sponsorships, food and other concessions, merchandise and other ancillary products and services. Live event ticket pricing is based on consumer demand for each event and the geographic location and target audience demographic of each event. Unforeseen events such as inclement weather conditions can have an adverse impact on our net revenue. In certain cases, we mitigate this risk with insurance policies, which cover a portion of lost revenue as a result of unforeseen events including inclement weather.
We strive to maximize our net revenue by managing our advertising inventory and adjusting prices based on supply and demand and by broadening our base of advertisers and subscribers. Our selling and pricing activity is based on demand for our advertising inventory and, in general, we respond to this demand by varying prices rather than by varying our target inventory levels. The optimal number of advertisements available for sale depends on the platform and in the case of our radio stations, their online streams and mobile applications, the programming format of a particular radio station. Each of our advertising products has a general target level of available inventory. We seek to broaden our base of advertisers in each of our markets by providing a wide array of audience demographic segments across our platforms, thereby providing each of our potential advertisers with an effective means of reaching a targeted demographic group.
Our advertising contracts are generally short-term. In the media industry, companies, including ours, sometimes utilize barter agreements that exchange advertising time for goods or services such as travel or lodging, instead of cash.
Our most significant expenses are sales personnel, programming, digital development, marketing and promotional, engineering, and general and administrative expenses. We strive to control these expenses by closely monitoring and managing each of our local markets and through efficiencies gained from the centralization of finance, accounting, legal and human resources functions and management information systems. We also use our scale and diversified geographic portfolio to negotiate favorable rates with vendors where feasible.
A portion of our expenses are variable. These variable expenses primarily relate to sales costs, such as commissions, as well as certain programming costs, such as music license fees, and certain costs related to production. Marketing and promotions expenses are discretionary and are primarily incurred in an effort to maintain and/or increase our audience share. Other programming, digital, engineering and general and administrative expenses are primarily fixed costs.
The Company has identified three operating segments, which are Advertising, including broadcast and digital advertising products and solutions, Townsquare Interactive, our digital marketing solutions subscription business and Live Events, including concerts, expositions and other experiential events.
OVERVIEW OF OUR PERFORMANCE
Changes In Our Business
On May 22, 2020, the Company entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement to acquire certain assets and liabilities related to a radio broadcast station in the Duluth, Minnesota market for $0.4 million. The acquisition closed on October 9, 2020 and consideration was paid with cash on hand. Refer to Note 4, Acquisitions, in the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
On May 22, 2019, the Company entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement to acquire certain assets and liabilities related to a radio broadcast station in Tuscaloosa, AL for $0.7 million. The acquisition closed on July 31, 2019 and consideration was paid with cash on hand. Refer to Note 4, Acquisitions, in the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
During the first quarter of 2019, management concluded that the Company should exit its music festival business, which consisted of four multi-day music festivals (the “Music Festivals”). On May 24, 2019, the Company closed on the sale of the Music Festivals for $10.0 million. Upon the sale, the Company and the purchaser of the Music Festivals entered into a production services agreement which required the Company to operate the 2019 festivals on the purchaser's behalf. The Company acted as an independent contractor while performing the services and earned a fixed percentage of profits from the festivals. Accordingly, the assets, liabilities and results of operations of this business have been presented as discontinued operations on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2019 and in the Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2019. Refer to Note 5, Divestitures and Discontinued Operations, in the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
COVID-19 Pandemic Impact
The COVID-19 pandemic has materially and adversely impacted the U.S. economy and financial markets, with legislative and regulatory responses including unprecedented monetary and fiscal policy actions across all sectors, and there is significant uncertainty as to the timing of stabilization and recovery. The extent of the COVID-19 impact will depend on future actions and outcomes, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the scope, severity and duration of the outbreak, the short-term and long-term economic impact of the outbreak (including the effect on advertising activity, consumer discretionary spending and our employees in the markets in which we operate), the actions taken to mitigate the impact of the pandemic, and the pace of economic and financial market recovery when the COVID-19 pandemic subsides, among others.
The COVID-19 pandemic and measures taken to contain it have subjected our business, results of operations, financial condition, stock price and liquidity to a number of material risks and uncertainties, all of which may continue or worsen. Our operations had performed strongly in the first two months of 2020 before the effects of COVID-19 began to impact our operations in early March 2020, as the challenges that COVID-19 created for advertisers and consumers has materially and adversely impacted our net revenues since mid-March. In particular, our clients canceled a significant amount of advertising, and we experienced a material decline in the purchase of new advertising by our clients. In addition, we canceled a large number of our live events. While our Advertising revenue and Live Events revenue significantly declined, Townsquare Interactive continued its revenue growth.
See Part I, Item 1A., “Risk Factors” for additional information on the current and potential impacts of COVID-19 and related risks and uncertainties to our business, results of operations, financial condition, liquidity, and stock price. We continue to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources - COVID-19 Response” for certain proactive initiatives we have taken to preserve financial flexibility, mitigate the impact of the recent and uncertain decline in net revenue, as well as position us for growth as advertising demand rebounds.
Highlights of Our Financial Performance
Certain key financial developments in our business for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 are summarized below:
•Net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared with the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased $60.1 million, or 13.9%, primarily driven by a decrease of $54.3 million in our Advertising net revenue as a result of advertising cancellations and declines in the purchase of new advertising and a $14.6 million decline in our Live Events net revenue as a result of the cancellation of live events, both primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic, offset by an increase of $8.8 million in our Townsquare Interactive segment, due to additional net subscribers in 2020.
•Excluding revenue related to political advertising of $16.0 million and $3.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared with the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased $73.0 million, or 17.0%.
•Operating loss increased $37.8 million from an operating loss of $37.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to an operating loss of $75.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 101.9%. Operating loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was impacted by a decrease of $60.1 million in net revenue as discussed above; an increase of $2.9 million in business realignment cost compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to COVID-19 related reductions in workforce; an increase in transaction costs of $1.1 million, primarily due to fees incurred related to the amendment of our $320.0 million term loan facility (the “Term Loans”) during the second quarter of 2020; partially offset by a decrease in direct operating expenses of $18.1 million and a decrease of $5.7 million in depreciation and amortization expense. Our Advertising segment reported an operating loss of $55.3 million which represents a decrease of $44.0 million from the year ended December 31, 2019, due to the decrease in net revenue discussed above, partially offset by a decrease in direct operating expenses of $13.5 million. Our Live Events segment reported an operating loss of $1.1 million, as compared to operating income of $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, reflecting the cancellation of live events in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
•The increases in the Advertising and Live Events segments operating losses were offset by Townsquare Interactive’s operating income of $20.5 million, an increase of $1.9 million from 2019, primarily due to growth in net subscribers, and a decrease of $8.1 million in corporate costs and other reconciling items, primarily due to lower compensation costs.
•Cash and cash equivalents decreased to $83.2 million from $84.7 million as of December 31 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table summarizes our historical consolidated results of operations:
**Percent change not meaningful.
Segment Results
The following table presents the Company's reportable segment net revenue and direct operating expenses for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively (in thousands):
Net Revenue
Net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $60.1 million, or 13.9%, as compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease in Advertising revenue was the result of advertising cancellations and a material decline in the purchase of new advertising by our clients primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The impact of the advertising cancellations and declines in new advertising were partially offset by a $12.9 million increase in political advertising revenue for the 2020 election cycle. Our Live Events segment revenue decreased $14.6 million, or 85.5%, in 2020, as compared to 2019 driven by the cancellation of events due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our Townsquare Interactive segment revenue increased $8.8 million, or 14.4% as compared to 2019, primarily due to the addition of approximately 3,750 net subscribers in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Direct Operating Expenses
Direct operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $18.1 million, or 6.0%, when compared with the same period in 2019. Our Advertising direct operating expenses for year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $13.5 million, or 5.5%, as compared to the same period in 2019. This decrease was primarily driven by lower compensation, partially offset by higher operating expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our Live Events segment reported direct operating expenses of $2.2 million, a decline of $11.5 million from the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily driven by the cancellation of live events as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our Townsquare Interactive segment reported an increase in direct operating expenses of $6.9 million from $42.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $49.3 million for the same period in 2020. The increase in direct operating expenses from the prior year for our Townsquare Interactive segment was due to the increase in headcount to support subscriber and revenue growth.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $20.1 million representing a decrease of $5.7 million or 22.2% compared to $25.8 million for same period of 2019. The decrease is primarily due to higher amortization expense in 2019 of capitalized software development costs due to significant projects that were placed in service in 2019 and 2018, with no comparable projects placed in service in 2020.
Corporate Expenses
Corporate expenses are of a general corporate nature or managed on a corporate basis. These costs (net of allocations to the business segments) primarily represent corporate stewardship and administration activities. Corporate expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $1.7 million, or 6.0%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to lower compensation costs, partially offset by an increase in professional fees.
Stock-based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared with the same period ended December 31, 2019, decreased $0.5 million or 19.6%, primarily due to the timing of options that vested in January 2019, with no comparable activity during 2020.
Transaction Costs
Transaction costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $1.1 million or 74.8%, primarily due to fees incurred as a result of the amendment of the Company's Term Loans related to a waiver of any default under the credit agreement, as more fully described in Note 9, Long-term Debt.
Business Realignment Costs
Business realignment costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $3.1 million, primarily due to employee-related costs incurred as a result of headcount reductions in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Impairment of Goodwill
In early 2019, we implemented changes to our reportable operating segments, which followed changes in the information reviewed by our CEO and Chief Operating Decision Maker (“CODM”). As a result of these changes, the Company's traditional broadcast operations were assigned to a standalone reporting unit, Local Advertising, representing a component of our Advertising reportable operating segment for the purposes of our annual goodwill impairment test. In conjunction with our annual goodwill impairment test we determined that the carrying value of our Local Advertising reporting unit exceeded its fair value as of our impairment assessment date, primarily as a result of this change. Prior to the change in reportable operating segments, the results of our traditional broadcast operations were aggregated with our digital advertising products and solutions, including Townsquare Interactive and Townsquare Ignite for the purposes of our annual goodwill impairment test. Accordingly, the Company recognized a $69.0 million goodwill impairment charge as of December 31, 2019.
No goodwill impairment charges were recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The key assumptions used to determine the estimated fair value of each reporting unit are predicated on our market positioning and the ability to provide diversified and integrated product and service offerings. In the event our operating strategy faces challenges in the business environments in which each of our reporting units operate, a resulting change in the key assumptions (e.g., long-term financial projections) could have a negative impact on the estimated fair value of our reporting units, and it is possible the Company could recognize additional future impairment charges.
Impairment of Intangible and Long-Lived Assets
Total impairment charges pertaining to FCC licenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $107.1 million. These charges were based upon interim impairment evaluations of our FCC licenses performed at June 30, 2020 and March 31, 2020, in which we incurred impairment charges of $28.7 million and $78.4 million, respectively, as compared to $39.4 million of impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2019. These charges were due to declines in the purchase of advertising by our clients and changes in the market data utilized in determining the discount rate applied in the valuation of our FCC licenses which drove an increase in the weighted average cost of capital. The changes in data were driven by an increase in market volatility and industry bond yields, a direct result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on market and economic conditions.
Unfavorable changes in key assumptions utilized in the impairment assessment of our FCC licenses may affect future testing results. For example, keeping all other assumptions constant, a 100-basis point increase in the weighted average cost of capital would cause the estimated fair values of our FCC licenses to decrease by $56.2 million as of December 31, 2020. Assumptions used to estimate the fair value of our FCC licenses are also dependent upon the expected performance and growth of our traditional broadcast operations. In the event our broadcast revenue experiences
further actual or anticipated declines, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, such declines will have a negative impact on the estimated fair value of our FCC licenses, and the Company could recognize additional impairment charges, which could be material.
The Company also recorded total impairment charges related to long-lived assets in certain markets during the year ended December 31, 2020 of $2.0 million.
Impairment of Investment
During the year ended December 31, 2019, our impairment testing indicated an adverse impact on one of our equity investments and as a result we recorded a $0.6 million impairment charge for the year ended December 31, 2019.
No investment impairment charges were recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Expense (Income)
The primary component of Other expense (income) in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is interest expense, net. The following table illustrates the components of our interest expense, net for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Income Tax Benefit
We recognized an income tax benefit of $23.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our effective tax rate associated with our income from continuing operations for the period was approximately 22.9%. Our effective tax rate may vary significantly from period to period, and can be influenced by many factors. These factors include, but are not limited to, changes to statutory rates in the jurisdictions where we have operations and changes in the valuation of deferred tax assets and liabilities. The difference between the effective tax rate and the federal statutory rate of 21% for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily relates to state and local income taxes and certain expenses that are not deductible for income tax purposes.
Net Loss from Discontinued Operations, Net of Tax
Net loss from discontinued operations, net of tax includes both the results of operations for these businesses, as well as the gain or loss recognized upon their ultimate sale. The components of net loss from discontinued operations, net of tax for the year ended December 31, 2019 are related to the sale of our Arizona Bridal Shows and Music Festivals businesses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We fund our working capital requirements through a combination of cash flows from our operating, investing, and financing activities. Based on current and anticipated levels of operations and conditions in our markets and industry, we believe that our cash on hand and cash flows from our operating, investing, and financing activities, will enable us to meet our working capital, capital expenditures, debt service, and other funding requirements for at least one year from the date of this report. These historical sources of funds have been and could continue to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Future capital requirements may be materially different than those currently planned in our budgeting and forecasting activities and depend on many factors, some of which are beyond our control. In particular during the period of uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have focused on and will continue to monitor our liquidity.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $543.4 million of outstanding indebtedness, net of deferred financing costs of $2.4 million. On January 6, 2021, we completed the private offering and sale of $550.0 million aggregate principal amount of 6.875% senior secured notes due 2026 (the “2026 Notes”), as discussed under “2021 Financing Transactions” below. The proceeds from the 2026 Notes, together with cash on hand, was used to repay borrowings under our Senior Secured Credit Facility and to redeem all of the outstanding 2023 Notes on January 14, 2021. Following the January 6, 2021 issuance our 2026 Notes, we expect our debt service requirements to be approximately $38.0 million over the next twelve months. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we were required to make an excess cash flow payment of $9.9 million under our Term Loan agreement, which was paid in the second quarter of 2020. In addition, as of December 31, 2020, we had $83.2 million of cash and cash equivalents, $58.6 million of receivables from customers, which historically have had an average collection cycle of approximately 55 days. We have observed an increase in collection times during the COVID-19 pandemic, which has increased the average collection cycle to approximately 62 days as of December 31, 2020 and has also resulted in increases to our allowance for doubtful accounts. We had restricted cash of $0.5 million and $0.5 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, that was held as collateral in connection with certain agreements. From time to time, such restricted funds could be returned to us or we could be required to pledge additional cash.
Our anticipated uses of cash in the near-term include working capital needs, debt payments, other obligations, and capital expenditures. However, our ability to fund our working capital needs, debt payments, other obligations, capital expenditures, and to comply with financial covenants under our debt agreements, depends on our future operating performance and cash flow, which are in turn subject to prevailing economic conditions, increases or decreases in advertising spending, changes in the highly competitive industry in which we operate, which may be rapid, and other factors, many of which are beyond our control. To the extent that current and anticipated future sources of liquidity are insufficient to fund our future business activities and requirements, we may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. The sale of additional equity would result in additional dilution to our stockholders, while the incurrence of debt financing would result in debt service obligations. Such debt instruments also could introduce covenants that might restrict our operations. We cannot assure you that we could obtain additional financing on favorable terms or at all.
On January 24, 2021,the Company entered into a stock repurchase agreement with certain affiliates of Oaktree Capital Management L.P. (“Oaktree”) to repurchase 606,484 shares of the Company’s Class A common stock, par value $0.01 per shares, 2,151,373 shares of the Company’s Class B common stock, par value $0.01 per share, and 7,242,143 warrants to purchase Class A Common Stock, or such greater number of securities as the Company may elect. On March 9, 2021, the repurchase was consummated and the Company elected to repurchase all of the outstanding securities held
by Oaktree, including 1,595,224 shares of Class A Common Stock, 2,151,373 shares of Class B Common Stock and 8,814,980 warrants for an aggregate purchase price of $80.4 million, or $6.40 per security. In connection with the closing under the stock repurchase agreement, on March 8, 2021, the Company and Oaktree entered into a settlement agreement (the “Settlement Agreement”), pursuant to which, among other things, the Company agreed to pay $4.5 million to Oaktree as follows: (i) $1.5 million on April 1, 2021; (ii) $1.0 million on July 1, 2021; (iii) $1.0 million on October 1, 2021; and (iv) $1.0 million on November 10, 2021. The Settlement Agreement also includes customary mutual releases from claims, demands, and damages related to the stock repurchase agreement.
Additionally, on a continuing basis, we evaluate and consider strategic acquisitions and divestitures to enhance our strategic and competitive position as well as our financial performance. Any future acquisitions, joint ventures or other similar transactions will likely require additional capital, which may not be available to us on acceptable terms, if at all. We also routinely monitor the changes in the financial condition of our customers and the potential impact on our results of operations.
COVID-19 Response
In response to the ongoing challenges and uncertainty in the U.S. economy and financial markets, and the Company’s business, resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, we have taken proactive initiatives to preserve financial flexibility and liquidity and mitigate the impact of the recent and uncertain decline in net revenue to operate through this period of disruption, as well as position us for growth when the U.S. general economy and advertising demand rebounds. See “COVID-19 Pandemic Impact” and Part I, Item 1A., “Risk Factors” for additional information on the current and potential impacts of COVID-19 and related risks and uncertainties to our business, results of operations, financial condition, liquidity, and stock price.
On March 17, 2020, we borrowed $50.0 million, constituting all amounts then available under our Revolving Credit Facility. On June 5, 2020, the Company repaid all amounts outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility, with $50.0 million of available borrowing capacity following the repayment.
We have also instituted immediate actions to address the impact to our consolidated financial position, results of operations and liquidity, including reducing our non-essential capital expenditures, and reducing our workforce through the termination or layoff of approximately 135 full-time employees. We also instituted other wage reduction efforts, such as the temporary suspension of the Company’s match on employee contributions to the Company’s defined contribution plan.
We have applied all applicable credits and deferrals under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act enacted March 27, 2020 (the “CARES Act”), including the deferral of the payment of certain payroll taxes until December 31, 2021 and 2022 and the other tax benefits. The CARES Act has not had a material impact on our financial condition, results of operations or liquidity. Additionally, our board of directors determined to cease payment of quarterly cash dividends, following the payment of our first quarter dividend of $2.1 million on May 15, 2020.
During the second half of 2020, we experienced some recovery in advertising revenues from the declines that were observed quarter and into the second quarter of 2020, however it remained materially below the levels we experienced in the same period of 2019. COVID-19 pandemic impact will depend on future actions and outcomes, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with scope, severity and duration of the outbreak, the short-term and long-term economic impact of the outbreak (including the continued effect consumer discretionary spending and our employees in the markets in which we operate), further actions taken to mitigate the impact of economic and financial market recovery when the COVID-19 pandemic subsides, among others.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $31.5 million. This decrease was primarily related to the increase in net loss, partially offset by less cash used in discontinued operations, as well as changes in working capital. Changes in working capital are primarily due to decreases in accounts receivable and increases in accrued expenses as a result of higher music license fees and payroll tax accruals, partially offset by lower accounts payable, due to the timing of collections and payments, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $14.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $5.9 million of net cash used in investing activities for 2019. Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 from continuing operations was $14.0 million and $17.0 million, respectively. The decrease in net cash used in investing activities from continuing operations was due to a $4.7 million decrease in capital expenditures, partially offset by lower proceeds related to the sales of assets in 2020.
Financing Activities
Cash flows used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 were $18.9 million, as compared to net cash used in financing activities of $10.3 million in 2019. The increase in net cash used in financing activities was due to the required $9.9 million 2019 excess free cash flow payment on our Term Loan and the May 2020 voluntary repurchase of $4.7 million of our 2023 Notes for $3.6 million, partially offset by decreases in dividend payments of $4.1 million and lower cash distributions to our non-controlling interests.
Financing Facilities
The following is a discussion of significant factors affecting our liquidity and use of capital resources as of and for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. On January 14, 2021, the net proceeds from the 2026 Notes, together with cash on hand, was used to repay all borrowings under our Senior Secured Credit Facility and to redeem all of the outstanding 2023 Notes, as as discussed under “2021 Financing Transactions” below.
2023 Unsecured Senior Notes
In April 2015, the Company issued $300.0 million of 6.5% Unsecured Senior Notes (the “2023 Notes”) due in 2023. On May 19, 2020, the Company voluntarily repurchased $4.7 million of its 2023 Notes at a market price below par, plus accrued interest, which were then canceled. During the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2018, we repurchased $19.9 million and $1.9 million, respectively of the 2023 Notes at a market price below par, including accrued interest, and canceled the repurchased notes.
The 2023 Notes mature on April 1, 2023, with interest payable on April 1 and October 1 of each year. Prior to maturity, the Company may redeem all or part of the 2023 Notes at specified redemption premiums as set forth in the indenture, together with any accrued and unpaid interest thereon. Additionally, if the Company experiences certain change of control events, holders of the 2023 Notes may require the Company to repurchase all or part of their notes at 101% of the principal amount thereof.
The 2023 Notes rank equally with all of the Company’s existing and future senior debt, are senior to all of the Company’s existing and future subordinated debt, and are guaranteed on a senior basis by certain of the Company’s direct and indirect wholly-owned subsidiaries.
The 2023 Notes indenture contains restrictive covenants that limit the ability of the Company and its subsidiaries to, among other things, incur additional debt or issue preferred stock; create liens; create restrictions on the Company’s subsidiaries’ ability to make payments to the Company; pay dividends and make other distributions in respect of the Company’s and its subsidiaries’ capital stock; make certain investments or certain other restricted
payments; guarantee indebtedness; designate unrestricted subsidiaries; sell certain kinds of assets; enter into certain types of transactions with affiliates; and effect mergers and consolidations.
As of December 31, 2020, the aggregate principal amount outstanding under the 2023 Notes was $273.4 million and we were in compliance with all of the covenants under the 2023 Notes indenture.
Senior Secured Credit Facility
In April 2015, we entered into a Senior Secured Credit Facility, including a seven year $275.0 million term loan facility and a five year $50.0 million Revolving Credit Facility.
Term Loans
In September 2015, we incurred an additional $45.0 million in Term Loans under the Senior Secured Credit Facility. Our Term Loans mature on April 1, 2022. Since our amendment of the Senior Credit Facility on February 8, 2017, the Term Loans incur interest based on an applicable margin of 300 basis points of LIBOR plus 3.00% with a LIBOR floor of 1.0%.
Based on our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 we made an excess free cash flow payment of $9.9 million on June 15, 2020. We were not required to make an excess free cash flow payment in 2019, based on our financial performance during the year ended December 31, 2018.
As of December 31, 2020, the balance of the Term Loans was $272.4 million with a current interest rate of 4.0%.
Revolving Credit Facility
In April 2019, we amended our existing Senior Secured Credit Facility to, among other things, extend the maturity date of the existing revolving credit facility by two years to April 1, 2022, coterminous with the Term Loans maturity date (with a springing maturity six months inside of the maturity date of the Term Loans) and to amend certain asset sale provisions. The Revolving Credit Facility has an interest rate based either on LIBOR and an applicable margin of 250 basis points, or an alternative base rate and an applicable margin of 150 basis points. The Revolving Credit Facility also carries an unused commitment fee equal to 0.50% per annum.
On March 17, 2020, the Company borrowed all amounts available, $50.0 million, under the Revolving Credit Facility as a precautionary measure due to the unknown extent of the impact the COVID-19 pandemic would have on the U.S. economy and the Company’s business. On June 5, 2020, the Company repaid all amounts outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility, with $50.0 million of available borrowing capacity following the repayment. As of December 31, 2020, there were no borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility.
Restrictions and Covenants
Borrowings under the Senior Secured Credit Facility are subject to mandatory prepayments equal to the net proceeds to the Company of any asset sales, as well as half of the annual excess free cash flow as defined in the credit agreement (subject to certain reductions). Borrowings are guaranteed by each of the Company’s direct and indirect subsidiaries, and subject to certain exceptions, are secured by substantially all of the tangible and intangible assets of the Company and its subsidiaries.
The Senior Secured Credit Facility contains covenants that, among other things, limit or restrict the ability of the Company and its subsidiaries to incur additional indebtedness or liens; engage in mergers or other fundamental changes; sell certain property or assets; pay dividends or other distributions; make acquisitions, investments, loans and advances; prepay certain indebtedness including the 2023 Notes; change the nature of its business; engage in certain transactions with affiliates and incur restrictions on interactions between the Company and its subsidiaries, or limit actions in relation to the Senior Secured Credit Facility. In addition, the Senior Secured Credit Facility contains a
requirement that, at the end of each calendar quarter, if we have drawn at least 30%, or $15 million, of the commitments under the Revolving Credit Facility, we must have a first lien leverage ratio (as defined under the Senior Secured Credit Facility) on such date of no greater than 3.75:1.00. As a result of our borrowings on March 17, 2020 under the Revolving Credit Facility, we became subject to this requirement. On June 5, 2020, the Company repaid all amounts outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility.
On April 13, 2020, the Company entered into Amendment No.5 to the Senior Secured Credit Facility, which extended the time period for delivery of the Company’s audited financial statements for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 and certain related information and documentation until June 15, 2020, and also waived any default under the credit agreement resulting from the failure to comply with Section 6.1(c) of the credit agreement in connection with the failure to deliver the financial statements and related information required to be delivered on April 6, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all our covenants under the Senior Secured Credit Facility.
2021 Financing Transactions
2026 Secured Senior Notes
On January 6, 2021, the Company completed the private offering and sale of the 2026 Notes at an issue price of 100.0%. The net proceeds from the 2026 Notes, together with cash on hand, was used to repay borrowings under the Senior Secured Credit Facility and to redeem all of the outstanding 2023 Notes on January 14, 2021, and to pay the premium, fees and expenses related thereto.
The 2026 Notes bear interest at a rate of 6.875% and mature on February 1, 2026. Interest is payable on the 2026 Notes semi-annually on February 1 and August 1 of each year, commencing on August 1, 2021. The 2026 Notes rank equally with all of the Company’s future senior debt, are senior to all of the Company’s future subordinated debt and any future junior lien indebtedness and unsecured indebtedness of the Company or guarantors. Obligations under the 2026 Notes are guaranteed by each of the Company’s direct and indirect subsidiaries, and subject to certain exceptions, are secured by substantially all of the tangible and intangible assets of the Company and its subsidiaries. The 2026 Notes and the related guarantees are structurally subordinated to any existing and future indebtedness, other liabilities and preferred stock of the Company’s subsidiaries that do not guarantee the 2026 Notes.
At any time prior to February 1, 2023, the Company may redeem the 2026 Notes in whole or in part, at its option, at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 2026 Notes plus an “applicable premium,” as set forth in the 2026 Notes indenture and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the redemption date. At any time on or after February 1, 2023, the Company may redeem the 2026 Notes at the redemption prices set forth in the 2026 Notes indenture, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the redemption date. In addition, at any time prior to February 1, 2023, the Company may redeem up to 40% of the aggregate principal amount of the 2026 Notes with the net cash proceeds of one or more equity offerings, at a price equal to 106.875% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the redemption date. If the Company experiences certain change of control events, holders of the 2026 Notes may require it to repurchase all or part of their 2026 Notes at 101% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the repurchase date.
The Company intends to enter into a new senior secured asset-based revolving credit facility (any such facility, the “New ABL Facility”). The Company intends to use the New ABL Facility to finance the working capital needs and other general corporate purposes of the Company and its subsidiaries. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to negotiate a definitive agreement or that it will be able to close the New ABL Facility. If the Company enters into any New ABL Facility, from and after the entry into any such New ABL Facility, the 2026 Notes and the related guarantees will be secured on a first priority basis.
The 2026 Notes indenture contains restrictive covenants that limit the ability of the Company and its restricted subsidiaries to, among other things: incur additional indebtedness; declare or pay dividends, redeem stock or make other distributions to stockholders; make investments; create liens or use assets as security in other transactions; merge or consolidate, or sell, transfer, lease or dispose of substantially all of their assets; enter into transactions with affiliates; sell or transfer certain assets; and agree to certain restrictions on the ability of restricted subsidiaries to make payments to the
Company. Certain of these covenants will be suspended if the 2026 Notes are assigned an investment grade rating by Standard & Poor’s Investors Ratings Services, Moody’s Investors Service, Inc. or Fitch Ratings, Inc. and no event of default has occurred and is continuing.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no material off-balance sheet arrangements or transactions.
Impact of Inflation
We do not believe inflation has a significant impact on our operations. However, there can be no assurance that future inflation would not have an adverse impact on our financial condition and results of operations.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared in conformity with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”), which requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts and disclosures reported in our Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes. Accounting estimates and assumptions described in this section are those we consider to be the most critical to an understanding of our financial statements because they inherently involve significant judgments and uncertainties. For all of these estimates, we note that future events rarely develop exactly as forecasted, and the best estimates routinely require adjustment. Actual results could differ from such estimates. The following discussion summarizes our critical accounting estimates. Circumstances arising from the COVID-19 pandemic in the future may require our estimates to change, however, as new events occur and additional information is obtained, any such changes will be recognized in the consolidated financial statements. Actual results could differ from such estimates, and any such differences may be material to our financial statements. Significant accounting policies used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements are discussed in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We reduce the carrying amount of accounts receivable by a valuation allowance that reflects our best estimate of the accounts that will not be collected. In addition to reviewing delinquent accounts receivable, we consider many factors in estimating our general allowance including historical data, collection experience, customer types, creditworthiness and economic trends. From time to time, we may adjust our assumptions for anticipated changes in any of those or other factors expected to affect collectability. We charge off account balances against the allowance when it is probable the receivable will not be recovered.
Long-lived assets
We record long-lived assets, including property, plant and equipment and capitalized software, at cost. For acquisitions of property, plant or equipment purchased as part of a business combination, the assets are valued at fair market value, as discussed below. We depreciate and amortize long-lived assets using useful lives determined by us based on historical experience and other information available to us. When we determine that long-lived assets will be disposed of prior to the end of their useful lives, we estimate the revised useful lives and depreciate the assets over the revised period.
We evaluate the potential impairment of long-lived assets at least annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. To determine whether impairment may exist, we group our long-lived assets at the geographic market level (i.e., the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows), and then perform our evaluation based on various analyses, including the projection of undiscounted cash flows. If the carrying amount of an asset, or asset group, is determined to exceed its estimated fair value, an impairment loss is recognized, and the assets are written down to estimated fair value.
Acquisitions and Business Combinations
We allocate the total cost of acquisitions to the underlying identifiable net assets, based on their respective estimated fair values at the date of acquisition with limited exceptions allowed by GAAP. Acquisition costs are generally expensed as incurred and restructuring costs associated with a business combination are generally expensed subsequent to the acquisition date. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired, including the amounts assigned to identifiable intangible assets. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management’s judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including assumptions with respect to future cash inflows and outflows, discount rates, asset lives and market multiples, among other items. In addition, we may establish liabilities related to acquired liabilities and qualifying restructuring costs and contingencies based on assumptions made at the time of acquisition. We evaluate these reserves on a regular basis to determine the adequacies of the amounts.
Goodwill arising from an acquisition is tested on an annual basis, or when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such assets may not be recoverable. We have elected to perform our annual goodwill impairment testing as of December 31st. Recoverability of goodwill is evaluated by comparison of the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying value. For purposes of testing the carrying value of the Company's goodwill for impairment, the fair value of goodwill for each reporting unit contains significant assumptions incorporating variables that are based on past experiences and judgments about future performance using industry information. These variables would include, but are not limited to: (1) forecasted revenue growth rates; (2) profit margin; (3) estimated capital expenditures and working capital requirements during the projection period; (4) risk-adjusted discount rate; and (5) expected growth rates in perpetuity to estimate terminal values. These variables are susceptible to changes in estimates, which could result in significant changes to the fair value of the goodwill. Impairment of goodwill is calculated by comparing the fair value as described above to the carrying value of goodwill.
We continually monitor and evaluate business and competitive conditions that affect our operations and reflect the impact of these factors in our financial projections. If permanent or sustained changes in business or competitive conditions occur, they can lead to revised projections that could potentially give rise to impairment charges.
For further discussion of impairment charges, see Note 7, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets
We test for impairment of our indefinite-lived intangible assets on an annual basis, as of December 31st, or when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such assets may not be recoverable. The most significant intangible asset we have is our FCC licenses, which have been deemed to have an indefinite life. The fair value of our FCC licenses is estimated to be the price that we would receive to sell an asset or pay to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
We evaluate the fair value of our FCC licenses at the unit of account level. Each market's broadcasting licenses are combined into a single unit of accounting, in our case geographic markets, for purposes of testing for impairments.
We utilize a discounted cashflow method to perform our impairment test. Under this method, the income that is attributable to each FCC license is isolated and is based upon modeling a hypothetical “greenfield” build-up to a “normalized” enterprise that, by design, lacks inherent goodwill and assumes that the only asset of the hypothetical start-up business is the license. It is assumed that rather than acquiring indefinite-lived intangible assets as part of a going concern business, the buyer hypothetically develops indefinite-lived intangible assets and builds a new operation with similar attributes from scratch. Thus, the buyer incurs start-up costs during the build-up phase which are normally associated with going concern value. Initial capital costs are deducted from the discounted cash flow model which results in value that is directly attributable to the indefinite-lived intangible assets. The cash flows generated in the greenfield method are presumed to emanate from the one asset, or the FCC license, that exists at time zero. This cash flow stream is discounted to arrive at a value for the FCC license.
For further discussion of impairment charges, see Note 7, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Leases
We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. The most significant estimates we use in accounting for leases include:
Expected lease term - Our expected lease term includes both contractual lease periods and cancellable option periods where failure to exercise such options would result in an economic penalty. The expected lease term is used in determining whether the lease is accounted for as an operating lease or a finance lease. A lease is considered a finance lease if the lease term exceeds 75% of the leased asset's useful life. The expected lease term is also used in determining the depreciable life of the asset. An increase in the expected lease term will increase the probability that a lease may be considered a finance lease and will generally result in higher interest and depreciation expense for a leased property recorded on our balance sheet.
Incremental borrowing rate - The incremental borrowing rate is primarily used in determining whether the lease is accounted for as an operating lease or a finance lease. A lease is considered a finance lease if the net present value of the minimum lease payments is greater than 90% of the fair market value of the property. An increase in the incremental borrowing rate decreases the net present value of the minimum lease payments and reduces the probability that a lease will be considered a finance lease. Right-of-use assets and lease liabilities are recognized at the commencement date based on the present value of the future minimum lease payments over the lease term. As our leases do not provide an implicit rate, in determining the net present value of lease payments, management used judgment in order to estimate the appropriate incremental borrowing rate, which is the rate incurred to borrow equivalent funds on a collateralized basis over a similar term in a similar economic environment.
Fair market value of leased asset - Equipment residual values are determined at the inception of the lease using estimates of fair value at the end of the lease term. Residual value estimates impact the determination of whether a lease is classified as an operating lease or a finance lease. A lease is considered a finance lease if the net present value of the minimum lease payments equals or exceeds 90% of the fair market value of the leased property. A higher fair market value reduces the likelihood that a lease will be considered a finance lease. Fair value estimates of equipment at the end of the lease term are based on historical renewal experience, used equipment markets, competition and technological changes.
For further discussion of our lease commitments, see Note 10, Lease and Other Commitments, in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Stock-based Compensation
We measure and recognize stock-based compensation expense related to stock-based transactions, including employee awards, based on the fair value of the award on the grant date. The fair values of restricted stock awards are determined based on the fair market value of our common stock at the time of grant. We estimate the fair value of option awards using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. This model requires assumptions including the fair value of our common stock, expected volatility, expected term of the award, expected dividend yield and risk-free interest rate. Stock-based compensation expense is recognized as the equity awards vest. We account for forfeitures as a reduction of compensation cost in the period when such forfeitures occur.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carry forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which
those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in the period that includes the enactment date.
We evaluate the need for valuation allowances to reduce the deferred tax assets to realizable amounts. Management evaluates all positive and negative evidence and uses judgment regarding past and future events, including operating results, to help determine when it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the deferred tax assets may not be realized. When appropriate, a valuation allowance is recorded against deferred tax assets to offset future tax benefits that may not be realized.
We follow the provisions of ASC Topic 740, Accounting for Income Taxes. ASC Topic 740 clarifies the accounting for uncertainties in income taxes recognized in an enterprise’s financial statements. ASC Topic 740 also prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. ASC Topic 740 provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, disclosures and transition. As required by the uncertain tax position guidance in ASC Topic 740, we recognize the financial statement benefit of a tax position only after determining that the relevant tax authority would more likely than not sustain the position following an audit. For tax positions meeting the more-likely-than-not threshold, the amount recognized in the financial statements is the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the relevant tax authority. Our policy is to recognize interest and penalties accrued on unrecognized tax benefits as part of income tax expense.
Contingencies and Litigation
On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our exposure related to contingencies and litigation and record a liability when available information indicates that a liability is probable and estimable. We also disclose significant matters that are reasonably possible to result in a loss that is expected to be material to our operations or financial results or are probable but not estimable.
New Accounting Standards and Accounting Changes
For a discussion of accounting standards updates that have been adopted or will be adopted in the future, please refer to Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.