Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes that appear elsewhere in this prospectus. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere particularly in the section titled “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this prospectus.
Prior to October 15, 2020, we were known as Forum Merger II Corporation. On October 15, 2020, Forum completed the Business Combination with Myjojo, Inc., a private company.
The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse merger in accordance with GAAP. Under this method of accounting, Forum was treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes. Accordingly, for accounting purposes, the Business Combination was treated as the equivalent of Ittella Parent issuing stock for the net assets of Forum, accompanied by a recapitalization. The net assets of Forum will be stated at historical cost, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded. Accordingly, for accounting purposes, the financial statements of the combined entity, including those included in this Annual Report represent a continuation of the financial statements of Ittella Parent with the acquisition being treated as the equivalent of Ittella Parent issuing stock for the net assets of Forum, accompanied by a recapitalization. The net assets of Forum are stated at historical cost, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded.
Overview
We are a rapidly growing plant-based food company with operations in the United States and Italy, offering a broad portfolio of frozen, plant-based food products in private label and under the “Tattooed Chef” brand. We provide plant-based meals and snacks including, but not limited to, acai and smoothie bowls, zucchini spirals, riced cauliflower, vegetable bowls and cauliflower crust pizza to leading club store and food retailers in the United States.
Our revenue in Fiscal 2020 was approximately $148.5 million, which represents a 74.9% increase from Fiscal 2019 revenue of $84.9 million. As of December 31, 2020, our products were sold in approximately 4,300 retail outlets in the United States. Our innovative plant-based products offer consumers a diverse portfolio of wholesome, clean label items that are convenient, without sacrificing on quality, nutritional value or freshness and that are great tasting.
During Fiscal 2020, we sold a substantial portion of our products to three customers, which accounted for approximately 88% of Fiscal 2020 revenue. These three customers individually accounted for approximately 39%, 32%, and 17% of our Fiscal 2020 total revenue, respectively. Management believes our relationships with these customers are strong, and none have indicated any intent to cease or reduce the volume of business they do with us. As we grow “Tattooed Chef,” we expect to expand our sales and marketing team by adding more dedicated personnel to service additional retail customers. We are also contemplating adding outside sales representatives and/or brokers to extend our sales efforts. These efforts to add retail customers could partially mitigate customer concentration risk.
Segment Information
We have one operating segment and one reportable segment, as our chief decision maker, our Chief Executive Officer, reviews financial information on an aggregate basis for purposes of allocating resources and evaluating financial performance.
Trends and Other Factors Affecting Our Operating Performance
Our management team monitors the following trends and factors that could impact our operating performance.
● Revenue Strategy - Historical growth has been predominately driven by sales of private label products. However, our current strategy is to grow sales of “Tattooed Chef” branded products, which have increased from approximately 22% of revenue in Fiscal 2019 to approximately 57% of revenue in Fiscal 2020. We expect growth of “Tattooed Chef” sales to continue to outpace that of private label, which will require us to execute our detailed marketing strategy.
● Long-Term Consumer Trends, and Demand - We participate in the $55 billion North American frozen food category. We believe our innovative food offerings converge with consumer trends and demands for great-tasting, wholesome, plant-based foods made from sustainably sourced ingredients, including preferences for flexitarian, vegetarian, vegan, organic, and gluten-free lifestyles. We expect consumer trends towards these healthier lifestyles to continue.
● Competition - We compete with companies that operate in the highly competitive plant-based and frozen food segments, many of which have greater financial resources. We believe that principal competitive factors in this category include, among others, taste, nutritional profile, ingredients, cost and convenience.
● Operating Costs - Our operating costs include raw materials, direct labor and other wages and related benefits, manufacturing overhead, selling, distribution, and other general and administrative expenses. We manage the impact of these operating costs on our business through select raw material contracts with growers and cooperatives in Italy that allow us to better control ingredient costs. We anticipate operating expenses to increase as a result of operating as a public company.
● Sales and Marketing Costs - As we grow our “Tattooed Chef” product portfolio, we expect to expand our sales and marketing team by adding more dedicated personnel to service additional retail customers. We are also contemplating adding outside sales representatives and/or brokers to extend our sales efforts. Marketing expenditures are expected to be primarily on product demonstration allowances, slotting fees (as we expand to retail grocery stores) and other similar in-store marketing costs. Some of these expenses will be categorized as net deductions to revenue under GAAP as opposed to marketing expense. We have also hired a national marketing firm to implement campaigns for digital video and display, connected television, social media and search engine marketing. As we expand and grow revenue, we will consider building out a brand management team (to support Ms. Galletti, who currently oversees all “Tattooed Chef” marketing efforts) to focus on digital marketing, social media and other marketing functions.
● Commodity Trends - Our profitability depends, among other things, on our ability to anticipate and react to raw material and food costs. We source our vegetables from a number of growing regions within Italy, and North and South America. The prices of vegetables are subject to many factors beyond our control, such as the number and size of growers that produce crops, the vagaries of these farming businesses (including poor harvests due to adverse weather conditions, natural disasters and pestilence), changes in national or world economic conditions, political events, tariffs, trade wars or other conditions in Italy, North America, or South America.
● Debt Obligations - We regularly evaluate our debt obligations, which primarily consist of a line of credit used to finance working capital requirements. As of December 31, 2020, the line of credit outstanding balance was $0.02 million, as compared to an outstanding balance as of December 31, 2019 of $10.1 million. The borrowing base is $25.0 million.
● Currency Hedging - We currently incur some costs and expenses in Euros and expects in the future to incur additional costs and expenses in that currency. As a result, revenues and results of operations are subject to foreign exchange fluctuations. Effective as of the first quarter of 2020, we utilize currency hedging (or purchases forward currency contracts) to mitigate currency exchange rate fluctuations.
● Acquisitions - Although our growth to date has been achieved exclusively from our organic business rather than growth through acquisitions, we are considering acquisition opportunities that are strategically aligned with our mission and needs.
● COVID-19 - The World Health Organization declared COVID-19 to constitute a “Public Health Emergency of International Concern” on January 30, 2020 and finally characterized it as a “pandemic” on March 11, 2020. This corresponds closely with the beginning of COVID-19’s impact on the consumption, distribution and production of our products. We are taking necessary preventive actions and implementing additional measures to protect our employees who are working on and off site, including implementing a series of physical distancing and hygienic practices to further support the health and safety of our employees in compliance with suggested Personal Protective Equipment guidelines per United States Centers for Disease Control and World Health Organization, including mandatory face coverings, increased hand washing and significantly increased sanitation of hard surfaces. Generally, producers of food products have been deemed “essential industries” by federal, state, and local governments and are exempt from certain COVID-19-related restrictions on business operations. Our management team continues to meet regularly and monitor customer and consumer demands, in addition to guidance from local, national, and international health agencies, and will adapt our plans as needed to continue to meet these demands. While the ultimate health and economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic are highly uncertain, we believe that our business operations and results of operations, including revenue, earnings and cash flows, we believe will not be adversely impacted during 2021.
To mitigate any potential impact of COVID-19 on our business operations and results thereof, we have diversified our suppliers of raw materials and keep close contact with them to anticipate any problems with keeping up with the demand for our products. We have expanded our supplier base so that we no longer rely on a sole source supplier for any of our raw materials. In this way, we are able to ensure we are getting competitive prices and reduce the risk of supply interruptions. To date, there has been no impact on our liquidity, and we have not had the need to raise capital, reduce our capital expenditures, or modify any terms or contractual arrangements in response to COVID-19. Any changes in our operations have been due to the growth of our business, which was planned prior to the pandemic.
Use of Adjusted EBITDA
We seek to achieve profitable, long term growth by monitoring and analyzing key operating metrics, including Adjusted EBITDA, as defined below in “Non-GAAP Financial Measures”. Our management uses this non-GAAP financial metric and related computations to evaluate and manage the business and to plan and make near and long-term operating and strategic decisions. The management team believes this non-GAAP financial metric is useful to investors to provide supplemental information in addition to the GAAP financial results. Management reviews the use of our primary key operating metrics from time-to-time. Adjusted EBITDA is not intended to be a substitute for any GAAP financial measure and, as calculated, may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of performance of other companies in other industries or within the same industry. Our management team believes it is useful to provide investors with the same financial information that it uses internally to make comparisons of historical operating results, identify trends in underlying operating results, and evaluate its business. Reconciliations between GAAP and non-GAAP financial measures are provided in “Non-GAAP Financial Measures,” which appears later in this section.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth selected items in our consolidated financial data in dollar amounts and as a percentage of revenue for the period represented:
Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
Revenue increased by $63.6 million, or 74.9%, to $148.5 million for Fiscal 2020 as compared to $84.9 million for Fiscal 2019. The revenue increase was due to an increase of $66.3 million in volume for Tattooed Chef branded products, primarily driven by expansion in the number of United States distribution points, increased revenue at existing club channel customers and new product introductions. The increase in branded product sales was partially offset by a $0.9 million decline in private label products and a $1.8 million decline in legacy products that are expected to be phased out in future periods. We anticipate continued growth in Tattooed Chef branded products primarily due to new product introductions, further expansion with current customers and increased sales to new retail customers. While we are primarily focused on growing our branded business, we will continue to support our current private label business and will evaluate new opportunities with these customers as they come.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold increased $53.6 million, or 75.3%, to $124.8 million for Fiscal 2020 as compared to $71.2 million for Fiscal 2019, primarily due to the increase in volume of products manufactured, stored and shipped, resulting in increased costs of raw materials (in absolute dollars), direct labor and additional freight and storage costs. Cost of goods sold was relatively flat as a percentage of revenue, constituting 84.1% of revenue for Fiscal 2020 compared to 83.9% of revenue for Fiscal 2019. We anticipate total cost of goods sold to increase in absolute dollars in 2021 due to the anticipated increase in revenue, but decrease as a percentage of revenue due to operating efficiencies and better absorption of fixed manufacturing costs on higher volume.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit increased $10.0 million, or 72.5%, to $23.7 million for Fiscal 2020 as compared to $13.7 million for Fiscal 2019. Gross margin for Fiscal 2020 was 15.9% as compared to 16.1% for Fiscal 2019. The slight decrease in gross margin was due to increased cost of raw materials and other manufacturing expenses offset by production efficiencies associated with larger sales volume in Fiscal 2020 compared to Fiscal 2019. We anticipate increases in gross profit in 2021 and beyond due to higher sales volume. We also anticipate higher gross margins in 2021 and beyond due to operating efficiencies and leverage of fixed manufacturing costs.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses increased $25.0 million, or 336.6%, to $32.5 million for Fiscal 2020 as compared to $7.5 million for Fiscal 2019, primarily due to first time grants of stock based compensation; a one-time, merger-related bonus (stock plus cash) to our Chief Operating Officer of approximately $13.0 million (See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements); increases in sales and marketing expenses resulting from a shift in focus to building the Tattooed Chef brand; increases in general and administrative expenses resulting from higher wages and related expenses; headcount additions required to manage the increase in revenue, and increased rent due to facility expansion. As a percentage of revenue, total operating expenses increased to 21.9% for Fiscal 2020 from 8.8% for Fiscal 2019. We anticipate operating expenses to increase further both in dollar amounts and as a percentage of revenue as a result of costs attributable to being a public company after October 15, 2020; increased spending on marketing and headcount to further invest in the expansion of the Tattooed Chef brand; and continued use of stock compensation to recruit and retain key employees. See “Risk Factors - We will incur significantly increased costs as a result of operating as a public company, and our management will be required to devote substantial time to compliance efforts.” However, we also expect future period increases to be offset by the one-time, merger-related compensation expense described above, which will not be present in future periods.
Other Income and Interest Expense, Net
Other income and interest expense, net, reflected income of $37.3 million for Fiscal 2020 versus an expense of $0.5 million for Fiscal 2019. The increase is primarily driven by a nonrecurring gain of $37.2 million on settlement of a contingent consideration derivative liability. Interest expense increased by $0.2 million for Fiscal 2020 to $0.7 million versus $0.5 million for Fiscal 2019 due to slightly higher average debt balances outstanding during Fiscal 2020. In Fiscal 2020, we recorded an unrealized gain of $0.9 million on foreign currency contracts that have not been settled as of December 31, 2020, whereby we purchased forward contracts for the Euro to mitigate potential impact on our manufacturing costs in Italy. There was no comparable other income in Fiscal 2019 because we did not engage in foreign currency contracts for Fiscal 2019.
Income Tax Benefit (Expense)
In October 2020, in anticipation of the Business Combination, UMB’s and Ittella International’s prior ownership were exchanged for interests in Myjojo (Delaware) shares. This taxable pre-merger exchange resulted in a step-up in the tax bases of intangible assets of approximately $140.0 million. As a result of this transaction, Myjojo (Delaware) recorded a one-time tax benefit of $39.1 million resulting from Myjojo (Delaware)’s change in tax status from an S-corporation to a C-corporation. For the fourth quarter ending December 31, 2020, we recorded a $43.5 million deferred tax asset and a $40.3 million tax benefit. For the year ending December 31, 2019, we had an income tax expense of $0.2 million.
Prior to the completion of the Business Combination, we elected to be taxed as an S-corporation for federal and state income tax purposes. Accordingly, our taxable income for federal and certain state purposes is attributed to, and reported by, our stockholders. We are subject to state franchise taxes and limited (reduced rate) state income taxes in California.
Our Italian operations are subject to foreign taxes applicable to its income derived in Italy. These taxes include income tax. Prior to the pre-merger exchange, the Company had a 70% interest in the Italian subsidiary, which was taxed as a partnership for U.S. income tax purposes. Following the pre-merger exchange, the Italian subsidiary is classified as a disregarded entity for U.S. income tax purposes, wholly owned by the Company. As such, its operations are also subject to U.S. income taxes, with respect to which the associated Italian taxes may be claimed as a foreign tax deduction or credit.
Net Income
Net income increased by $63.1 million, to $68.7 million for Fiscal 2020 as compared to net income of $5.6 million for Fiscal 2019, due primarily to derivative gain discussed in the section “-Other income and interest expense, net” and the income tax benefit discussed in the section “-Income tax benefit (expense), net”. Excluding the non-recurring gain on derivative related to the settlement of contingently redeemable equity, the one-time tax benefit resulting from the change in tax status, and the one-time compensation expense described in “-Operating Expenses”, net income for Fiscal 2020 would have been $5.4 million, or $0.2 million less than Fiscal 2019, as increases in gross profit were offset by increased investment in the Tattooed Chef brand and costs incurred to transition to a public company, including stock-based compensation expense.
Other Comprehensive Income (Loss), Net
Other comprehensive income (loss), net, represents the effect of the Euro currency translation resulting from income statement accounts that are translated to United States dollars based on an average monthly exchange rate. Balance sheet accounts are translated to United States dollars at the balance sheet date. For Fiscal 2020, we recorded income of $0.8 million on translation versus a $0.2 million loss in Fiscal 2019.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA increased by $2.7 million to $9.6 million for Fiscal 2020 as compared to $6.9 million for Fiscal 2019. The improvement in Adjusted EBITDA was primarily the result of the increase in revenue and gross profit, partially offset by increased operating expenses to support the growth in revenue, brand recognition for Tattooed Chef, and, beginning in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020, increased general and administrative costs resulting from being a public company as compared to the prior-year period.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We use non-GAAP financial information and believe it is useful to investors as it provides additional information to facilitate comparisons of historical operating results, identify trends in operating results, and provide additional insight on how the management team evaluates the business. Our management team uses Adjusted EBITDA to make operating and strategic decisions, evaluate performance and comply with indebtedness related reporting requirements. Below are details on this non-GAAP measure and the non-GAAP adjustments that the management team makes in the definition of Adjusted EBITDA. The adjustments generally fall within the categories of non-cash items, acquisition and integration costs, business transformation initiatives, financing related costs and operating costs of a non-recurring nature. We believe this non-GAAP measure should be considered along with net income, the most closely related GAAP financial measure. Reconciliations between Adjusted EBITDA and net income are below, and discussion regarding underlying GAAP results throughout this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
As new events or circumstances arise, the definition of Adjusted EBITDA could change. When the definitions change, we will provide the updated definition and present the related non-GAAP historical results on a comparable basis.
Adjusted EBITDA Reconciliation
We define EBITDA as net income before interest, taxes, depreciation. Adjusted EBITDA further adjusts EBITDA by adding back non-recurring expenses and other non-operational charges. Adjusted EBITDA is one of the key performance indicators we use in evaluating our operating performance and in making financial, operating, and planning decisions. We believe Adjusted EBITDA is useful to the readers of this prospectus in the evaluation of our operating performance.
The following table provides a reconciliation from net income to Adjusted EBITDA for Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2019:
Pricing Policies
We negotiate different prices at our different club and retail customers based on product quantity and packaging configuration. At this time, we do not expect to adjust product prices from the current levels. However, we do acknowledge that competitive pressures, such as the introduction of additional plant-based products by our competitors, may require us to lower prices, increase marketing and advertising expenditures, or increase the use of discounting or promotional campaigns, each of which may affect its margins, operating results or profitability.
Seasonality
Historically, we experienced greater demand for certain products of ours during the third and fourth quarters, primarily due to increased demand in the summer season and increased holiday orders from retailers and club stores. We expect that seasonality in revenue will decrease as our business grows and additional products are introduced.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $131.6 million of cash. We believe that our cash, availability under our credit line (See “- Indebtedness” below), and cash flows from operations, will be sufficient to support our planned operations for at least the next 12 months. We finance our operations and capital expenditures through a combination of internally generated cash from operations, available cash on hand and the ability to draw on our line of credit. Our current working capital needs are to support accounts receivable growth, manage inventory to meet demand forecasts and support operational growth. Our long-term financial needs primarily include working capital requirements, capital expenditures and payments on notes payable. We may also pursue strategic acquisition opportunities that may impact our future cash requirements. There are a number of factors that may negatively impact our available sources of funds in the future including the ability to generate cash from operations and borrow on our debt facilities. The amount of cash generated from operations is dependent upon factors such as the successful execution of our business strategy and general economic conditions.
We may opportunistically raise debt capital, subject to market and other conditions. Additionally, as part of our growth strategies, we may also raise debt capital for strategic alternatives and general corporate purposes. If additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, operating results, and financial condition may be adversely affected.
Indebtedness
We have a line of credit that provides for borrowings up to (a) 90% of the net amount of eligible accounts receivables; plus, (b) the least of (i) the sum of: (A) 50% of the net amount of eligible inventory; plus (B) 45% of the net amount of eligible in-transit inventory; (ii) $10.0 million; or (iii) 50% of the aggregate amount of revolving loans outstanding, minus (C) the sum of all reserves. This line of credit is secured by substantially all of our assets. Outstanding borrowings under this line of credit bear interest at the sum of (i) the higher of the prime rate or LIBOR rate plus 2.0% and (ii) 1%. As of December 31, 2020, the outstanding balance on the line of credit was less than $0.1 million and the borrowing base was the full $25.0 million. The line of credit is secured by our inventory and accounts receivable and a first position lien on all our assets. In July 2018, we exercised an option within this line of credit to enter into a promissory note with the same financial institution in the amount of $1.0 million. The note accrues interest at the sum of (i) the higher of the prime rate or LIBOR rate plus 2.0% and (ii) 1.5% and has a maturity date of May 2021. The note is secured by substantially all of our assets.
A letter of credit in the approximate amount of 445,000 Euros was outstanding as of December 31, 2020. The letter of credit was issued to guarantee the Italian facility lease.
Liquidity
We generally fund our short- and long-term liquidity needs through a combination of cash on hand, cash flows generated from operations, and available borrowings under our line of credit (See “- Indebtedness” above). Our management regularly reviews certain liquidity measures to monitor performance.
Cash Flows
The following table presents the major components of net cash flows from and used in operating, investing and financing activities for Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2019:
Operating Activities
For Fiscal 2020, we realized net income of $68.7 million, including a non-cash $37.2 million gain on derivatives and a non-cash tax benefit of $41.3 million. Net cash was reduced by $8.6 million, $20.7 million and $0.9 million due to increases in accounts receivable, inventory, prepaid expenses and other assets, respectively, due to the significant increase in sales activity and backlog of products scheduled for delivery to fulfill customer demands. Offsetting those increases was a $10.5 million increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses, deferred revenues, and other current liabilities (combined) due to the increased activity to meet higher sales volume. For Fiscal 2020, non-cash items included depreciation expenses of $1.4 million, stock compensation expenses of $15.4 million, and unrealized gains on forward contracts of $0.9 million.
For Fiscal 2019, we realized net income of $5.6 million. Net cash was reduced by a $6.8 million increase in inventory to meet growth in anticipated sales and a $2.6 million increase in accounts receivable resulting from that growth and increase in prepaid expenses of $1.4 million, partially offset by a $3.6 million increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities. In Fiscal 2019 depreciation expenses were $0.7 million.
We anticipate that our depreciation and amortization expense will increase in 2021 and for future periods based on capital expenditures on property, plant and equipment made in 2019 and 2020, and expected capital expenditures to expand production capabilities in both the Italy and California facilities. We also anticipate increases in stock-based compensation as we make equity grants to certain key employees, members of our management team, and our Board.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities relates to capital expenditures to support growth and investment in property, plant and equipment to expand production capacity, tenant improvements, and to a lesser extent, replacement of existing equipment.
For Fiscal 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $7.0 million as compared to $3.4 million in Fiscal 2019. Cash used in both periods consisted primarily of capital expenditures to improve efficiency and output from our current facilities.
Financing Activities
For Fiscal 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $147.4 million. As a result of the Business Combination, we received $105.0 million in cash, net of issuance and other transaction costs. As a result of the cash received, we made a net reduction in our outstanding line of credit and notes payable (including to related parties) of $12.0 million. We received a capital contribution of $9.5 million in Fiscal 2020 and made a distribution payment of $8.1 million. Also, in Fiscal 2020, we received $53.0 million from the exercise of outstanding warrants.
For Fiscal 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $8.8 million consisting of $6.0 million in capital contributions resulting from the 12.5% minority investment by UMB, and $3.0 million of net borrowings under our credit facility and notes payable to support working capital requirements to fund growth, partially offset by $0.3 million in dividends and $0.2 million in repayment of debt to related parties.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities that would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, that have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In preparing our financial statements, we make estimates, assumptions, and judgments that can have a significant impact on our reported revenue, results of operations, and comprehensive net income or loss, as well as on the value of certain assets and liabilities on our balance sheet during, and as of, the reporting periods. These estimates, assumptions, and judgments are necessary and are made based on our historical experience, market trends and on other assumptions and factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances because future events and their effects on our results of operations and value of our assets cannot be determined with certainty. These estimates may change as new events occur or additional information is obtained. We may periodically be faced with uncertainties, the outcomes of which are not within our control and may not be known for a prolonged period of time. Because the use of estimates is inherent in the financial reporting process, actual results could differ from those estimates or assumptions.
The critical accounting estimates, assumptions, and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Valuation of Holdback Shares and Sponsor Earnout Shares
We recognized and measured the contingent amounts associated with the Holdback Shares and Sponsor Earnout Shares at fair value as of the Closing date of $120.35 million and $0, respectively, using a probability-weighted discounted cash flow model. These measures are based upon significant inputs that are not observable by the market and are therefore considered to be Level 3 inputs. Refer to Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements for discussion related to the measurement and recognition.
Revenue Recognition
We sell plant-based meals and snacks including, but not limited to, acai and smoothie bowls, zucchini spirals, riced cauliflower, vegetable bowls and cauliflower crust pizza primarily in the U.S. and Italy. All of our revenue relates to contracts with customers. Our accounting contracts are from purchase orders or purchase orders combined with purchase contracts. Revenue recognition is completed on a point in time basis when product control is transferred to the customer. In general, control transfers to the customer when the product is shipped or delivered to the customer based upon applicable shipping terms. Customer contracts generally do include more than one performance obligation and the performance obligations in our contracts are satisfied within one year. No payment terms beyond one year are granted at contract inception.
Most contracts also include some form of variable consideration. The most common forms of variable consideration include discounts and demonstration costs. Variable consideration is treated as a reduction in revenue when product revenue is recognized. Depending on the specific type of variable consideration, we use either the expected value or most likely amount method to determine the variable consideration. We review and update our estimates and related accruals of variable consideration each period based on the terms of the agreements, historical experience, and any recent changes in the market.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are recorded at invoiced amounts. We extend credit to our customers based on an evaluation of a customer’s financial condition and collateral is generally not required. We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated uncollectible accounts receivable. The allowance is based on our assessment of known delinquent accounts, historical experience, and other currently available evidence of the collectability and the aging of accounts receivable. Although management believes the current allowance is sufficient to cover existing exposures, there can be no assurance against the deterioration of a major customer’s creditworthiness, or against defaults that are higher than what has been experienced historically.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
Valuation Allowances for Deferred Tax Assets
We establish an income tax valuation allowance when available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider the amounts and timing of expected future deductions or carryforwards and sources of taxable income that may enable utilization. We maintain an existing valuation allowance until enough positive evidence exists to support its reversal. Changes in the amount or timing of expected future deductions or taxable income may have a material impact on the level of income tax valuation allowances. Our assessment of the realizability of the deferred tax assets requires judgment about its future results. Inherent in this estimation is the requirement for us to estimate future book and taxable income and possible tax planning strategies. These estimates require us to exercise judgment about our future results, the prudence and feasibility of possible tax planning strategies, and the economic environment in which it does business. It is possible that the actual results will differ from the assumptions and require adjustments to the allowance. Adjustments to the allowance would affect future net income.