ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Executive Summary
TTEC Holdings, Inc. (“TTEC”, “the Company”, “we”, “our” or “us”) is a leading global customer experience as a service (“CXaaS”) partner for many of the world’s iconic brands, Fortune 1000 companies, government agencies, and disruptive growth companies. TTEC helps its clients deliver frictionless customer experiences, strengthen customer relationships, brand recognition and loyalty through personalized interactions, improve their Net Promoter Score, customer satisfaction and quality assurance, and lower their total cost to serve by combining innovative digital solutions with best-in-class service capabilities to enable and deliver simplified, consistent and seamless customer experience across channels and phases of the customer lifecycle.
Our CXaaS solutions enhance our clients’ customers experience and help differentiate our clients from their competition.
In the fast expanding direct-to-customer ("DTC") channel where experiences are everything, enterprises must become increasingly more customer-centric, virtualized and digitally enabled to acquire, grow and maintain customers. Our mission is to enable and accelerate our clients' path to virtual and digital transformation. We are focused on improving the experience of our clients' customers by leveraging existing and emerging technologies - cloud, omnichannel, analytics, artificial intelligence ("AI"), machine learning ("ML"), robotic process automation ("RPA"), and real-time conversational messaging.
The Company reports its financial information based on two segments: TTEC Digital and TTEC Engage.
● TTEC Digital provides the CX technology services and platforms to support our clients’ customer interaction delivery infrastructure. The segment designs, builds and operates the omnichannel ecosystem in a cloud, on premise, or hybrid environment, inclusive of fully integrating, orchestrating, and administrating highly scalable, feature-rich CX technology applications.
● TTEC Engage provides the CX managed services to support our clients’ end-to-end customer interaction delivery, by providing the essential CX omnichannel and application technologies, human resources, recruiting, training and production, at-home or facility-based delivery infrastructure on a global scale, and engagement processes. This segment provides full-service digital, omnichannel customer engagement, supporting customer care, customer acquisition, growth and retention, and fraud detection and prevention services.
TTEC Digital and TTEC Engage strategically come together under our unified offering, Humanify® Customer Experience as a Service ("CXaaS"), which drives measurable customer results for clients through the delivery of personalized, omnichannel experiences. Our Humanify® cloud platform provides a fully integrated ecosystem of CX offerings, including messaging, AI, ML, RPA, analytics, cybersecurity, customer relationship management ("CRM"), knowledge management, journey orchestration and traditional voice solutions. Our end-to-end platform differentiates us from many competitors by combining design, strategic consulting, best-in-class technology, data analytics, process optimization, system integration and operational excellence. This unified offering is value-oriented, outcome-based and delivered to large enterprises, governments and disruptive growth companies on a global scale.
During fiscal 2020, the TTEC global operating platform delivered onshore, nearshore, and offshore services in 20 countries on six continents -- the United States, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Germany, Greece, India, Ireland, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, the Philippines, Poland, Singapore, South Africa, Thailand, and the United Kingdom with the help of 61,000 consultants, technologists, and CX professionals.
Our revenue for fiscal 2020 was $1.949 billion, approximately $307 million, or 16% which came from our TTEC Digital segment and $1.642 billion, or 84%, which came from our TTEC Engage segment.
To improve our competitive position in a rapidly changing market and stay strategically relevant to our clients, we continue to invest in innovation and service offerings for both mainstream and high growth disruptive businesses, diversifying and strengthening our core customer care services with consulting, data analytics, insights, and technology-enabled, outcomes-focused services.
We also invest to broaden our product and service capabilities, increase our global client base and industry expertise, tailor our geographic footprint to the needs of our clients, and further scale our end-to-end integrated solutions platform. To this end we have been highly acquisitive in the last several years, including an acquisition in the second half of 2020 of a preferred Amazon Connect cloud contact center service provider, an acquisition in the first quarter of 2020 of an autonomous customer experience and intelligent automation solutions provider and an acquisition in the fourth quarter of 2019 of a provider of customer care, social media community management, content moderation, technical support and business process solutions for rapidly growing businesses in early stages of their lifecycle.
We have extensive expertise in the automotive, communications, financial services, national/federal and state and local government, healthcare, logistics, media and entertainment, e-tail/retail, technology, travel and transportation industries. We serve more than 300 diverse clients globally, including many of the world’s iconic brands, Fortune 1000 companies, government agencies, and disruptive growth companies.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 as a global pandemic. Within weeks of this announcement, travel bans, a state of emergency, quarantines, lockdowns, “shelter in place” orders, and business restrictions and shutdowns were issued in most countries where TTEC does business. The need to comply with these measures, which came into effect with little notice, impacted our day-to-day operations and disrupted our business in the last month of the first quarter and second quarter of the year. As a result, operations were suspended in some of our TTEC Engage customer experience delivery sites. Business continuity plans were executed to transition as many employees as was reasonably possible to a work from home environment to support the health and well-being of our employees and communities and to provide a stable service delivery platform for our clients.
Between mid-March and mid-April 2020, we transitioned over 43,000 employees, or 80% of our employee population, to a work from home environment. With the easing of some of the government restrictions, those employees who were considered essential and could not operate effectively while remote returned to our brick-and-mortar sites, but most continue to work from home.
For those sites that continue to operate, we have taken extensive measures to protect the health and safety of our employees, in accordance with the recommendations and guidelines provided by the World Health Organization, the U.S. and European Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the U.S. Occupational Safety Association, and local governments in jurisdictions where our customer experience centers are located.
Although our business experienced the effects of COVID-19 in the first half of 2020, our implementation of business continuity plans, rapid transition of employees to a work from home environment, and the geographic diversification of our delivery centers allowed us to mitigate potentially more severe impacts, and positioned us to support our commercial and public sector clients experiencing significant surge volumes of customer, patient and citizen COVID-19 related engagement. Our COVID-19 related surge work has contributed approximately 12% of our total revenue for 2020. Although approximately 20% of our pre-COVID-19 business was comprised of clients in industries that have been negatively impacted by the pandemic, i.e. automotive, retail and travel and hospitality, the 2020 total revenue derived from these clients has increased approximately 10% over the prior year period. Through the period ended December 31, 2020 the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material adverse impact on our operational or financial results. While we expect this positive trend to continue and while some of our COVID-19 related work has transitioned to more traditional business activities for the same clients, there is uncertainty about our COVID-19 surge volumes and our non-COVID-19 related business. We cannot accurately predict the severity of the economic and operational challenges of a pro-longed COVID-19 pandemic on our clients’ businesses and its effect on the magnitude and timing of their buying decisions. Further, while to date we have been successful in managing service delivery from our delivery sites that could not be replaced with work from home delivery, unpredictable lockdown decisions in some jurisdictions where we do business may continue to impact our delivery capability with little notice, thus potentially impacting our results of operations in the future.
In March 2020, we launched multiple cost reduction, optimization, and liquidity preservation initiatives to align our expenses with anticipated changes in revenue and increased costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic and government mandated restriction measures. We also intensified our cash flow discipline, including working capital management, hiring freezes, cuts in non-essential spending, suspension of merit increases and some incentive programs, deferral of capital expenditures, where possible, and negotiations for rent concessions for those facilities that we were unable to use during the government restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our results of operations for 2020 permitted us to reverse most of the cost austerity measures. With the greater adoption of our work from home solution during the COVID-19 pandemic, we also launched a comprehensive review of our global real estate footprint to balance our commitments to physical facilities around the globe against evolving client preferences with respect to traditional physical delivery centers and work from home delivery. Considering the continued COVID-19 related uncertainties, we continue to remain vigilant in our cost management.
Our Integrated Service Offerings and Business Segments
We provide strategic value and differentiation through our two business segments: TTEC Digital and TTEC Engage.
TTEC Digital provides the CX technology services and platforms to support our clients’ customer interaction delivery infrastructure. The segment designs, builds and operates the omnichannel ecosystem in a cloud, on premise, or hybrid environment, and fully integrates, orchestrates, and administers highly scalable, feature-rich CX technology applications. These solutions are critical to enabling and accelerating digital transformation for our clients.
● Technology Services: Our technology services design, integrate and operate highly scalable, digital omnichannel technology solutions in the cloud, on premise, or hybrid environment, including journey orchestration, automation and AI, knowledge management, and workforce productivity.
● Professional Services: Our management consulting practices deliver customer experience strategy, analytics, process optimization, and learning and performance services.
TTEC Engage delivers the CX managed services to support our clients’ end-to-end customer interaction delivery, by providing the essential CX omnichannel and application technologies, human resources, recruiting, training and production, at-home or facility-based delivery infrastructure on a global scale, and engagement processes. This segment provides full-service digital, omnichannel customer engagement, supporting customer care, customer acquisition, growth and retention, and fraud detection and prevention services.
● Customer Acquisition Services: Our customer growth and acquisition services optimize the buying journeys for acquiring new customers by leveraging technology and analytics to deliver personal experiences that increase the quantity and quality of leads and customers.
● Customer Care Services: Our customer care services provide turnkey contact center solutions, including digital omnichannel technologies, associate recruiting and training, facilities, and operational expertise to create exceptional customer experiences across all touchpoints.
● Fraud Prevention Services: Our digital fraud detection and prevention services proactively identify and prevent fraud and provide community content moderation and compliance.
Based on our clients’ preference, we provide our services on an integrated cross-business segment and/or on a discrete basis.
Additional information with respect to our segments and geographic footprint is included in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Our 2020 Financial Results
In 2020, our revenue increased 18.6% to $1,949 million over 2019, including an increase of 0.02% or $0.3 million due to foreign currency fluctuations. The increase in revenue was comprised of a $1.6 million, or 0.5%, increase for TTEC Digital and a $303.9 million, or 22.7%, increase for TTEC Engage.
Our 2020 income from operations increased $81.0 million to $204.7 million or 10.5% of revenue, from $123.7 million or 7.5% of revenue for 2019. The change in operating income is attributable to a number of different factors across the segments. The TTEC Digital operating income expanded with an 16.4%, or $6.4 million, improvement over last year primarily due to the growth of its higher margin cloud business. The TTEC Engage operating income increased 88.0%, or $74.6 million, compared to the prior year based on the increase in revenue including, but not limited to, the acquisition of FCR and significant surge volumes in our commercial and public sector clients experiencing spikes in customer interactions related to COVID-19.
Income from operations in 2020 and 2019 included a total of $9.1 million and $5.5 million of restructuring and asset impairments, respectively.
Our offshore customer engagement centers spanning six countries serve clients based in the U.S. and in other countries with 23,400 workstations representing 55% of our global delivery capabilities. Revenue for our TTEC Engage segment provided in these offshore locations represented 29% of our 2020 revenue, as compared to 34% of our 2019 revenue.
Our seat utilization is defined as the total number of utilized workstations compared to the total number of available production workstations. As of December 31, 2020, the total production workstations for our TTEC Engage segment was 42,434 and the overall capacity utilization in our centers was 57% versus 74% in the prior year period. The utilization is lower than the previous year primarily due to COVID-19 protocols requiring the distancing of associates which has reduced the available seat capacity. Adjusted for social distancing protocols, which reduced the available workstations to approximately 21,200, and accounting for all client paid seats as utilized, whether through actual usage or contractual commitments to hold the seats, current utilization is in excess of 114%.
Post COVID-19 we expect our clients to leverage a more diversified geographic footprint and an increased mix of work from home vs. brick and mortar seats. We will continue to refine our site strategy and capacity as we finalize plans with our clients and prospects.
Some of our clients may be subject to regulatory pressures to serve clients onshore. We plan to continue to selectively retain and grow capacity and expand into new offshore markets, while maintaining appropriate capacity onshore. As we grow our offshore delivery capabilities and our exposure to foreign currency fluctuation increases, we will continue to actively manage this risk via a multi-currency hedging program designed to minimize operating margin volatility.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We regularly review our estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions, which are based upon historical experience and on various other factors believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Reported amounts and disclosures may have been different had management used different estimates and assumptions or if different conditions had occurred in the periods presented. Below is a discussion of the policies that we believe may involve a high degree of judgment and complexity.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue from contracts and programs when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to the customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration it expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. Revenue is recognized when or as performance obligations are satisfied by transferring control of a promised good or service to a customer. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer. Performance obligation is the unit of accounting for revenue recognition under the provisions of ASC Topic 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” and all related amendments (“ASC 606”). A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation in recognizing revenue.
The BPO inbound and outbound service fees are based on either a per minute, per hour, per FTE, per transaction or per call basis, which represents the majority of our contracts. These contracts have a single performance obligation as the promise to transfer the individual goods or services is not separately identifiable from other promises in the contracts and, therefore, not distinct. For example, services for the training of the Company’s agents (which are separately billable to the customer) are a separate promise in our BPO contracts, but they are not distinct from the primary service obligations to transfer services to the customers. The performance of the customer service by the agents is highly dependent on the initial, growth, and seasonal training services provided to the agents during the life of a program. The training itself is not considered to have value to the customer on a standalone basis, and therefore, training on a standalone basis cannot be considered a separate unit of accounting. The Company therefore defers revenue from certain training services that are rendered mainly upon commencement of a new client contract or program, including seasonal programs. Revenue is also deferred when there is significant growth training in an existing program. Accordingly, recognition of initial, growth, and seasonal training revenues and associated costs (consisting primarily of labor and related expenses) are deferred and amortized over the period of economic benefit. With the exception of training, which is typically billed upfront and deferred, the remainder of revenue is invoiced on a monthly or quarterly basis as services are performed and does not create a contract asset or liability.
In addition to revenue from BPO services, revenue also consists of fees from services for program launch, professional consulting, fully-hosted or managed technology and learning innovation services. The contracts containing these service offerings may contain multiple performance obligations. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, the Company allocates the contract’s transaction price to each performance obligation using the best estimate of the standalone selling price of each distinct good or service in the contract. The primary method used to estimate standalone selling price is the expected cost plus a margin approach, under which the Company forecasts its expected costs of satisfying a performance obligation and then adds an appropriate margin for that distinct good or service. The Company forecasts its expected cost based on historical data, current prevailing wages, other direct and indirect costs incurred in recently completed contracts, market conditions, and other client specific cost considerations. For these services, the point at which the transfer of control occurs determines when revenue is recognized in a specific reporting period. Within our Digital segment, where there are product sales, the attribution of revenue is recognized when the transfer of control is completed and the products are delivered to the client’s location. Where services are rendered to a customer, the attribution is aligned with the progress of work and is recognized over time (i.e. based on measuring the progress toward complete satisfaction of a performance obligation using an output method or an input method). Where output method is used, revenue is recognized on the basis of direct measurements of the value to the customer of the goods or services transferred relative to the remaining goods or services promised under the contract. The majority of the Company’s services are recognized over time using the input method in which revenue is recognized on the basis of efforts or inputs toward satisfying a performance obligation (for example, resources consumed, labor hours expended, costs incurred, or time elapsed) relative to the total expected inputs to satisfy the performance obligation. The measures used provide faithful depiction of the transfer of goods or services to the customers. For example, revenue is recognized on certain consulting contracts based on labor hours expended as a measurement of progress where the consulting work involves input of consultants’ time. The progress is measured based on the hours expended over total number of estimated hours included in the contract multiplied by the total contract consideration. The contract consideration can be a fixed price or an hourly rate, and in either case, the use of labor hours expended as an input measure provides a faithful depiction of the transfer of services to the customers. Deferred revenues for these services represent amounts collected from, or invoiced to, customers in excess of revenues recognized. This results primarily from i) receipt of license fees that are deferred due to one or more of the revenue recognition criteria not being met, and ii) the billing of annual customer support agreements, annual managed service agreements, and billings for other professional services that have not yet been performed by the Company. The Company records amounts billed and received, but not earned, as deferred revenue. These amounts are recorded in Deferred revenue or Other long-term liabilities, as applicable, in the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets based on the period over which the Company expects to render services. Costs directly associated with revenue deferred, consisting primarily of labor and related expenses, are also deferred and recognized in proportion to the expected future revenue from the contract.
Variable consideration exists in contracts for certain client programs that provide for adjustments to monthly billings based upon whether the Company achieves, exceeds or fails certain performance criteria. Adjustments to monthly billings consist of contractual bonuses/penalties, holdbacks and other performance based conditions. Variable consideration is estimated at contract inception at its most likely value and updated at the end of each reporting period as additional performance data becomes available. Revenue related to such variable consideration is recognized only to the extent that a significant reversal of any incremental revenue is not considered probable.
Contract modifications are routine in the performance of the customer contracts. Contracts are often modified to account for customer mandated changes in the contract specifications or requirements, including service level changes. In most instances, contract modifications relate to goods or services that are incremental and distinctly identifiable, and, therefore, are accounted for prospectively.
Direct and incremental costs to obtain or fulfill a contract are capitalized, and the capitalized costs are amortized over the corresponding period of benefit, determined on a contract by contract basis. The Company recognizes an asset for the incremental costs of obtaining a contract with a customer if it expects to recover those costs. The incremental costs of obtaining a contract are those costs that the Company incurs to obtain a customer contract that it would not have incurred if the contract had not been obtained. Contract acquisition costs consist primarily of payment of commissions to sales personnel and are incurred when customer contracts are signed. The deferred sales commission amounts are amortized based on the expected period of economic benefit and are classified as current or non-current based on the timing of when they are expected to be recognized as an expense. Costs to obtain a contract that would have been incurred regardless of whether the contract was obtained are recognized as an expense when incurred, unless those costs are explicitly chargeable to the customer regardless of whether the contract is obtained. Sales commissions are paid for obtaining new clients only and are not paid for contract renewals or contract modifications. Capitalized costs of obtaining contracts are periodically reviewed for impairment.
In certain cases, the Company negotiates an upfront payment to a customer in conjunction with the execution of a contract. Such upfront payments are critical to acquisition of new business and are often used as an incentive to negotiate favorable rates from the clients and are accounted for as upfront discounts for future services. Such payments are either made in cash at the time of execution of a contract or are netted against the Company’s service invoices. Payments to customers are capitalized as contract acquisition costs and are amortized in proportion to the expected future revenue from the contract, which in most cases results in straight-line amortization over the life of the contract. Such payments are considered a reduction of the selling prices of the Company’s products or services, and therefore, are accounted for as a reduction of revenue when amortized. Such capitalized contract acquisition costs are periodically reviewed for impairment taking into consideration ongoing future cash flows expected from the contract and estimated remaining useful life of the contract.
Some of the Company’s service contracts are short-term in nature with a contract term of one year or less. For those contracts, the Company has utilized the practical expedient in ASC 606-10-50-14 exempting the Company from disclosure of the transaction price allocated to remaining performance obligations if the performance obligation is part of a contract that has an original expected duration of one year or less. Also in alignment with ASC 606-10-50-14, the Company does not disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations for contracts for which it recognizes revenue at the amount to which it has the right to invoice for services performed. Additionally, the Company’s standard payment terms are less than one year. Given the foregoing, the Company has elected the practical expedient under ASC 606-10-32-18 to not assess whether a contract has a significant financing component. Pursuant to the Company’s election of the practical expedient under ASC 606-10-32-2A, sales, value add, and other taxes that are collected from customers concurrent with revenue-producing activities, which the Company has an obligation to remit to the governmental authorities, are excluded from revenue.
Income Taxes
Accounting for income taxes requires recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future income tax consequences of transactions that have been included in the Consolidated Financial Statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities using tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. When circumstances warrant, we assess the likelihood that our net deferred tax assets will more likely than not be recovered from future projected taxable income.
We continually review the likelihood that deferred tax assets will be realized in future tax periods under the “more-likely-than-not” criteria. In making this judgment, we consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, in determining whether, based on the weight of that evidence, a valuation allowance is required.
We follow a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to determine if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on audit. The second step is to estimate and measure the tax benefit as the amount that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the tax authority. We evaluate these uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis. This evaluation is based on the consideration of several factors including changes in facts or circumstances, changes in applicable tax law, and settlement of issues under audit.
Interest and penalties relating to income taxes and uncertain tax positions are accrued net of tax in the Provision for income taxes in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss).
In the future, our effective tax rate could be adversely affected by several factors, many of which are outside our control. Our effective tax rate is affected by the proportion of revenue and income before taxes in the various domestic and international jurisdictions in which we operate. Further, we are subject to changing tax laws, regulations and interpretations in multiple jurisdictions in which we operate, as well as the requirements, pronouncements and rulings of certain tax, regulatory and accounting organizations. We estimate our annual effective tax rate each quarter based on a combination of actual and forecasted results of subsequent quarters. Consequently, significant changes in our actual quarterly or forecasted results may impact the effective tax rate for the current or future periods.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We evaluate the carrying value of property, plant and equipment and definite-lived intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. An asset is considered to be impaired when the forecasted undiscounted cash flows of an asset group are estimated to be less than its carrying value. The amount of impairment recognized is the difference between the carrying value of the asset group and its fair value. Fair value estimates are based on assumptions concerning the amount and timing of estimated future cash flows and assumed discount rates.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
We evaluate goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for possible impairment at least annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable.
We use a two-step process to assess the realizability of goodwill. The first step, Step 0, is a qualitative assessment that analyzes current economic indicators associated with a particular reporting unit. For example, we analyze changes in economic, market and industry conditions, business strategy, cost factors, and financial performance, among others, to determine if there would be a significant decline to the fair value of a particular reporting unit. A qualitative assessment also includes analyzing the excess fair value of a reporting unit over its carrying value from impairment assessments performed in previous years. If the qualitative assessment indicates a stable or improved fair value, no further testing is required.
If a qualitative assessment indicates that a significant decline to fair value of a reporting unit is more likely than not, or if a reporting unit’s fair value has historically been closer to its carrying value, we will proceed to Step 1 testing where we calculate the fair value of a reporting unit based on discounted future probability-weighted cash flows. If Step 1 indicates that the carrying value of a reporting unit is in excess of its fair value, we will record an impairment equal to the amount by which a reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value.
We estimate fair value using discounted cash flows of the reporting units. The most significant assumptions used in these analyses are those made in estimating future cash flows. In estimating future cash flows, we use financial assumptions in our internal forecasting model such as projected capacity utilization, projected changes in the prices we charge for our services, projected labor costs, as well as contract negotiation status. The financial and credit market volatility directly impacts our fair value measurement through our weighted average cost of capital that we use to determine our discount rate. We use a discount rate we consider appropriate for the country where the business unit is providing services.
Similar to goodwill, the Company may first use a qualitative analysis to assess the realizability of its indefinite-lived intangible assets. The qualitative analysis will include a review of changes in economic, market and industry conditions, business strategy, cost factors, and financial performance, among others, to determine if there would be a significant decline to the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset. If a quantitative analysis is completed, an indefinite-lived intangible asset (such as a trade name) is evaluated for possible impairment by comparing the fair value of the asset with its carrying value. Fair value is estimated as the discounted value of future revenues arising from a trade name using a royalty rate that a market participant would pay for use of that trade name. An impairment charge is recorded if the intangible asset’s carrying value exceeds its estimated fair value.
Derivatives
We may enter into foreign exchange forward and option contracts to reduce our exposure to foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations that are associated with forecasted revenue earned in foreign locations. We may enter into interest rate swaps to reduce our exposure to interest rate fluctuations associated with our variable rate debt. Upon proper qualification, these contracts are often accounted for as cash flow hedges under current accounting standards. From time-to-time, we may also enter into foreign exchange forward contracts to hedge our net investment in a foreign operation.
All derivative financial instruments are reported in the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value. Changes in fair value of derivative instruments designated as cash flow hedges are recorded in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), a component of Stockholders’ Equity, to the extent they are deemed effective. Based on the criteria established by current accounting standards, all of our cash flow hedge contracts are deemed to be highly effective. Changes in fair value of any net investment hedge are recorded as cumulative translation adjustment in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) in the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets offsetting the change in cumulative translation adjustment attributable to the hedged portion of our net investment in the foreign operation. Any realized gains or losses resulting from the foreign currency cash flow hedges are recognized together with the hedged transactions within Revenue. Any realized gains or losses resulting from the interest rate swaps are recognized in Interest expense. Gains and losses from the settlements of our net investment hedges remain in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) until partial or complete liquidation of the applicable net investment.
We also enter into fair value derivative contracts to reduce our exposure to foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations associated with changes in asset and liability balances. Changes in the fair value of derivative instruments designated as fair value hedges affect the carrying value of the asset or liability hedged, with changes in both the derivative instrument and the hedged asset or liability being recognized in Other income (expense), net in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss).
While we expect that our derivative instruments will continue to be highly effective and in compliance with applicable accounting standards, if our hedges did not qualify as highly effective or if we determine that forecasted transactions will not occur, the changes in the fair value of the derivatives used as hedges would be reflected currently in earnings.
Contingencies
We record a liability for pending litigation and claims where losses are both probable and reasonably estimable. Each quarter, management reviews all litigation and claims on a case-by-case basis and assigns probability of loss and range of loss.
Explanation of Key Metrics and Other Items
Cost of Services
Cost of services principally include costs incurred in connection with our customer experience services and technology services, including direct labor and related taxes and benefits, telecommunications, technology costs, sales and use tax and certain fixed costs associated with the customer engagement centers. In addition, cost of services includes income related to grants we may receive from local or state governments as an incentive to locate customer engagement centers in their jurisdictions which reduce the cost of services for those facilities.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses primarily include costs associated with administrative services such as sales, marketing, product development, legal, information systems (including core technology and telephony infrastructure), accounting and finance. It also includes outside professional fees (i.e., legal and accounting services), building expense for non-engagement center facilities and other items associated with general business administration.
Restructuring Charges, Net
Restructuring charges, net primarily include costs incurred in conjunction with reductions in force or decisions to exit facilities, including termination benefits and lease liabilities, net of expected sublease rentals.
Interest Expense
Interest expense includes interest expense, amortization of debt issuance costs associated with our Credit Facility, and the accretion of deferred payments associated with our acquisitions.
Other Income
The main components of other income are miscellaneous income not directly related to our operating activities, such as foreign exchange gains and reductions in our contingent consideration.
Other Expenses
The main components of other expenses are expenditures not directly related to our operating activities, such as foreign exchange losses and increases in our contingent consideration.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to December 31, 2019
The tables included in the following sections are presented to facilitate an understanding of Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and present certain information by segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (amounts in thousands). All inter-company transactions between the reported segments for the periods presented have been eliminated.
TTEC Digital
The increase in revenue for the TTEC Digital segment was related to significant increases in the cloud platform and the systems integration practice including a large multi-year governmental contract, and the acquisitions of Serendebyte and Voice Foundry during 2020, offset by reductions in the legacy facility based training business and the Middle East consulting practice, both of which the Company has exited.
The operating income expansion is primarily attributable to the acquisitions and continued improved utilization of technology and people assets as the business scales its cloud and system integration revenue, as well as the exit of the less profitable facilities based training and Middle East consulting practices. The operating income also increased due to the $2.0 million impairment of intangible and other long-lived assets for one of the consulting components in this segment (See Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Notes 6 and 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements) recorded during 2019. The operating income as a percentage of revenue increased to 14.8% in 2020 as compared to 12.7% in 2019. Included in the operating income was amortization related to acquired intangibles of $3.0 million and $2.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
TTEC Engage
The increase in revenue for the TTEC Engage segment was due to a net increase of $408.5 million in client programs including the acquisition of FCR in the fourth quarter of 2019 and certain surge programs for several clients in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, offset by a decrease for program completions of $104.6 million. Prior to the end of 2020, a significant portion of the surge work has converted into longer-term normal course business.
The operating income increased in line with the improved revenue including the acquisition of FCR as well as continued improved profitability in our customer growth, @Home, fraud prevention and detection and customer acquisition offerings and auto and hypergrowth client portfolios, offset by increases in amortization for acquired intangibles. Partially offsetting these increases was a net $7.6 million in restructuring and impairment charges related to several facilities in the U.S, Canada, and the Philippines. (see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements). As a result, the operating income as a percentage of revenue increased to 9.7% in 2020 as compared to 6.3% in the prior period. Included in the operating income was amortization expense related to acquired intangibles of $13.2 million and $9.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Interest Income (Expense)
Interest income decreased to $1.7 million in 2020 from $1.9 million in 2019 due to lower interest rates offset by higher average cash balances. Interest expense decreased to $17.5 million during 2020 from $19.1 million during 2019, primarily due to lower interest rates despite higher utilization of the line of credit, and a $1.6 million increase period over period in the charge related to the future purchase of the remaining 30% interest in Motif, which was finalized during the second quarter of 2020.
Other Income (Expense), Net
For the year ended December 31, 2020 Other income (expense), net decreased to net expense of $18.6 million from net income of $3.9 million during the prior year.
Included in the year ended December 31, 2020 was a net $1.8 million benefit related to the fair value adjustments of contingent consideration for three acquisitions, offset by a $19.9 million expense related to the deconsolidation of three subsidiaries and the related removal of the Currency Translation Adjustments (see Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Notes 2 and 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements).
Included in the year ended December 31, 2019 was a $2.4 million benefit related to the fair value adjustment of contingent consideration for an acquisition, a $1.4 million benefit on recovery of receivables in connection with the consulting business that we are winding down, a $1.4 million benefit related to royalty payments in connection with the sale of a business, and a $0.7 million benefit on the sale of trademarks.
Income Taxes
The reported effective tax rate for 2020 was 24.0% as compared to 23.3% for 2019. The effective tax rate for 2020 was impacted by earnings in international jurisdictions currently under an income tax holiday, $2.9 million of expense related to changes in tax contingent liabilities, a $1.8 million benefit related to provision to return adjustments, a $3.0 million benefit related to losses on dissolutions of subsidiaries, $0.4 million of expense related to changes in valuation allowances, a $2.0 million benefit related to restructuring charges, $0.8 million of expense for earnouts related to acquisitions, a $4.0 million benefit related to equity based compensation, a $4.2 million benefit related to the amortization of purchased intangibles, and $0.1 million of other benefits. Without these items our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 would have been 22.5%.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, our effective tax rate was 23.3%. The effective tax rate for 2019 was impacted by earnings in international jurisdictions currently under an income tax holiday, $0.7 million of expense related to changes in tax contingent liabilities, a $1.7 million benefit related to provision to return adjustments, a $2.8 million benefit related to tax rate changes, $4.5 million of expense related to changes in valuation allowances, a $0.9 million benefit related to restructuring charges, a $4.7 million benefit related to equity based compensation, a $2.9 million benefit related to the amortization of purchased intangibles, and $0.3 million of other benefits. Without these items our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019 would have been 24.4%.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 compared to December 31, 2018
For a discussion of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, please see Part II. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are our cash generated from operations, our cash and cash equivalents, and borrowings under our Credit Facility. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated positive operating cash flows of $271.9 million. We believe that our cash generated from operations, existing cash and cash equivalents, and available credit will be sufficient to meet expected operating and capital expenditure requirements for the next 12 months.
We manage a centralized global treasury function in the United States with a focus on safeguarding and optimizing the use of our global cash and cash equivalents. Our cash is held in the U.S. in U.S. dollars, and outside of the U.S. in U.S. dollars and foreign currencies. We expect to use our cash to fund working capital, global operations, dividends, acquisitions, and other strategic activities. While there are no assurances, we believe our global cash is well protected given our cash management practices, banking partners and utilization of diversified bank deposit accounts and other high quality investments.
We have global operations that expose us to foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations that may positively or negatively impact our liquidity. We are also exposed to higher interest rates associated with our variable rate debt. To mitigate these risks, we enter into foreign exchange forward and option contracts through our cash flow hedging program. Please refer to