Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly under the heading “Risk Factors.” Please refer to our “Forward-Looking Statements” section on page 3 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Background
TechTarget, Inc. is a global data and analytics leader and software provider for purchase intent-driven marketing and sales data which delivers business impact for B2B companies. Our solutions enable B2B technology companies to identify, reach, and influence key enterprise technology decision makers faster and with higher efficacy. We improve IT vendors’ abilities to impact highly targeted audiences for business growth using advanced targeting, first-party analytics and data services complemented with customized marketing programs that integrate demand generation, brand marketing, and advertising techniques.
We enable enterprise technology and business professionals to navigate the complex and rapidly-changing enterprise technology landscape where purchasing decisions can have significant financial and operational consequences. Our content strategy includes three primary sources which enterprise technology and business professionals use to assist them in their pre-purchase research: independent content provided by our professionals, vendor-generated content provided by our customers and member-generated, or peer-to-peer, content. In addition to utilizing our independent editorial content, registered members appreciate the ability to deepen their pre-purchase research by accessing the extensive vendor supplied content available across our website network. Likewise, we believe these members derive significant additional value from the ability our network provides to seamlessly interact with and contribute to information exchanges in a given field. To advance our ability to provide purchase intent-driven marketing and sales data, we have been acquisitive. During 2020, we acquired BrightTALK Limited, a technology media company that provides customers with a platform to create, host and promote webinar and video content, The Enterprise Strategy Group, Inc., a leading provider of decision support content based on user research and market analysis for global enterprise companies, and Data Science Central, LLC, a digital publishing and media company focused on data science and business analytics.
We had approximately 26.9 million and 20.0 million registered members and user - our “audiences” - as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During the second quarter of 2020, the Company ended a partnership with a company covering the Benelux region. This reduced our member number by 0.5 million. Additionally, we restated our 2019 membership to remove the Benelux member number as of December 31, 2019 (0.5 million). We believe that we have sufficient members within our remaining database to support our business needs within the Benelux region. As a result of the BrightTALK acquisition we added approximately 6.1 million unique users to our audiences. While the size of our registered member base does not provide direct insight into our customer numbers or our revenues, the value of our services sold to our customers is a direct result of the breadth and reach of this content footprint. This footprint creates the opportunity for our clients to gain business leverage by targeting our audiences through customized marketing programs. Likewise, the behavior exhibited by these audiences enables us to provide our customers with data products to improve their marketing and sales efforts. The targeted nature of our member base enables B2B technology companies to reach a specialized audience efficiently because our content is highly segmented and aligned with the B2B technology companies’ specific products.
With it, we have developed a broad customer base and, in 2020 delivered, purchase intent data programs to approximately 1,590 customers.
Executive Summary
Our total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased approximately $14.4 million, of which approximately $1.2 million was related to the acquisition of the BrightTALK, to $148.4 million, or 11% compared with 2019, driven primarily by higher lead generation revenues. Our business was impacted by the effects of the spread of COVID-19. We are witnessing the far-reaching impact that COVID-19 is having on our employees, customers, vendors, members, stockholders, and other stakeholders, as well as the global economy and society at large. While we have responded proactively to address the effects of COVID-19 and to mitigate its potential impact on our business, including through the elimination of all non-essential travel, transitioning our entire workforce to a remote work environment, and enhancing access to certain health and safety resources for our employees, beginning in March, 2020 we saw certain customers extend their normal sales cycles and budget shifts as some customers moved from long-term commitments to shorter-term marketing campaigns as they began to navigate through the pandemic. New customer acquisition has become harder as some potential customers have been less apt to spend on new products or services. Additionally, we noted a shift to our digital offerings
among our international customers as they were more reliant on face to face events. Revenues from our Priority Engine™ product increased 5% to $52.4 million in 2020 compared to 2019.
Longer-term deals amounted to 34% of our revenue in the fourth quarter of 2020, which is consistent with 34% in the fourth quarter of 2019. The amount of revenue that we derived from longer-term contracts in the fourth quarter of 2020 increased by approximately $2.7 million, an increase of 22% compared to the amount that we recognized in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Gross profit percentage of 75% for 2020 was consistent with 2019 and 2018 gross profit percentage of 76%.
Business Trends
The following discussion highlights key trends affecting our business.
•
Macro-economic Conditions and Industry Trends. Because most of our customers are B2B technology companies, the success of our business is intrinsically linked to the health, and subject to the market conditions, of the IT industry. Despite the current uncertainty in the economy, there are several factors indicating positive IT spending over the next few years is likely. There are several IT catalysts such as AI, security, data analytics, and cloud migrations, to name a few. Our growth continues to be driven in large part by the return on the investments we made in our data analytics suite of products, IT Deal Alert™, which continues to drive market share gains for us. While we will continue to invest in this growth area, management will also continue to carefully control discretionary spending such as travel and entertainment, and the filling of new and replacement positions, in an effort to maintain profit margins and cash flows.
•
COVID-19. Throughout 2020, we have been impacted by COVID-19 in multiple ways; we noted an acceleration of our international revenue as customers in those regions moved from face-to-face events to online platforms; we noted a reticence among certain of our customers to enter into longer-term contractual relationships which had a negative impact on the percentage of revenue under longer term-contracts; we noted our ability to expand our new logo acquisition with our Priority Engine Express offering was negatively impacted. We anticipate certain of these trends to continue throughout 2021.
•
Brexit. The United Kingdom’s June 2016 referendum, in which voters approved an exit of the United Kingdom from the European Union, commonly referred to as “Brexit,” resulted in significant general economic uncertainty as well as volatility in global stock markets and currency exchange rate fluctuations. In March 2017, the United Kingdom served notice to the European Council under Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty of its intention to withdraw from the European Union. As of January 30, 2020, the United Kingdom’s membership in the European Union was terminated and an eleven-month transition period began. In December 2020, the United Kingdom and the European Union agreed on a trade and cooperation agreement, under which the United Kingdom and the European Union will now form two separate markets governed by two distinct regulatory and legal regimes. The trade and cooperation agreement covers the general objectives and framework of the relationship between the United Kingdom and the European Union, including as it relates to trade, transport and visas. Notably, under the trade and cooperation agreement, United Kingdom service suppliers no longer benefit from automatic access to the entire European Union single market, United Kingdom goods no longer benefit from the free movement of goods and there is no longer the free movement of people between the United Kingdom and the European Union. Depending on the application of the terms of the trade and cooperation agreement, we could face new regulatory costs and challenges. The full effect of Brexit remains uncertain and depends on the application of the terms of the trade and cooperation agreement. Our revenue generated from customers who have billing addresses within the United Kingdom was approximately 12% of our total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020.
•
Customer Demographics. In the year ended December 31, 2020, revenues from our legacy global customers (a static cohort comprising of our 10 historically largest on premises hardware technology companies), decreased by approximately 9% compared to the prior year. Revenues from our largest 100 customers, excluding the legacy global customers described above, increased by approximately 17% compared to the prior year. Revenues attributable to our remaining customers, which includes venture capital-backed start-ups that primarily operate in North America, increased by approximately 14% over the prior year.
Our key strategic initiatives include:
•
Geographic - During 2020, approximately 39% of our revenues were derived from international campaigns.
•
Product -Purchase intent data continues to drive our product road strategy. During 2021, we intend to improve upon our sales use case by expanding our sales alerts and inbound converter features among other strategic objectives. We will also incorporate the purchase intent data from BrightTALK into Priority Engine™.
•
Our revenues were up 11% in 2020 compared to 2019, which was primarily driven by the increases noted above. We have looked extensively at the dynamics between IT Deal Alert™ and other offerings and have evaluated whether our growth in IT Deal Alert™ customers is taking away from other products for those same accounts. However, our data indicates that this is not the case, and while our sales team is leading with IT Deal Alert™, our sales team continues to emphasize the benefits of integration across our product offerings.
Sources of Revenues
•
Sources of Revenues
Revenue for the twelve-month periods ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 by geo-target were as follows (in thousands):
We sell customized marketing programs to B2B technology companies targeting a specific audience within a particular enterprise technology or business sector or sub-sector. We maintain multiple points of contact with our customers to provide support throughout their organizations and their customers’ IT sales cycles. As a result, our customers often run multiple advertising programs with us in order to target their desired audience of enterprise technology and business professionals more effectively. There are multiple factors that can impact our customers’ marketing and advertising objectives and spending with us, including but not limited to, IT product launches, increases or decreases to their advertising budgets, the timing of key industry marketing events, responses to competitor activities and efforts to address specific marketing objectives such as creating brand awareness or generating sales leads. Our products and services are generally delivered under short-term contracts that run for the length of a given program, typically less than nine months. In 2016, we began to enter into longer-term contracts with certain customers, and in the quarter ended December 31, 2020 approximately 34% of our revenues were from contracts in excess of 270 or more days (“longer-term contracts”).
Product and Service Offerings
We use our offerings to provide B2B technology companies with numerous touch points to identify, reach and influence key enterprise technology decision makers. The following is a description of the products and services we offer:
IT Deal Alert™. IT Deal Alert™ is a suite of products and services for B2B technology companies that leverages the detailed purchase intent data that we collect about end-user enterprise technology organizations. Through proprietary scoring methodologies, we use this insight to help our customers identify and prioritize accounts whose content consumption around specific enterprise technology topics indicates that they are “in-market” for a particular product or service. We also use the data directly to identify and further profile accounts’ upcoming purchase plans.
•
IT Deal AlertTM. A suite of data and services for B2B technology companies that leverages the detailed purchase intent data that we collect on enterprise technology organizations and professionals researching IT purchases on our network of websites. Through proprietary scoring methodologies, we use this insight to help our customers identify and prioritize accounts and contacts whose content consumption around specific enterprise technology topics indicates that they are “in-market” for a particular product or service. The suite of products and services includes Priority Engine™, Qualified Sales Opportunities™, and Deal Data™. Priority Engine™ is a subscription service powered by our Activity Intelligence™ platform, which integrates with customer relationship management and marketing automation platforms from salesforce.com, Marketo, Eloqua, Pardot, and Integrate. The service delivers lead generation workflow solutions that enable marketers and sales forces to identify and understand accounts and individuals actively researching new technology purchases and then to engage those active prospects. Qualified Sales Opportunities™ is a product that profiles specific in-progress purchase projects, including information on scope and purchase considerations. Deal Data™ is a customized solution aimed at sales intelligence and data scientist functions within our customer organizations. It renders our Activity Intelligence™ data into one-time offerings directly consumable by the customer’s internal applications.
•
Channel Offerings. Our offering allows our customers to deliver unlimited live webinars and videos to an unlimited audience.
•
Demand Solutions. Our offerings enable our customers to reach and influence prospective buyers through content marketing programs, such as white papers, webcasts, podcasts, videocasts, virtual trade shows, and content sponsorships, designed to generate demand for their solutions, and through display advertising and other brand programs that influence consideration by prospective buyers. We believe this allows B2B technology companies to maximize ROI on marketing and sales expenditures by capturing sales leads from the distribution and promotion of content to our audience of enterprise technology and business professionals.
•
Brand Solutions. Our suite of brand solutions offerings provides B2B technology companies with direct exposure to targeted audiences of enterprise technology and business professionals actively researching information related to their products and services. We leverage our Activity Intelligence™ platform to enable significant segmentation and targeting of specific audiences that can be accessed through these programs. Components of brand programs may include on-network branding, off-network branding, and microsites and related formats.
•
Custom Content Creation. We also at times create white papers, case studies, webcasts or videos to our customers’ specifications. These customized content assets are then promoted to our audience within both demand solutions and brand solutions programs.
As a result of our recent acquisition of BrightTALK we are now able to provide a platform that allows our customers to create, host and promote webinar, virtual event and video content.
Cost of Revenues, Operating Expenses and Other
Expenses consist of cost of revenues, selling and marketing, product development, general and administrative, depreciation, amortization, and interest and other expense, net. Personnel-related costs are a significant component of each of these expense categories except for depreciation, amortization and interest and other expense, net.
Cost of Revenues. Cost of revenues consists primarily of: salaries and related personnel costs, member acquisition expenses (primarily keyword purchases from leading internet search sites), lead generation expenses, freelance writer expenses, website hosting costs; vendor expenses associated with the delivery of webcast, podcast, videocast and similar content; and other offerings; stock-based compensation expenses; facility expenses and other related overhead.
Selling and Marketing. Selling and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries and related personnel costs; sales commissions; travel-related expenses; stock-based compensation expenses; facility expenses and other related overhead. Sales commissions are recorded as expense when earned by the employee, based on recorded revenue.
Product Development. Product development includes the creation and maintenance of our network of websites, advertiser offerings and technical infrastructure. Product development expense consists primarily of salaries and related personnel costs; stock-based compensation expenses; facility expenses and other related overhead.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related personnel costs; facility expenses and related overhead; accounting, legal and other professional fees; transaction-related expenses; and stock-based compensation expenses.
Depreciation. Depreciation expense consists of the depreciation of our property and equipment and other capitalized assets. Depreciation is calculated using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives, ranging from three to eleven years.
Amortization of Intangible Assets. Amortization of intangible assets expense consists of the amortization of intangible assets recorded in connection with our acquisitions. Separable intangible assets that are not deemed to have an indefinite life are amortized over their estimated useful lives, which range from eighteen months to nineteen years, using methods that are expected to reflect the estimated pattern of economic use.
Interest and Other Expense, Net. Interest expense, net consists primarily of interest costs and the related amortization of deferred issuance costs on our Notes and amounts borrowed under our current and our prior loan agreements and amortization of premiums on our investments, less any interest income earned on cash, cash equivalents and short-term and long-term investments. We historically have invested our cash in money market accounts, municipal bonds, government agency bonds, U.S. Treasury securities, and corporate bonds. Other expense consists primarily of non-operating gains or losses, primarily related to realized and unrealized foreign currency gains and losses on trade assets and liabilities.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
The discussion of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue, long-lived assets, goodwill, stock-based compensation, contingent liabilities, self-insurance accruals and income taxes. We base our estimates of the carrying value of certain assets and liabilities on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable. In some cases, changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. See the notes to our consolidated financial statements for information about these critical accounting policies as well as a description of our other accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
We generate substantially all of our revenues from the sale of targeted marketing and advertising campaigns, which we deliver via our network of websites and data analytics solutions (see above “Product and Service Offerings”). We recognize revenue when performance obligations are satisfied by transferring promised goods and services to customers in an amount the Company expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. The Company enters into contracts that can include various combinations of its offerings which are generally capable of being distinct and accounted for as a separate performance obligation. When performance obligations are combined into a single contract, we utilize stand-alone selling price (“SSP) to allocate the transaction price among the performance obligations. Our estimates of SSP for each performance obligation require judgement that considers multiple factors such as historical pricing trends, pricing practices within different geographies.
Revenue from our brand and demand solutions is primarily recognized when the transfer of control occurs. Certain of the contracts within brand and demand solutions are duration-based campaigns which, in the event of customer cancellation, provide the Company with an enforceable right to a proportional payment for the portion of the campaign based on services provided. Accordingly, revenue from duration-based campaigns is recognized using a time-based measure of progress, which the Company believes best depicts how it satisfies its performance obligations in these arrangements as control is continuously transferred throughout the contract period. Revenue from microsites is recognized ratably over the life of the contract. Revenue from custom content creation is recognized over the expected period of performance using a single measure of progress, typically based on hours incurred. Payments received in advance of services being rendered are recorded as deferred revenue.
Changes in judgements regarding these assumptions could impact the timing of revenue recognition.
Long-Lived Assets
Our long-lived assets consist primarily of property and equipment, capitalized software, goodwill, and other intangible assets. Goodwill and other intangible assets have arisen from our acquisitions. The amount assigned to intangible assets is subjective and based on our estimates of the future benefit of the intangible assets using accepted valuation techniques, such as discounted cash flow. Our long-lived assets, other than goodwill, are amortized over their estimated useful lives, which we determine based on the consideration of several factors including the period of time the asset is expected to remain in service. Intangible assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives, which range from eighteen months to nineteen years, using methods of amortization that are expected to reflect the estimated pattern of economic use. The carrying amounts of our acquired intangible assets are periodically reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the assets may not be recoverable or their useful life is shorter than originally
estimated. Consistent with our determination that we have only one reporting segment, we have determined that there is only one reporting unit and test goodwill for impairment at the entity level. We evaluate the carrying value and remaining useful lives of long-lived assets, other than goodwill, whenever indicators of impairment are present. We evaluate the carrying value of goodwill annually using the two-step process required by Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (“ASC 350”). The first step of the impairment test is to identify potential impairment by comparing the reporting unit’s fair value with its net book value (or carrying amount), including goodwill. The fair value is estimated based on a market value approach. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds it carrying amount, the reporting unit’s goodwill is not considered to be impaired and the second step of the impairment test is not performed. Whenever indicators of impairment are present, we would perform the second step and compare the implied fair value of the reporting unit’s goodwill, as defined by ASC 350, to it carrying value to determine the amount of the impairment loss, if any. As of December 31, 2020, there were no indications of impairment based on our analysis, and our estimated fair value exceeded our carrying value by a significant margin.
Business Combinations and Valuation of Goodwill and Acquired Intangible Assets
The Company uses its best estimates and assumptions to allocate fair value to the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date. Any residual purchase price is recorded as goodwill. The Company’s estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement and can include but are not limited to, the cash flows that an asset is expected to generate in the future, and the appropriate weighted-average cost of capital.
During the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, the Company may record adjustments to the fair value of these tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. In addition, uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances are initially recorded in connection with a business combination as of the acquisition date. The Company continues to collect information and reevaluates these estimates and assumptions quarterly and records any adjustments to the Company’s preliminary estimates to goodwill provided that the Company is within the measurement period. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the fair value of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to the Company’s consolidated statement of operations.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure stock-based compensation at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and recognize stock-based compensation in our results of operations using the straight-line method over the vesting period of the award. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the fair value of stock option awards. We calculated the fair values of the options granted using the following estimated weighted average assumptions:
The expected volatility of options granted in 2020, 2019, and 2018 was determined using a weighted average of the historical volatility of our stock for a period equal to the expected life of the option. The risk-free interest rate is based on a zero-coupon U.S. treasury instrument whose term is consistent with the expected life of the stock options. We have not paid and do not anticipate paying cash dividends on our shares of common stock; therefore, the expected dividend yield is assumed to be zero. We applied an estimated annual forfeiture rate based on historical averages in determining the expense recorded in each period.
Internal-Use Software and Website Development Costs
We capitalize costs of materials, consultants and compensation and related expenses of employees who devote time to the development of internal-use software and website applications. We begin to capitalize our costs to develop software and website applications when planning stage efforts are successfully completed, management has authorized and committed project funding, and it is probable that the project will be completed, and the software will be used as intended. Our judgment is required in determining the point at which various projects enter the state at which costs may be capitalized, in assessing the ongoing value of the capitalized costs and in determining the estimated useful lives over which the costs are amortized, which is generally three years. To the extent that we
change the manner in which we develop and test new features and functionalities related to our internal use software and websites, assess the ongoing value of capitalized assets or determine the estimated useful lives over which the costs are amortized, the amount of internal use software and website development costs we capitalize and amortize in future periods would be impacted. We review capitalized internal-use software and website development costs for recoverability whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. We would recognize an impairment loss only if the carrying amount of the asset is not recoverable and exceeds its fair value. There were no impairments to internal-use software and website developments costs during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 or 2018. We capitalized internal-use software and website development costs of $6.1 million, $5.1 million, and 3.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in both U.S. and foreign jurisdictions, and we use estimates in determining our provision for income taxes. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities based on temporary differences between the financial reporting and income tax bases of assets and liabilities using statutory rates expected to be in effect when such differences are settled.
Our net deferred tax liabilities are comprised primarily of book to tax differences on stock-based compensation, basis difference in convertible debt and timing of deductions for right-of-use assets and lease liabilities, accrued expenses, depreciation, and amortization.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods indicated:
Comparison of Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 (“fiscal 2020”) increased 11% over the year ended December 31, 2019 (“fiscal 2019”). The increase in revenues was mainly due to increases in our lead generation business and our growth in international revenue due to shifts in marketing spend resulting from the impacts of COVID-19. Priority Engine™ revenues were up 5% in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Profit
Cost of Revenues. Cost of revenues for fiscal 2020 increased by $5.5 million as compared to fiscal 2019. The increase in cost of revenues in fiscal 2020 was primarily driven by the increase in variable costs attributable to contracted services costs related to fulfilling campaigns.
Gross Profit. Our gross profit is equal to the difference between our revenues and our cost of revenues for the period. Gross profit percentage was 75% for fiscal 2020 and 76% for fiscal 2019.
Operating Expenses and Other
Selling and Marketing. Sales and marketing costs increased by $3.0 million for fiscal 2020 as compared to the fiscal 2019 primarily as a result of an increase in salaries and related costs (including an increase in stock compensation of $1.6 million).
Product Development. Product development costs decreased by $0.3 million in fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019. Pay and benefit costs decreased by $0.5 million, primarily due to an increase in the amount of labor costs capitalized as internal use software. Decrease was offset by stock-based compensation costs increasing by $0.1 million primarily due to increase in stock price and costs of services and software increasing by $0.1 million.
General and Administrative. General and administrative costs increased by $4.9 million in fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019 primarily due to higher legal and professional fees relating to our acquisitions and other matters of approximately $4.3 million and an increase in stock-based compensation costs of $0.6 million.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation expense in fiscal 2020 increased by $1.2 million as compared to fiscal 2019 primarily due to depreciation relating to new additions placed in service during 2020 and an increase in amortization expense relating to acquired intangibles.
Interest and Other Expense, Net. Interest and other expense, net in fiscal 2020 decreased by $0.4 million as compared to fiscal 2019. Primarily due to the increase in interest expense of $0.2 million from our issuance of convertible notes and the related amortization of costs associated with the offering and the amortization of the amount of the convertible note categorized into equity offset by foreign currency-related gains of $0.7 million in fiscal 2020 as compared to $51 thousand in fiscal 2019. The foreign currency-related gains and losses were due to changes in exchange rates in currencies where we record accounts receivable and accounts payable in the normal course of business, largely the United Kingdom and Australia.
Provision for Income Taxes. Our effective tax rate was 24.2% and 23.5% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The higher rate in 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to higher income and increase in non-deductible expenses and offset by increase in excess tax benefits of stock-based compensation. The effective tax rate differs from the statutory rate primarily due to permanent differences of non-deductible expenses, excess tax deductions from stock-based compensation, state income taxes, and foreign income taxes.
Comparison of Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased 10% over the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase in revenues was due to our successful efforts in obtaining new Priority Engine™ customers and existing customers increasing their spend for data driven marketing products. Priority Engine™ revenues were up 34% in fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 which was driven by the addition of approximately 210 new Priority Engine™ customers.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Profit
Cost of Revenues. The increase in cost of revenues in fiscal 2019 was primarily driven by the increase in variable costs attributable to contracted services costs related to fulfilling campaigns attributable to the increase of $12.6 million in revenues.
Gross Profit. Our gross profit is equal to the difference between our revenues and our cost of revenues for the period. Gross profit percentage was 76% for both fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2018.
Operating Expenses and Other
Selling and Marketing. Sales and marketing costs increased by $4.7 million for fiscal 2019 as compared to the fiscal 2018 primarily as a result of an increase in salaries and related costs (including an increase in stock compensation of $4.0 million).
Product Development. Product development costs decreased by $0.8 million in fiscal 2019 as compared to fiscal 2018. Primarily due to an increase in capitalized software costs of $2.2 million offset partly by higher compensation costs of $1.2 million.
General and Administrative. General and administrative costs decreased by $0.5 million in fiscal 2019 as compared to fiscal 2018 primarily due to lower professional fees of $0.6 million and bad debt expense $0.7 offset by an increase in stock-based compensation costs of $0.8 million.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation expense in fiscal 2019 increased slightly when compared to fiscal 2018 primarily due to the mix of new additions and their depreciable lives.
Interest and Other Expense, Net. Interest and other expense, net in fiscal 2019 decreased by $1.1 million compared to fiscal 2018. The $1.1 million change was primarily due to decrease in interest expense of $0.6 million due to a lower interest rate on the new loan and foreign currency-related gains of $52 thousand in fiscal 2019 compared to foreign currency-related losses of $0.5 million in fiscal 2018. The foreign currency-related gains and losses were due to changes in exchange rates in currencies where we record accounts receivable and accounts payable in the normal course of business, largely the United Kingdom and Australia.
Provision for Income Taxes. Our effective tax rate was 23.5% and 12.7% for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The higher rate in 2019 as compared to 2018 was primarily due to higher income and a lower tax benefit related to excess tax deductions from stock-based compensation. The effective tax rate differs from the statutory rate primarily due to these permanent differences of non-deductible expenses, excess tax deductions from stock-based compensation, state income taxes, and foreign income taxes.
Selected Quarterly Results of Operations
The following table presents our unaudited quarterly consolidated results of operations for the eight quarters ended December 31, 2020. The unaudited quarterly consolidated information has been prepared on the same basis as our audited consolidated financial statements. You should read the following table presenting our quarterly consolidated results of operations in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The operating results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of the operating results for any future period.
Seasonality
The timing of our revenues is affected by seasonal factors. Our revenues are seasonal primarily as a result of the annual budget approval process of many of our customers, the normal timing at which our customers introduce new products, and the historical decrease in advertising in summer months. The timing of revenues in relation to our expenses, much of which do not vary directly with revenues, has an impact on the cost of revenues, selling and marketing, product development, and general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues in each calendar quarter during the year.
The majority of our expenses are personnel-related and include salaries, stock-based compensation, benefits and incentive-based compensation plan expenses. As a result, we have not experienced significant seasonal fluctuations in the timing of our expenses period to period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Resources
At December 31, 2020, our cash, cash equivalents and investments totaled $82.7 million. Our cash, cash equivalents and investments increased by $25.2 million during fiscal 2020, primarily due to the cash generated from operations and the issuance of our convertible notes. Partially offset by the cash generated from acquisitions, the repurchase of shares under our stock repurchase plan and the extinguishment of our term loan. Additionally, we utilized cash for purchases of property and equipment and other capitalized assets. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents, and investments, and our cash flow from operating activities will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for at least the next 12 months. Our future working capital requirements will depend on many factors, including the operations of our existing business, our potential strategic expansion internationally, future acquisitions we might undertake, and the expansion into complementary businesses. To the extent that our cash and cash equivalents, investments and cash flow from operating activities are insufficient to fund our future activities, we may need to raise additional funds through bank credit arrangements or public or private equity or debt financings. We also may need to raise additional funds in the event we determine in the future to effect one or more additional acquisitions of businesses.
Cash, Cash Equivalents and Investments
Our cash, cash equivalents and investments at December 31, 2020 were held for working capital purposes and were invested primarily in bonds. We do not enter into investments for trading or speculative purposes.
Accounts Receivable, Net
Our accounts receivable balance fluctuates from period to period, which affects our cash flows from operating activities. The fluctuations vary depending on the timing of our service delivery and billing activity, cash collections, and changes to our allowance for doubtful accounts. We use days sales outstanding (“DSO”) as a measurement of the quality and status of our receivables. We define DSO as net accounts receivable at quarter end divided by total revenues for the applicable period, multiplied by the number of days in the applicable period. DSO was 57 days at December 31, 2020, 69 days at December 31, 2019 and 87 days at December 31, 2018. The debtor days exclude our December 2020 acquisitions. The change in DSO year over year is primarily due to the timing of payments from all classes of customers.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities primarily consists of net income adjusted for certain non-cash items including depreciation and amortization, the provision for bad debt, stock-based compensation, deferred income taxes, and the effect of changes in working capital and other activities.
The increase in cash provided by operating activities in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 was primarily the result of increases in non-cash stock compensation of $2.6 million, a $1.9 million increase in depreciation and amortization expense and changes in operating assets and liabilities, primarily driven by a $7.0 million increase in accrued expenses and a $2.9 million increase in other liabilities.
The increase in cash provided by operating activities in fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 was primarily the result of increases in non-cash stock compensation of $5.1 million, a $3.9 million increase in net income as well as changes in operating assets and liabilities, primarily driven by a $2.5 million increase in income taxes payable and a $2.6 million decrease in accounts receivable.
The increase in cash provided by operating activities in fiscal 2018 compared to fiscal 2017 was primarily the result of a $6.2 million increase in net income offset in part by changes in operating assets and liabilities, primarily driven by increases in accounts receivable and contract liabilities of $1.5 million and $2.0 million, respectively, in 2018.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 was $175.7 million; which consisted of $6.7 million for the purchase of property and equipment and other capitalized assets, made up primarily of computer equipment and related software and internal-use development costs, and $174.0 million for the purchase of various businesses during 2020, offset in part by $5.0 million from sales of short-term investments.
Cash used in investing activities in the year ended December 31, 2019 was $10.8 million; which consisted of $6.3 million for the purchase of property and equipment and other capitalized assets, made up primarily of computer equipment and related software and internal-use development costs, and $5.0 million for the purchase of investments, offset in part by $0.5 million from the maturity of short-term investments.
Cash provided by investing activities in the year ended December 31, 2018 was $1.7 million; $7.6 million from the net sales and maturities of short-term and long-term investments, partially offset by $5.5 million for the purchase of other capitalized assets, made up primarily of website development costs, computer equipment and related software and internal-use development costs and $0.4 million for cash used to acquire the operating assets of a business.
Capital Expenditures. We have made capital expenditures primarily for computer equipment and related software needed to host our websites, internal-use software development costs, as well as for leasehold improvements and other general purposes to support our growth. Our capital expenditures totaled $6.7 million, $6.3 million, and $5.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. A majority of our capital expenditures in 2020, 2019, and 2018 were internal-use software and website development costs and, to a lesser extent, computer equipment and related software. Additionally, during 2018, the Company expended funds relating to leasehold improvements at its corporate offices.
We expect to spend approximately $10.5 million in capital expenditures in 2021, primarily for internal-use software and website development costs and computer equipment and related software. We are not currently party to any purchase contracts related to future capital expenditures. We believe we can fund these future additions through cash generated from operations.
Financing Activities
During 2020, we received net proceeds from our convertible notes offering of approximately $195 million. Additionally, we received proceeds from the exercise of stock options in the amounts of $0.6 million, $0.4 million and $1.0 million in the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. These inflows were offset by $14.8 million, $7.1 million, and $7.1 million used for the repurchase of shares under our stock repurchase programs in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively, as well as $3.5 million, $2.8 million, and $3.2 million related to tax withholdings on net share settlements in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
Common Stock Repurchase Programs
In November 2018, we announced that our Board had authorized a $25.0 million stock repurchase program (the “November 2018 Repurchase Program”) whereby we are authorized to repurchase our common stock from time to time on the open market or in privately negotiated transactions at prices and in the manner that may be determined by management. During the last quarter of 2019 we repurchased 94,125 shares of common stock for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $2.3 million pursuant to the November 2018 Repurchase Program. In the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 we repurchased a total of 736,760 shares for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $14.8 million under the “November 2018 Repurchase Program.” We terminated this repurchase program in May 2020.
In May 2020, we announced that our Board had authorized a $25.0 million stock repurchase program (the “May 2020 Repurchase Program”) whereby we are authorized to repurchase our common stock from time to time on the open market or in privately negotiated transactions at prices and in the manner that may be determined by management. No amounts were repurchased under this plan during 2020.
Repurchased shares were recorded under the cost method and are reflected as treasury stock in the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets. All repurchased shares were funded with cash on hand. (see Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements).
Convertible Senior Notes and Contractual Commitments
In December 2020, the Company issued $201.25 million in aggregate principal amount of 0.125% convertible senior notes due December 15, 2025, unless earlier repurchased by the Company or converted by the holder pursuant to their terms. Interest is payable semiannually in arrears on June 15 and December 15 of each year, commencing on June 15, 2021.
The Notes are governed by an Indenture between the Company, as issuer, and U.S. Bank, National Association, as trustee. The Notes are unsecured and rank senior in right of payment to the Company’s future indebtedness that is expressly subordinated in right of payment to the Notes and equal in right of payment to the Company’s unsecured indebtedness that is not so subordinated.
Upon conversion, the Company will pay or deliver, as the case may be, cash, shares of the Company’s common stock or a combination of cash and shares of common stock, at the Company’s election.
The Notes have an initial conversion rate of 14.1977 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of Notes. This represents an initial effective conversion price of approximately $70.43 per share of common stock and 2,858,706 shares issuable upon conversion. Throughout the term of the Notes, the conversion rate may be adjusted upon the occurrence of certain events. Holders of the Notes will not receive any cash payment representing accrued and unpaid interest, if any, upon conversion of a Note, except in limited circumstances. Accrued but unpaid interest will be deemed to be paid by cash, shares of the Company’s common stock or a combination of cash and shares of the Company’s common stock paid or delivered, as the case may be, to the holder upon conversion of Notes.
As of December 31, 2020, our principal contractual commitments consist of obligations under leases for office space and our Convertible Debt. The offices are leased under non-cancelable operating lease agreements that expire through 2029.
The following table sets forth our commitments to settle contractual obligations in cash as of December 31, 2020:
See Note 9 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on our Convertible Senior Notes and Note 10 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information with respect to our operating leases.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for recent accounting pronouncements that could have an effect on us.