Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion is intended to analyze major elements of our consolidated financial statements and provide insight into important areas of management’s focus. This section should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying Notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Statements in the following discussion may include forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” for additional discussion of these factors and risks.
Business Overview
We are a geographically diversified oil and gas services company, focused on completion fluids and associated products and services, comprehensive water management, frac flowback, production well testing and offshore rig cooling services. Prior to the closing of the GP Sale on January 29, 2021, we operated in three reporting segments organized into three Divisions. Following the closing of the GP sale, we operate through two reporting segments organized into two Divisions - Completion Fluids & Products and Water & Flowback Services.
Demand for products and services of our Completion Fluids & Products Division remained resilient during 2020 despite the unprecedented effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on the oil and gas industry. The impact of lower US activity was partially offset by strong international sales in the Middle East and Europe. While significant macro-economic uncertainty remains, oil prices have returned to pre-pandemic levels and activity is expected to continue to rebound from its recent lows.
Lower commodity prices during 2020 particularly affected domestic onshore demand for our Water & Flowback Services Division. However, although water management services activity dropped significantly during the second and third quarters, we began to see some recovery in activity levels during the fourth quarter as oil and gas prices stabilized above $40.
Our former Compression Division provided compression services for natural gas and oil production, gathering, artificial lift, transmission, processing, and storage. Our former Compression Division operated primarily through CCLP, of which we owned 35% of the common equity and controlled through our ownership of its general partner as of December 31, 2020. On January 29, 2021, we entered into the Purchase and Sale Agreement with Spartan pursuant to which we sold the general partner of CCLP, including IDRs in CCLP and approximately 23.1% of the outstanding limited partner interests in CCLP, in exchange for a combination of $13.4 million in cash paid at closing, $0.5 million in cash payable on the six-month anniversary of the closing and $3.1 million in contingent consideration in the form of cash and/or CCLP common units if CCLP achieves certain financial target on or before December 31, 2022. We were required to use all net cash proceeds received at closing from the sale to repay borrowings under our Term Credit Agreement. Following the closing of the transaction, we retained approximately 11.1% of the outstanding CCLP common units. We have reflected the operations of our former Compression Division as discontinued operations for all periods presented. See Note 3 - “Discontinued Operations” and Note 18- “Subsequent Event” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
We actively managed our flexible cost structure as a proactive response to the changing market conditions throughout 2020. We implemented temporary and permanent cost actions in 2020, including reduced capital expenditures, workforce reductions, salary reductions, suspension of 401(k) matching contributions for our employees and negotiated reductions in expenditures with many of our suppliers. While we are not able to predict how long market disruptions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic will continue, or what impact it will ultimately have on our business, we saw activity levels begin to stabilize starting at the end of the third quarter 2020 and increase since then.
Results of Operations
The following data should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the associated Notes contained elsewhere in this report.
2020 Compared to 2019
Consolidated Comparisons
Revenues
Consolidated revenues for 2020 decreased compared to the prior year primarily due to lower activity in our Water & Flowback Services Division, where revenue decreased by $146.9 million. The decreased for this division was driven by a significant reduction in capital spending by our customers in response to the decline in oil prices associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. See Divisional Comparisons section below for additional discussion.
Gross Profit
Consolidated gross profit increased during 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to a $91.8 million impairment charge at our El Dorado plant, which reduced gross profit for the Completion Fluids and Products Division in 2019. Despite lower activity levels, this division continued to deliver strong margins during 2020 and generated gross profit that was in line with the prior year gross profit before impairments. The increased gross profit for the Completion Fluids and Products Division in 2020 was partially offset by results for the Water & Flowback Services Division, where lower revenues impacted gross profit, despite aggressive management of costs.
General and Administrative Expense
Consolidated general and administrative expenses decreased during 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to decreased salary related expenses of $19.1 million, decreased general expenses of $1.9 million and decreased professional services fees of $1.7 million. These decreases were partially offset by increased bad debt expenses of $3.3 million. Decreased general and administrative expenses were primarily driven by our
Corporate Division. Most of the decrease in general and administrative expenses resulted from restructuring and headcount reductions in response to the decline in activity levels, particularly in our U.S. onshore operations. Despite the significant cost reduction, general and administrative expense as a percentage of revenues increased compared to the prior year due to lower revenues.
Interest Expense, Net
Consolidated interest expense, net, decreased in 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to a decrease in Corporate interest expense. Corporate interest expense decreased due to lower borrowings under the ABL Credit Agreement. Interest expense during 2020 and 2019 includes $1.6 million and $1.4 million, respectively, of finance cost amortization.
Gain on Sale of Assets
Consolidated gain on sale of assets increased during 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to increased sales of assets during the year.
Warrants
The warrants are accounted for as a derivative liability in accordance with ASC 815 and therefore they are classified as a long-term liability on our consolidated balance sheet at their fair value. Increases (or decreases) in the fair value of the warrants are generally associated with increases (or decreases) in the trading price of our common stock, resulting in adjustments to earnings for the associated valuation losses (gains), and resulting in future volatility of our earnings during the period the warrants are outstanding.
Loss from Discontinued Operations
The loss from discontinued operations increased during 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to lower revenues from our former Compression Division as well as increased impairments recognized during 2020 as a result of the recent market conditions, partially offset by lower operating costs from our former Compression Division. The loss from discontinued operations also decreased $9.0 million from loss reserves recorded during 2019 related to the exit from the Offshore Division.
Provision for Income Tax
Our consolidated provision for income taxes during 2020 was primarily attributable to taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions and Texas gross margin taxes. Our consolidated effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 of negative 7.0% was primarily the result of losses generated in entities for which no related tax benefit has been recorded. The losses generated by these entities do not result in tax benefits due to offsetting valuation allowances being recorded against the related net deferred tax assets. We establish a valuation allowance to reduce the deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Included in our deferred tax assets are $104.5 million of net operating loss carryforwards that may be available to offset future income tax liabilities in the U.S. as well as in certain international jurisdictions where net operating loss carryforwards exist.
Divisional Comparisons
Completion Fluids & Products Division
The decrease in Completion Fluids & Products Division revenues during 2020 compared to the prior year was primarily due to lower activity related to the decline in oil and gas prices resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Completion Fluids & Products Division gross profit during 2020 increased compared to the prior year primarily due to a $91.8 million impairment charge at our El Dorado plant, which reduced gross profit for the prior year. Despite lower activity levels, the division continued to deliver strong margins and generated gross profit that was broadly in line with the prior year gross profit before impairments. Completion Fluids & Products Division profitability in future periods will be continue to be affected by the mix of its products and services, including the timing of TETRA CS Neptune completion fluid projects.
The Completion Fluids & Products Division reported a pretax income during 2020 compared to pretax loss in the prior year primarily due to the increase in gross profit discussed above. Completion Fluids & Products Division administrative cost levels increased compared to the prior year, primarily due to increased bad debt of $3.5 million and increased salary and employee related expenses of $1.3 million.
Water & Flowback Services Division
Water & Flowback Services Division revenues decreased during 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to reduced customer drilling and completions activity as a result of lower oil and gas prices caused primarily by
the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Water management and flowback service revenues decreased $148.9 million during 2020 compared to the prior year. The volatility in oil and gas commodity prices driving reductions in customer capital spending has resulted in decreased pricing and activity when compared to the prior year, leading to lower revenues and margins. Product sales revenue increased by $2.0 million, due to higher equipment sales in the US.
The Water & Flowback Services Division reflected a gross loss during 2020 compared a gross profit in the prior year primarily due to lower revenues associated with lower activity levels.
The Water & Flowback Services Division reported a slight increase in pretax loss compared to the prior year, primarily due to the gross loss described above, offset by the goodwill impairment recognized in 2019. General and administrative expenses decreased primarily due to decreased wage and benefit expenses of $7.3 million, decreased general expenses of $1.4 million, and decreased bad debt expense of $0.7 million.
Corporate Overhead
Corporate Overhead pretax loss decreased during 2020 compared to the prior year primarily due to decreased general and administrative expense and decreased interest expense. Corporate general and administrative expense decreased primarily due to decreased salary related expense of $13.1 million, $1.2 million of decreased general expenses and $1.0 million of decreased professional fees. Interest expense decreased due to lower borrowings under the ABL Credit Agreement. The fair value of the outstanding warrants liability resulted in a $0.3 million credit to earnings in the current year compared to a $1.6 million credit to earnings during 2019.
How we Evaluate Operations
We use U.S. GAAP financial measures such as revenues, gross profit, income (loss) before taxes, and net cash provided by operating activities, as well as certain non-GAAP financial measures, including Adjusted EBITDA, as performance measures for our business.
Adjusted EBITDA. We view Adjusted EBITDA as one of our primary management tools, and we track it on a monthly basis, both in dollars and as a percentage of revenues (typically compared to the prior month, prior year period, and to budget). We define Adjusted EBITDA as earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, impairments and certain non-cash charges and non-recurring adjustments.
Adjusted EBITDA is used as a supplemental financial measure by our management to:
•evaluate the financial performance of our assets without regard to financing methods, capital structure, or historical cost basis; and
•determine our ability to incur and service debt and fund capital expenditures.
The following table reconciles net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods indicated:
Adjusted EBITDA is a financial measure that is not in accordance with U.S. GAAP and should not be considered an alternative to net income, operating income, cash flows from operating activities, or any other measure of financial performance presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. This measure may not be comparable to similarly titled financial metrics of other entities, as other entities may not calculate Adjusted EBITDA in the same manner as we do. Management compensates for the limitations of Adjusted EBITDA as analytical tools by reviewing the comparable U.S. GAAP measures, understanding the differences between the measures, and incorporating this knowledge into management’s decision-making processes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We believe that our capital structure allows us to meet our financial obligations despite current uncertain operating conditions and financial markets. Our liquidity at the end of fourth quarter was $91.9 million. Liquidity is defined as unrestricted cash plus availability under the revolving credit facility.
Our consolidated sources and uses of cash, including cash activity from our former Compression Division, during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are as follows:
Consolidated cash flows provided by operating activities totaled $76.9 million during 2020 compared to $90.2 million during the prior year, a decrease of $13.3 million. CCLP generated $20.8 million of our consolidated cash flows provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $67.7 million during the prior year. Operating cash flows decreased primarily due to a decrease in revenues, which were partly offset by monetization of working capital. During 2020, TETRA increased cash generation, which offset CCLP’s decreased cash generation. Our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities will no longer include cash activities of our former Compression Division, including CCLP, following the GP Sale on January 29, 2021. We continue to monitor customer credit risk in the current environment and focus on serving larger capitalized oil and gas operators and national oil companies.
Investing Activities
During 2020, CCLP launched an initiative to rationalize its fleet by selling smaller and mid-sized equipment to focus on the larger-horsepower fleet as well as to sell equipment outside its core area of focus. One of CCLP’s larger customers purchased a small number of large units recently deployed. Additionally during 2020, the Partnership sold its Midland fabrication facility and real estate for $17.0 million. Investing cash flows for 2020 also include $14.2 million from TETRA’s sale of 15 high horse power compressor units to Spartan during the fourth quarter. As a result of CCLP’s and TETRA’s equipment sales, 2020 cash proceeds from the sale of used equipment exceed the cash outflows to purchase new equipment.
Total cash capital expenditures, including capital expenditures associated with discontinued operations, during 2020 were $29.4 million, net of $12.7 million cost of compressors sold, as we adjusted to current market conditions. Our Completion Fluids & Products Division spent $4.0 million on capital expenditures during 2020, the majority of which related to plant and facility additions. Our Water & Flowback Services Division spent $9.7 million on capital expenditures, primarily to maintain, automate and upgrade its water management and flowback equipment fleet. Our former Compression Division spent $14.7 million, primarily to maintain its compression fleet. 2019 Investing cash flows include proceeds of $12.9 million from the sale of property, plant and equipment primarily the result of a sale-leaseback transaction during the fourth quarter of 2019, where CCLP sold ten compression units and immediately leased them back at a monthly rate. These compression units are included in operating lease right-of-use assets on our consolidated balance sheets.
Historically, a significant majority of our planned capital expenditures have been related to identified opportunities to grow and expand our existing businesses. However, such expenditures have recently been, and may continue to be, postponed or canceled as we are reviewing all capital expenditure plans carefully in an effort to conserve cash. We currently have no long-term capital expenditure commitments. The deferral of capital projects could affect our ability to compete in the future.
If the forecasted demand for our products and services increases or decreases, the amount of planned expenditures on growth and expansion may be adjusted.
Through our common unit ownership interest in CCLP, which was approximately 35% as of December 31, 2020 and approximately 11% as of March 4, 2021, we receive quarterly cash distributions, if any, from CCLP. On January 19, 2021, CCLP announced a cash distribution of $0.01 per common unit for the quarter ended December 31, 2020, which was paid on February 12, 2021 based on our retained interest.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the total amount of consolidated net cash used in financing activities was $17.6 million, primarily related to pay down of our Term Credit Agreement, cash fees related to the exchange of CCLP debt and repayments under our ABL Credit Agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the total amount of consolidated net cash provided by financing activities was $5.9 million, primarily due to borrowings under our ABL Credit Agreement and our Term Credit Agreement, net of cash redemptions of the CCLP Preferred Units. We may supplement our existing cash balances and cash flow from operating activities with short-term borrowings, long-term borrowings, issuances of equity and debt securities, and other sources of capital. We are aggressively managing our working capital and capital expenditure needs in order to maximize our liquidity in the current environment.
Asset-Based Credit Agreement. The ABL Credit Agreement provides for a senior secured revolving credit facility of up to $100 million, subject to a borrowing base to be determined by reference to the value of inventory and accounts receivable, and includes a sublimit of $20.0 million for letters of credit and a swingline loan sublimit of $10.0 million. The ABL Credit Agreement may be used for working capital needs, capital expenditures and other general corporate purposes. The amounts we may borrow under the ABL Credit Agreement are based on a percentage of our accounts receivable and certain inventory. Changes in demand for our products and services have an impact on our eligible accounts receivable, which could result in significant changes to our borrowing base and therefore our availability under our ABL Credit Agreement. With the current depressed oil and gas market conditions, we believe our availability under our ABL Credit facility will be adversely impacted by the expected decline in our customers’ activity levels. The ABL Credit Agreement is scheduled to mature on September 10, 2023. As of December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding balance under the ABL Credit Agreement and, subject to compliance with the covenants, borrowing base, and other provisions of the agreement that may limit borrowings, we had an availability of $24.6 million under the ABL Credit Agreement. As of March 3, 2021, we have no outstanding borrowings under our ABL Credit Agreement and $8.3 million letters of credit, resulting in $30.1 million of availability.
Term Credit Agreement. The Term Credit Agreement provides a loan in the amount of $220.5 million and is scheduled to mature on September 10, 2025 for certain acquisitions (the “Additional Term Loans,” and together with the Initial Term Loan, the “Term Loan”). Our Term Credit Agreement requires us to annually prepay up to 50% of Excess Cash Flow (as defined in the Term Credit Agreement) from the most recent full fiscal year. If our Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Term Credit Agreement) at year-end is less than 2.00 to 1.00, the prepayment requirement is decreased to 25%. If our Leverage Ratio at year-end is less than 1.50 to 1.00, then no prepayment is required. As of March 3, 2021, $201.7 million in aggregate principal amount of our Term Credit Agreement is outstanding.
As of December 31, 2020, we are in compliance with all covenants of our debt agreements. See Note 10 - “Long-Term Debt and Other Borrowings” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Other Sources and Uses
In addition to the aforementioned credit facilities and senior notes, we fund our short-term liquidity requirements from cash generated by our operations and from short-term vendor financing. Should additional capital be required, the ability to raise such capital through the issuance of additional debt or equity securities may currently be limited. Instability or volatility in the capital markets at the times we need to access capital may affect the cost of capital and the ability to raise capital for an indeterminable length of time. If it is necessary to issue additional equity to fund our capital needs, additional dilution of our common stockholders will occur. We periodically evaluate engaging in strategic transactions and may consider divesting non-core assets where our evaluation suggests such transaction is in the best interest of our business. In challenging economic environments, we may experience increased delays and failures by customers to pay our invoices. Given the nature and significance of the COVID-19 pandemic and disruption in the oil and gas industry, we could experience delayed customer payments and payment defaults associated with customer liquidity issues and bankruptcies. If our customers delay paying or fail to pay us a significant amount of our outstanding receivables, it could have an adverse effect on our liquidity. An increase of unpaid receivables would also negatively affect our borrowing availability under the ABL Credit Agreement.
In November 2020, we sold 15 high horsepower compressor units to Spartan for $14.2 million. In connection with that sale, we also assigned a lease with CCLP for those units to Spartan. On January 29, 2021 we completed the GP Sale. Approximately $18.8 million in net cash proceeds from both the November 2020 compressor sale and the GP Sale were used to repay borrowings under our Term Credit Agreement.
On April 11, 2019, we filed a universal shelf Registration Statement on Form S-3 with the SEC. On May 1, 2019, the Registration Statement on Form S-3 was declared effective by the SEC. Pursuant to this registration statement, we have the ability to sell debt or equity securities in one or more public offerings up to an aggregate public offering price of $464.1 million, inclusive of $64.1 million of our common stock issuable upon conversion of our currently outstanding warrants. This shelf registration statement currently provides us additional flexibility with regard to potential financings that we may undertake when market conditions permit or our financial condition may require.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements. We prepared these financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP. In preparing our consolidated financial statements, we make assumptions, estimates, and judgments that affect the amounts reported. We base these on historical experience, available information, and various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable. Our assumptions, estimates, and judgments may change as new events occur, as new information is acquired, and as changes in our operating environments are encountered. Actual results are likely to differ from our current estimates, and those differences may be material. The following critical accounting policies reflect the most significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
The determination of impairment of long-lived assets, including identified intangible assets, is conducted periodically whenever indicators of impairment are present. If such indicators are present, the determination of the amount of impairment is based on our judgments as to the future operating cash flows to be generated from these assets throughout their estimated useful lives. If an impairment of a long-lived asset is warranted, we estimate the fair value of the asset based on a present value of these cash flows or the value that could be realized from disposing of the asset in a transaction between market participants. The oil and gas industry is cyclical, and our estimates of the amount of future cash flows, the period over which these estimated future cash flows will be generated, as well as the fair value of an impaired asset, are imprecise. Our failure to accurately estimate these future operating cash flows or fair values could result in certain long-lived assets being overstated, which could result in impairment charges in periods subsequent to the time in which the impairment indicators were first present. Alternatively, if our estimates of future operating cash flows or fair values are understated, impairments might be recognized unnecessarily or in excess of the appropriate amounts. During 2020, we recorded an impairment charge of $0.6 million primarily related to a right of use asset for the lease of our Canada office within our Water & Flowback Services Division as we ceased use of the office during the year.
Impairment of Goodwill
During the third quarter of 2019, we determined that the deteriorating energy industry outlook was an indicator requiring further analysis for impairment of goodwill. We determined at that time that the fair value of the Water Management reporting unit, the only reporting unit with goodwill, exceeded its carrying value and there was no impairment to goodwill.
During the fourth quarter of 2019, due to further deterioration in the energy industry outlook resulting in decreased expected future cash flows for our Water Management reporting unit, a component of our Water & Flowback Services Division, we recorded a full goodwill impairment of $25.9 million. As a result, there was no goodwill balance as of December 31, 2020 or December 31, 2019.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
An “off balance sheet arrangement” is defined as any contractual arrangement to which an entity that is not consolidated with us is a party, under which we have, or in the future may have:
•any obligation under a guarantee contract that requires initial recognition and measurement under U.S. GAAP;
•a retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to an unconsolidated entity or similar arrangement that serves as credit, liquidity, or market risk support to that entity for the transferred assets;
•any obligation under certain derivative instruments; or
•any obligation under a material variable interest held by us in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk or credit risk support to us, or engages in leasing, hedging, or research and development services with us.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had no off balance sheet arrangements that may have a current or future material effect on our consolidated financial condition or results of operations.
Commitments and Contingencies
Litigation
For information regarding litigation, see See Note 12 - “Commitments and Contingencies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Long-Term Debt
For information on our credit agreements, see Note 10 - “Long-Term Debt and Other Borrowings” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Asset Retirement Obligations
We operate facilities in various U.S. and foreign locations that are used in the manufacture, storage, and sale of our products, inventories, and equipment. We are required to take certain actions in connection with the retirement of these assets. See Note 2 - “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” and Note 8 - “Leases” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding asset retirement obligations.
Leases
We have operating leases for some of our transportation equipment, office space, warehouse space, operating locations, and machinery and equipment. Our leases have remaining lease terms ranging from 1 to 16 years. See Note 2 - “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information our lease obligations.
Product Purchase Obligations
In the normal course of our Completion Fluids & Products Division operations, we enter into supply agreements with certain manufacturers of various raw materials and finished products. Some of these agreements have terms and conditions that specify a minimum or maximum level of purchases over the term of the agreement. Other agreements require us to purchase the entire output of the raw material or finished product produced by the manufacturer. Our purchase obligations under these agreements apply only with regard to raw materials and finished products that meet specifications set forth in the agreements. We recognize a liability for the purchase of such products at the time we receive them. As of December 31, 2020, the aggregate amount of the fixed and determinable portion of the purchase obligation pursuant to our Completion Fluids & Products Division’s supply agreements was approximately $85.3 million, extending through 2029, including commitments of $9.5 million per year from 2021 through 2025.
Contingencies of Discontinued Operations
In early 2018, we closed the Maritech Asset Purchase and Sale Agreement with Orinoco Natural Resources, LLC (“Orinoco”) that provided for the purchase by Orinoco of Maritech’s remaining oil and gas properties and related assets. Also in early 2018, we closed the Maritech Membership Interest Purchase and Sale Agreement with Orinoco that provided for the purchase by Orinoco of all of the outstanding membership interests in Maritech. As a result of these transactions, we have effectively exited the business of our former Maritech segment.
Under the Maritech Asset Purchase and Sale Agreement, Orinoco assumed all of Maritech’s decommissioning liabilities related to the leases sold to Orinoco (the “Orinoco Lease Liabilities”) and, under the Maritech Membership Interest Purchase and Sale Agreement, Orinoco assumed all other liabilities of Maritech, including the decommissioning liabilities associated with the oil and gas properties previously sold by Maritech (the “Legacy Liabilities”), subject to certain limited exceptions unrelated to the decommissioning liabilities. To the extent that Maritech or Orinoco fails to satisfy decommissioning liabilities associated with any of the Orinoco Lease Liabilities or the Legacy Liabilities, we may be required to satisfy such liabilities under third party indemnity agreements and corporate guarantees that we previously provided to the U.S. Department of the Interior and other parties, respectively.
Pursuant to a Bonding Agreement entered into as part of these transactions (the “Bonding Agreement”), Orinoco provided non-revocable performance bonds in an aggregate amount of $46.8 million to cover the performance by Orinoco and Maritech of the asset retirement obligations of Maritech (the “Initial Bonds”) and agreed to replace, within 90 days following the closing, the Initial Bonds with other non-revocable performance bonds, meeting certain requirements, in the aggregate sum of $47.0 million (collectively, the “Interim Replacement Bonds”). Orinoco further agreed to replace, within 180 days following the closing, the Interim Replacement Bonds with a maximum of three non-revocable performance bonds in the aggregate sum of $47.0 million, meeting certain requirements (the “Final Bonds”). Among the other requirements of the Final Bonds was that they must provide coverage for all of the asset retirement obligations of Maritech instead of only relating to specific properties. In the event Orinoco does not provide the Interim Replacement Bonds or the Final Bonds, Orinoco is required to make certain cash escrow payments to us.
The payment obligations of Orinoco under the Bonding Agreement were guaranteed by Thomas M. Clarke and Ana M. Clarke pursuant to a separate guaranty agreement (the “Clarke Bonding Guaranty Agreement”). Orinoco has not delivered such replacement bonds and neither it nor the Clarkes has made any of the agreed upon cash escrow payments and we filed a lawsuit against Orinoco and the Clarkes to enforce the terms of the Bonding Agreement and the Clarke Bonding Guaranty Agreement. A summary judgment was initially granted in favor of Orinoco and the Clarkes which dismissed our claims against Orinoco under the Bonding Agreement and against the Clarkes under the Clarke Bonding Guaranty Agreement. We filed an appeal and also asked the trial court to grant a new trial on the summary judgment or to modify the judgment because we believe this judgment should not have been granted. On November 5, 2019, the trial court signed an order granting our motion for new trial and vacating the prior order granting summary judgment for Orinoco and the Clarkes. The parties are awaiting direction from the court on a new scheduling order and/or trial setting. The Initial Bonds, which are non-revocable, remain in effect.
If we become liable in the future for any decommissioning liability associated with any property covered by either an Initial Bond or an Interim Replacement Bond while such bonds are outstanding and the payment made to us under such bond is not sufficient to satisfy such liability, the Bonding Agreement provides that Orinoco will pay us an amount equal to such deficiency and if Orinoco fails to pay any such amount, such amount must be paid by the Clarkes under the Clarke Bonding Guaranty Agreement. However, if the Final Bonds or the full amount of the escrowed cash have been provided, neither Orinoco nor the Clarkes would be liable to pay us for any such deficiency. Our financial condition and results of operations may be negatively affected if Orinoco is unable to cover any such deficiency or if we become liable for a significant portion of the decommissioning liabilities.
In early 2018, we also closed the sale of our Offshore Division to Epic Companies, LLC (“Epic Companies,” formerly known as Epic Offshore Specialty, LLC). Part of the consideration we received was a promissory note of Epic Companies in the original principal amount of $7.5 million (the “Epic Promissory Note”). At the end of August 2019, Epic Companies filed for bankruptcy and we recorded a reserve of $7.5 million for the full amount of the promissory note, including accrued interest, and certain other receivables in the amount of $1.5 million during the quarter ended September 30, 2019. The Epic Promissory Note became due on December 31, 2019 and neither Epic nor the Clarkes made payment. TETRA filed a lawsuit against the Clarkes on January 15, 2020 for breach of the promissory note guaranty agreement. In September 2020, the court granted TETRA’s Motion for Summary
Judgment and entered Final Judgment in our favor, dismissing counterclaims by the Clarkes and awarded TETRA $7.9 million in damages. The Clarkes have filed an appeal which we will defend. We cannot provide any assurance the Clarkes will pay the judgment or that they will not file for bankruptcy protection. If the Clarkes do file for bankruptcy protection, we likely would be unable to collect all, or even a significant portion of, the judgment owed to us.
For further discussion, see Note 3 - “Discontinued Operations” and Note 11 - “Acquisitions and Dispositions” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.