Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of our operations together with its financial statements and the notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations, whose actual outcomes involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those stated in or implied by these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors”, “Cautionary Statement regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and elsewhere in this report.
Overview
We are a pharmaceutical company developing therapeutics utilizing our proprietary long-term drug delivery platform, ProNeura™, for the treatment of select chronic diseases for which steady state delivery of a drug provides an efficacy and/or safety benefit. ProNeura consists of a small, solid implant made from a mixture of ethylene-vinyl acetate, or EVA, and a drug substance. The resulting product is a solid matrix that is administered subdermally, normally in the inner upper arm, in a brief, outpatient procedure and is removed in a similar manner at the end of the treatment period of several months. These procedures may be performed by trained health care providers, or HCPs, including licensed and surgically qualified physicians, nurse practitioners, and physician’s assistants in a HCP’s office or other clinical setting.
Our first product based on our ProNeura technology was our Probuphine® (buprenorphine) implant, which was approved in the United States, Canada and the European Union, or EU, for the maintenance treatment of opioid use disorder in clinically stable patients taking 8 mg or less a day of oral buprenorphine. Following reacquisition of the rights to Probuphine from our former licensee in mid-2018, we endeavored to build our infrastructure and grow our commercial capabilities with the limited resources at our disposal. While we made important progress in laying the groundwork during 2019 to transition into a company with full commercial potential, and also among other things manage the challenges of the restrictive product label, the Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy, or REMS, program and the complexity of the distribution channel, the emergence of the Covid-19 pandemic in early 2020 and the resultant restrictions and lockdown of facilities severely impacted our ability to continue to expand our commercial operations. With limited financial resources and insufficient sales revenue during the first three quarters of 2020, we made the decision to discontinue selling Probuphine in the U.S. and wind down our commercialization activities, and to pursue a plan that will enable us to focus on our current, early-stage ProNeura-based product development programs. Probuphine continues to be commercialized in Canada and the EU by other companies who have either licensed or acquired the rights from Titan.
We operate in only one business segment, the development of pharmaceutical products. We make available free of charge through our website, www.titanpharm.com, our periodic reports as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file such material with, or furnish it to, the SEC.
Critical Accounting Policies and the Use of Estimates
The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates. We believe the following accounting policies for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 to be applicable:
Revenue Recognition
Beginning January 1, 2018, we have followed the provisions of ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. The guidance provides a unified model to determine how revenue is recognized.
We generate revenue principally from collaborative research and development arrangements, technology licenses and sales, government grants and, until the discontinuance of our commercial operations, the sale of Probuphine in the U.S. Consideration received for revenue arrangements with multiple components is allocated among the separate performance obligations based upon their relative estimated standalone selling price.
In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under our agreements, we perform the following steps for our revenue recognition: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations, including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations based on estimated selling prices; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation.
Net Product Revenue
Prior to the discontinuation of our commercialization activities relating to Probuphine in the U.S., we recognized revenue from product sales when control of the product transfers, generally upon shipment or delivery, to our customers, which include distributors. As customary in the pharmaceutical industry, our gross product revenue was subject to a variety of deductions in the forms of variable consideration, such as rebates, chargebacks, returns and discounts, in arriving at reported net product revenue. This variable consideration was estimated using the most-likely amount method, which is the single most-likely outcome under a contract and was typically at stated contractual rates. The actual outcome of this variable consideration could materially differ from our estimates. From time to time, we would adjust our estimates of this variable consideration when trends or significant events indicated that a change in estimate is appropriate to reflect the actual experience. Additionally, we continued to assess the estimates of our variable consideration as we continued to accumulate additional historical data.
Returns - Consistent with the provisions of ASC 606, we estimated returns at the inception of each transaction, based on multiple considerations, including historical sales, historical experience of actual customer returns, levels of inventory in our distribution channel, expiration dates of purchased products and significant market changes which could impact future expected returns to the extent that we would not reverse any receivables, revenues, or contract assets already recognized under the agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we entered into agreements with large national specialty pharmacies with a distribution channel different from that of our existing customers and, therefore, the related reserves had unique considerations. We continued to evaluate the activities with these specialty pharmacies and updated the related reserves accordingly.
Rebates - Our provision for rebates was estimated based on our customers’ contracted rebate programs and our historical experience of rebates paid.
Discounts -The provision was estimated based upon invoice billings, utilizing historical customer payment experience.
Performance Obligations
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer. Our performance obligations include commercialization license rights, development services and services associated with the regulatory approval process.
We have optional additional items in contracts, which are accounted for as separate contracts when the customer elects such options. Arrangements that include a promise for future commercial product supply and optional research and development services at the customer’s discretion are generally considered as options. We assess if these options provide a material right to the customer and, if so, such material rights are accounted for as separate performance obligations. If we are entitled to additional payments when the customer exercises these options, any additional payments are recorded in revenue when the customer obtains control of the goods or services.
Transaction Price
We have both fixed and variable consideration. Non-refundable upfront payments are considered fixed, while milestone payments are identified as variable consideration when determining the transaction price. Funding of research and development activities is considered variable until such costs are reimbursed at which point they are considered fixed. We allocate the total transaction price to each performance obligation based on the relative estimated standalone selling prices of the promised goods or services for each performance obligation.
At the inception of each arrangement that includes milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being achieved and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the value of the associated milestone is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our control, such as approvals from regulators, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received.
For arrangements that include sales-based royalties or earn-out payments, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license or purchase agreement is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties or earn-out payments relate, we recognizes revenue at the later of (a) when the related sales occur, or (b) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty or earn-out payment has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied).
Allocation of Consideration
As part of the accounting for these arrangements, we must develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the stand-alone selling price of each performance obligation identified in the contract. Estimated selling prices for license rights are calculated using the residual approach. For all other performance obligations, we use a cost-plus margin approach.
Timing of Recognition
Significant management judgment is required to determine the level of effort required under an arrangement and the period over which we expect to complete our performance obligations under an arrangement. We estimate the performance period or measure of progress at the inception of the arrangement and re-evaluate it each reporting period. This re-evaluation may shorten or lengthen the period over which revenue is recognized. Changes to these estimates are recorded on a cumulative catch up basis. If we cannot reasonably estimate when our performance obligations either are completed or become inconsequential, then revenue recognition is deferred until we can reasonably make such estimates. Revenue is then recognized over the remaining estimated period of performance using the cumulative catch-up method. Revenue is recognized for licenses or sales of functional intellectual property at the point in time the customer can use and benefit from the license. For performance obligations that are services, revenue is recognized over time proportionate to the costs that we have incurred to perform the services using the cost-to-cost input method.
Inventories
Inventories are recorded at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is based on the first in, first out method. We regularly review inventory quantities on hand and write down to its net realizable value any inventory that we believe to be impaired. The determination of net realizable value requires judgment including consideration of many factors, such as estimates of future product demand, product net selling prices, current and future market conditions and potential product obsolescence, among others.
Share-Based Payments
We recognize compensation expense for all share-based awards made to employees, directors and consultants. The fair value of share-based awards is estimated at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense, net of estimated pre-vesting forfeitures, ratably over the vesting period of the award.
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value method of our awards. Calculating stock-based compensation expense requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected term of the share-based awards, stock price volatility, and pre-vesting forfeitures. We estimate the expected term of stock options granted for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 based on the historical experience of similar awards, giving consideration to the contractual terms of the share-based awards, vesting schedules and the expectations of future employee behavior. We estimate the volatility of our common stock at the date of grant based on the historical volatility of our common stock. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based awards represent our best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. In addition, we are required to estimate the expected pre-vesting forfeiture rate and only recognize expense for those shares expected to vest. We estimate the pre-vesting forfeiture rate based on historical experience. If our actual forfeiture rate is materially different from our estimate, our stock-based compensation expense could be significantly different from what we have recorded in the current period.
Income Taxes
We make certain estimates and judgments in determining income tax expense for financial statement purposes. These estimates and judgments occur in the calculation of certain tax assets and liabilities, which arise from differences in the timing of recognition of revenue and expense for tax and financial statement purposes.
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our income taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. This process involves us estimating our current tax exposure under the most recent tax laws and assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items for tax and accounting purposes.
We assess the likelihood that we will be able to recover our deferred tax assets. We consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, expectations and risks associated with estimates of future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in assessing the need for a valuation allowance. If it is not more likely than not that we will recover our deferred tax assets, we will increase our provision for taxes by recording a valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets that we estimate will not ultimately be recoverable.
Clinical Trial Accruals
We also record accruals for estimated ongoing clinical trial costs. Clinical trial costs represent costs incurred by CROs and clinical sites. These costs are recorded as a component of research and development expenses. Under our agreements, progress payments are typically made to investigators, clinical sites and CROs. We analyze the progress of the clinical trials, including levels of patient enrollment, invoices received and contracted costs when evaluating the adequacy of accrued liabilities. Significant judgments and estimates must be made and used in determining the accrued balance in any accounting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates under different assumptions. Revisions are charged to expense in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become known. The actual clinical trial costs for studies conducted in the past three years have not differed materially from the estimated projection of expenses.
Warrants Issued in Connection with Equity Financing
We generally account for warrants issued in connection with equity financings as a component of equity, unless there is a deemed possibility that we may have to settle warrants in cash. For warrants issued with deemed possibility of cash settlement, we record the fair value of the issued warrants as a liability at each reporting period and record changes in the estimated fair value as a non-cash gain or loss in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Leases
In February 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) issued Accounting Standard Update, or ASU, No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), to enhance the transparency and comparability of financial reporting related to leasing arrangements. We adopted the standard effective January 1, 2019.
We determine whether the arrangement is or contains a lease at inception. Operating lease right-of-use assets and lease liabilities are recognized at the present value of the future lease payments at commencement date. The interest rate implicit in lease contracts is typically not readily determinable, and therefore, we utilize our incremental borrowing rate, which is the rate incurred to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment. Certain adjustments to the right-of-use asset may be required for items such as initial direct costs paid or incentives received.
Lease expense is recognized over the expected term on a straight-line basis. Operating leases are recognized on our balance sheet as right-of-use assets, operating lease liabilities, current and operating lease liabilities, non-current. We no longer recognize deferred rent on our balance sheet.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have funded our operations since inception primarily through the sale of our securities and the issuance of debt, as well as with proceeds from warrant and option exercises, corporate licensing and collaborative agreements, the sale of royalty rights, sales of Probuphine and government-sponsored research grants. At December 31, 2020, we had working capital of approximately $3.1 million compared to working capital of approximately $4.7 million at December 31, 2019.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of the net loss for the period of approximately $18.2 million and approximately $2.0 million related to changes in the fair value of assets transferred as part of the DSRA Agreement. This was partially offset by an approximately $0.9 million non-cash gain due to changes in the fair value of warrants, approximately $0.5 million in non-cash interest expense, $0.3 million of depreciation and amortization expense, approximately $0.2 million of finance costs associated with warrant issuances, approximately $0.1 million related to losses on debt extinguishment and approximately $1.0 million related to net changes in other operating assets and liabilities. Uses of cash in operating activities were primarily to fund commercialization activities, product development programs and administrative expenses.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to purchases of equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of approximately $11.6 million in proceeds from our equity offerings, proceeds of approximately $7.2 million from the exercise of warrants to purchase our common stock and approximately $0.7 million received under our PPP Loan. This was partially offset by approximately $1.6 million in cash payments related to the DSRA Agreement.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received approximately $7.2 million in cumulative net cash proceeds from the exercise of outstanding warrants to purchase 1,112,313 shares of our common stock.
In January 2021, we completed a registered direct offering pursuant to which we issued 2,725,000 shares of our common stock at an offering price of $3.55 per share and private placement warrants to purchase 2,725,000 shares of our common stock with an exercise price of $3.55 per share. We received net cash proceeds of approximately $8.9 million after the deduction of underwriting fees and other offering expenses.
In October 2020, we completed a public offering pursuant to which we sold 2,666,667 shares of our common stock and issued warrants to purchase 2,666,667 shares of our common stock with an exercise price of $3.00 per share. We received net cash proceeds of approximately $5.7 million, after deduction of underwriting fees, other offering expenses and the $1.6 million payment pursuant to the DSRA Agreement.
In October 2020, we entered into the DSRA Agreement with Molteni and Horizon to settle our outstanding debt obligations for $1.6 million in cash, the transfer of certain Probuphine assets to Molteni, including all of our manufacturing equipment, and the termination of our rights to future payments under the Purchase Agreement with Molteni. The DSRA Agreement, provided for the release to us of the remaining collateral.
In September 2020, we completed a registered direct offering with several institutional investors pursuant to which we issued 648,000 shares of our common stock at a price of $4.20 per share. We received net cash proceeds of approximately $2.4 million, after the deduction of underwriting fees and other offering expenses.
In January 2020, we completed a registered direct offering pursuant to which we issued 290,000 shares of our common stock at an offering price of $7.50 per share and private placement warrants to purchase 290,000 shares of our common stock with an exercise price of $7.50 per share. We received net cash proceeds of approximately $1.9 million, after the deduction of underwriting fees and other offering expenses.
In October 2019, we completed an underwritten public offering pursuant to which we issued 1,342,534 units at an offering price of $6.75 per unit, consisting of 1,196,200 shares of our common stock, pre-funded warrants to purchase 146,334 shares of our common stock with an exercise price of $0.30 per share and Class B warrants to purchase 1,342,534 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $6.75 per share. We received net cash proceeds totaling approximately $8.1 million, after the deduction of underwriting fees and other offering expenses.
In August 2019, we completed an offering pursuant to which we issued 49,334 shares of our common stock and pre-funded warrants to purchase 45,744 shares of our common stock with an exercise price of $0.30 per share in a registered direct offering and private placement warrants to purchase 95,078 shares of our common stock with an exercise price of $32.10 per share in a concurrent private placement. We received net cash proceeds totaling approximately $1.8 million, after deduction of underwriting fees and other offering expenses.
In June 2019, we issued 14,943 shares of our common stock upon the conversion of the Molteni Convertible Loan upon the receipt of the EMA approval of Sixmo.
In April 2019, we implemented an at-the-market offering, or the ATM, for the sale of up to $8.6 million of our common stock. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we received total net proceeds of approximately $0.5 million from the sale of 10,989 shares of our common stock at a weighted-average price of $48.00 per share under the ATM.
At December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $5.4 million, which we believe, together with the approximately $8.9 million of the net proceeds from the January 2021 Offering, are sufficient to fund our planned operations into the first quarter of 2022. We will require additional funds to finance our operations beyond such period; however, there can be no assurance that our efforts to obtain the funding required to continue our operations will be successful. There is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues
Product revenues from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of sales of our Probuphine product materials to Molteni and Knight for the EU and Canada, respectively. Revenue from sale of Probuphine in the U.S. has been reclassified to discontinued operations for all periods presented (see Note 11 to the financial statements included in this report for more information).
License revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects royalties received on sales of Probuphine by Knight in Canada. License revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 reflects amortization of deferred revenue related to the sale to Molteni of the European intellectual property rights to our Probuphine product.
The increase in grant revenue was due to our increased activities related to the NIDA grant for the development of a nalmefene implant.
Operating Expenses
Cost of goods sold from continuing operations reflects costs and expenses associated with sales of our Probuphine product to Molteni and Knight for the EU and Canada, respectively. Cost of goods sold related to the sale of Probuphine in the U.S. has been reclassified to discontinued operations for all periods presented (see Note 11 to the financial statements included in this report for more information).
The increase in research and development costs from continuing operations was primarily associated with increased activities related to non-clinical studies required for the planned IND submission as part of our NIDA grant for the development of a nalmefene implant. Other research and development expenses include internal operating costs such as research and development personnel-related expenses, non-clinical and clinical product development related travel expenses, and allocation of facility and corporate costs. Research and development expenses related to our U.S. Probuphine activities have been reclassified to discontinued operations for all periods presented (see Note 11 to the financial statements included in this report for more information). As a result of the risks and uncertainties inherently associated with pharmaceutical research and development activities described elsewhere in this document, we are unable to estimate the specific timing and future costs of our clinical development programs or the timing of material cash inflows, if any, from our product candidates. However, we anticipate that our research and development expenses will increase as we continue our current or any future ProNeura development programs to the extent these costs are not supported through grants or partners.
The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to increases in consulting and professional fees. This was partially offset by decreases in non-cash stock compensation expense. Selling and marketing expenses related to the sale of Probuphine in the U.S. have been reclassified to discontinued operations for all periods presented (see Note 11 to the financial statements included in this report for more information).
Other Expenses, Net
The decrease in other income (expense) for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to non-cash losses related to changes in the fair value of warrants, losses related to debt extinguishment and expenses related to the issuance of the January 2020 Warrants. This was partially offset by non-cash gains on changes in the fair value of assets and decreases in interest expense related to our loans. Net other income for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to non-cash gains on changes in the fair value of warrants and again on debt extinguishment related to our Molteni loan, partially offset by interest expense on our loans. Higher interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to higher loan balances, partially offset by the settlement of our Molteni convertible loan in June 2019.
Discontinued Operations
Following our October 2020 decision to discontinue the commercialization of our Probuphine product in the U.S., we recorded a loss on discontinued operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 of approximately $10.8 million and $9.0 million, respectively (see Note 11 to the financial statements included in this report for more information).
Net Loss and Net Loss per Share
Our net loss from continuing operations applicable to common stockholders for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $7.4 million, or approximately $1.96 per share, compared to our net loss continuing operations applicable to common stockholders of approximately $7.5 million, or approximately $9.78 per share, for the comparable period in 2019. Our net loss from discontinued operations applicable to common stockholders for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $10.8 million, or approximately $2.87 per share, compared to our net loss discontinued operations applicable to common stockholders of approximately $9.0 million, or approximately $11.71 per share, for the comparable period in 2019.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have never entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements and we have never established any special purpose entities. We have not guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities or entered into any options on non-financial assets.