Item 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Item 1A.-Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Business Overview
We are an in vitro diagnostics company and leader in the rapid detection of sepsis-causing pathogens, and are dedicated to improving patient care and reducing the cost of care by helping clinicians effectively treat patients faster than ever before. We have developed an innovative and proprietary technology platform that offers a rapid, sensitive and simple alternative to existing diagnostic methodologies. We are using our T2MR technology to develop a broad set of applications aimed at lowering mortality rates, improving patient outcomes and reducing the cost of healthcare by helping medical professionals make targeted treatment decisions earlier. T2MR enables rapid detection of pathogens, biomarkers and other abnormalities in a variety of unpurified patient sample types, including whole blood, plasma, serum, saliva, sputum and urine, and can detect cellular targets at limits of detection as low as one colony forming unit per milliliter, or CFU/mL. Our products include the T2Dx Instrument, T2Candida Panel, the T2Bacteria Panel, the T2Resistance Panel, and the T2SARS-CoV-2 Panel that are all powered by our proprietary T2MR technology. Our development efforts target sepsis, which is an area of significant unmet medical need in which existing therapies could be more effective with improved diagnostics.
On September 22, 2014, we received market clearance from the FDA for our first two products, the T2Dx® Instrument, or the T2Dx and the T2Candida® Panel, or T2Candida, which have the ability to rapidly identify the five clinically relevant species of Candida, a fungal pathogen known to cause sepsis, directly from whole blood. On May 24, 2018, we received market clearance from the FDA for the T2Bacteria® Panel, or T2Bacteria, which runs on the T2Dx Instrument and has the ability to rapidly identify five of the most common and deadly sepsis-causing bacteria directly from whole blood. We have also developed and sell a research use only Candida auris assay, the T2Cauris™ Panel, for the rapid identification of Candida auris, a species of Candida that is highly drug resistant. We have developed a T2Resistance™ Panel for the early and sensitive detection of resistance markers, which can assist clinicians in selecting effective antibiotics. The T2Resistance Panel received FDA Breakthrough Device designation in February 2019 and was granted a CE Mark in November 2019. An additional diagnostic application in
development is the T2Lyme™ Panel, or T2Lyme, which is focused on the detection of the bacteria that cause Lyme disease. Diagnostic applications for additional bacteria species and resistance markers were developed as part of a collaboration with CARB-X, a public-private partnership with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, or HHS, and the Wellcome Trust of London, focused on combatting antibiotic resistant bacteria. On August 2, 2019, CMS granted approval for a New Technology Add-on Payment (NTAP) for the T2Bacteria Panel for fiscal year 2020 and in September 2020, CMS extended the approval for 2021. In September 2019, BARDA awarded us a milestone-based contract, with an initial value of $6 million, and a potential value of up to $69 million, for the development of new direct-from-blood diagnostic panels that will run on the T2Dx. In September 2020, we completed the initial phase and BARDA exercised the first contract option valued at $10.5 million. The existing reimbursement codes support our sepsis products and anticipate the same for our Lyme disease product candidates. The economic savings associated with our sepsis products are realized directly by hospitals. In the United States, we have a commercial team that is primarily targeting hospitals with the highest concentration of patients at risk for sepsis-related infections. Internationally, we have primarily partnered with distributors that target large hospitals in their respective international markets.
We believe our sepsis products, which include T2Candida, T2Bacteria, T2Resistance, and T2Cauris, will redefine the standard of care in sepsis management while lowering healthcare costs by improving both the precision and the speed to detection of sepsis-causing pathogens. According to a study published in the Journal of Clinical Microbiology in 2010, targeted therapy for patients with bloodstream infections can be delayed up to 72 hours due to the wait time for blood culture results. In another study published in Clinical Infectious Diseases in 2012, the delayed administration of appropriate antifungal therapy was associated with higher mortality among patients with septic shock attributed to Candida infection and, on that basis, the study concluded that more rapid and accurate diagnostic techniques are needed. Due to the high mortality rate associated with Candida infections, physicians often will place patients on antifungal drugs while they await blood culture diagnostic results which generally take at least five days to generate a negative test result. Antifungal drugs are toxic and may result in side effects and can cost over $50 per day. The speed to result of T2Candida and T2Bacteria coupled with their higher sensitivity as compared to blood culture may help reduce the overuse of ineffective, or even unnecessary, antimicrobial therapy which may reduce side effects for patients, lower hospital costs and potentially counteract the growing resistance to antimicrobial therapy. The administration of inappropriate therapy is a driving force behind the spread of antimicrobial-resistant pathogens, which the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, or the CDC, recently called “one of our most serious health threats.” The addition of the use of our products, T2Bacteria, T2Candida, and T2Resistance, which all run on the T2Dx Instrument, with the standard of care for the management of patients suspected of sepsis, enables clinicians to potentially treat 90% of patients with sepsis pathogen infections with the right targeted therapy within the first twelve hours of development of the symptoms of disease. Currently, high risk patients are typically initially treated with broad spectrum antibiotic drugs that typically cover approximately 60% of patients with infections. Of the remaining 40% of patients, approximately 30% of the patients typically have a bacterial infection and 10% typically have Candida infections. T2Candida and T2Bacteria are designed to identify pathogens commonly not covered by broad spectrum antibiotic drugs.
We compete with traditional blood culture-based diagnostic companies, including Becton Dickinson & Co. and bioMerieux, Inc., as well as companies offering post-culture species identification using both molecular and non-molecular methods, including bioMerieux, Inc. (and its affiliate, BioFire Diagnostics, Inc.), Bruker Corporation, Accelerate Diagnostics, Luminex, Genmark, Cepheid and Beckman Coulter, a Danaher company. In addition, there may be a number of new market entrants in the process of developing other post-blood culture diagnostic technologies that may be perceived as competitive with our technology. Karius, Inc. offers a lab developed culture independent diagnostic test for the identification of pathogens that has not been cleared by the FDA but may be perceived as competitive with our technology.
We have never been profitable and have incurred net losses in each year since inception. Our accumulated deficit at December 31, 2020 was $423.0 million and we have experienced cash outflows from operating activities over the past years. Substantially all of our net losses resulted from costs incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from selling, general and administrative costs associated with our operations. We have incurred significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution of our FDA-cleared products, T2Dx, T2Candida and T2Bacteria. In addition, we will continue to incur significant costs and expenses as we continue to develop other product candidates, improve existing products and maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio. We may seek to fund our operations through public equity or private equity or debt financings, as well as other sources. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements if and when needed would have a negative impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition and our ability to develop, commercialize and drive adoption of the T2Dx Instrument, T2Candida, T2Bacteria, T2Resistance, T2SARS-CoV-2 and future T2MR-based diagnostics.
We are subject to a number of risks similar to other newly commercial life science companies, including, but not limited to commercially launching our products, development and market acceptance of our product candidates, development by our competitors of new technological innovations, protection of proprietary technology, and raising additional capital.
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted and may continue to impact our operations. We have established protocols for continued manufacturing, distribution and servicing of our products with safe social distancing and personal protective equipment measures and for remote work for employees not essential to on-site operations. To date these measures have been mostly successful but may not continue to function should the pandemic escalate and further impact our personnel. Our hospital customers have restricted our sales team’s access to their facilities and as a result, we had significantly reduced our sales and general and administrative staffing levels to reduce expenses. Our customers may reduce their purchases of our products. Our customers may cease to comply with the terms of our sales agreements and this may impact our ability to recognize revenue and hinder receivables collections. We have a significant development contract with a United States government agency and should the agency reduce, cancel or not grant additional milestone projects our ability to continue our future product development may be impacted. Our shipping carrier’s ability to deliver our products to customers may be disrupted. We have reviewed our suppliers and quantities of key materials and believe we have sufficient stocks and alternate sources of critical materials should our supply chains become disrupted, although raw materials for the manufacturing of reagents is in high demand, and interruptions in supply are difficult to predict. At the onset of the pandemic, we believed that the pandemic’s impact on our sales would affect the recoverability of the value of our T2-owned instruments and components. The COVID-19 pandemic also caused us to reassess our build plan and evaluate our inventories accordingly, which resulted in an additional charge to cost of product revenue for excess inventories.
At December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $423.0 million. We have experienced cash outflows from operating activities over the past years and are required to maintain a minimum cash balance under our Term Loan Agreement with CRG Servicing LLC (“CRG”). There can be no assurance that any financing by us can be realized, or if realized, what the terms of any such financing may be, or that any amount that we are able to raise will be adequate.
While we believe that our cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities and restricted cash of $52.7 million at December 31, 2020 will be sufficient to fund our current operating plan at least a year from issuance of these financial statements, certain elements of our operating plan cannot be considered probable. Under ASC 205-40, the future receipt of potential funding from our Co-Development partners and other resources cannot be considered probable at this time because none of the plans are entirely within our control. During the year ended December 31, 2020, management implemented a cost improvement strategy which is focused on reducing operating expenses and improving cost of goods sold.
The Term Loan Agreement with CRG (Note 6) has certain covenants which require us to achieve certain annual revenue targets, whereby we are required to pay double the amount of any shortfall as an acceleration of principal payments, and maintain a minimum cash balance of $5.0 million. As of the date of these financial statements, we achieved the revenue target of $15.0 million for the twenty-four month period ended December 31, 2020; however there are no assurances that we will achieve the revenue target for the twenty-four month period ended December 31, 2021. Should we fail to meet the revenue target, we would seek a waiver of this provision. There can be no assurances that we would be successful in obtaining a waiver. If we are unsuccessful in obtaining a waiver, we would pay the cure amount set forth under the Term Loan Agreement. While we believe we can continue as a going concern for at least a year from issuance of these financial statements, there can be no assurances that we will continue to be in compliance with the cash covenant in future periods without additional funding. In January 2021, CRG amended the Term Loan Agreement to significantly reduce the revenue covenant for the twenty-four month period ended December 31, 2021.
These conditions raise substantial doubt regarding the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a period of one year after the date that the financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 are issued. Management's plans to alleviate the conditions that raise substantial doubt include raising additional funding, earning payments pursuant to the Company’s Co- Development agreements, delaying certain research projects and capital expenditures and eliminating certain future operating expenses in order to fund operations at reduced levels for the Company to continue as a going concern for a period of 12 months from the date the financial statements are issued. Management has concluded the likelihood that its plan to successfully obtain sufficient funding from one or more of these sources or adequately reduce expenditures, while reasonably possible, is less than probable. Accordingly, the Company has concluded that substantial doubt exists about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a period of at least 12 months from the date of issuance of these consolidated financial statements. See Note 1 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information about our assessment.
On April 7, 2020, we received a letter from The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC (“Nasdaq”) indicating that, for the last thirty consecutive business days, the bid price for our common stock had closed below the minimum $1.00 per share requirement for continued listing on the Nasdaq Global Market under Nasdaq Listing Rule 5450(a)(1). On June 16, 2020, we received a letter from the Nasdaq stating that we had regained compliance.
Financial Overview
Revenue
We generate revenue from the sale of our products, related services, reagent rental agreements and from activities performed pursuant to research and development agreements and government contributions.
Revenue earned from activities performed pursuant to research and development agreements is reported as research revenue and is recognized over time, using an input method as the work is completed, limited to payments earned. Costs incurred to deliver the services are recorded as research and development expense in the consolidated financial statements. The timing of receipt of cash from our research and development agreements generally differs from when revenue is recognized. Milestones are contingent on the occurrence of future events and are considered variable consideration being constrained until the Company believes a significant revenue reversal will not occur.
Grants received, including cost reimbursement agreements, are assessed to determine if the agreement should be accounted for as an exchange transaction or a contribution. An agreement is accounted for as a contribution if the resource provider does not receive commensurate value in return for the assets transferred.
Product revenue is generated by the sale of instruments and consumable diagnostic tests predominantly through our direct sales force in the United States and distributors in geographic regions outside the United States. We do not offer product return or exchange rights (other than those relating to defective goods under warranty) or price protection allowances to its customers, including its distributors. Payment terms granted to distributors are the same as those granted to end-user customers and payments are not dependent upon the distributors’ receipt of payment from their end-user customers. We either sell instruments to customers and international distributors, or retain title and place the instrument at the customer site pursuant to a reagent rental agreement. When the instrument is placed under a reagent rental agreement, our customers generally agree to fixed term agreements, which can be extended, and incremental charges on each consumable diagnostic test purchased. Shipping and handling costs are billed to customers in connection with a product sale.
Fees paid to member-owned group purchasing organizations (“GPOs”) are deducted from related product revenues.
Direct sales of instruments include warranty, maintenance and technical support services typically for one year following the installation of the purchased instrument (“Maintenance Services”). Maintenance Services are separate performance obligations as they are service based warranties and are recognized on a straight-line basis over the service delivery period. After the completion of the initial Maintenance Services period, customers have the option to renew or extend the Maintenance Services typically for additional one-year periods in exchange for additional consideration. The extended Maintenance Services are also service based warranties that represent separate purchasing decisions.
We warrant that consumable diagnostic tests will be free from defects, when handled according to product specifications, for the stated life of the product. To fulfill valid warranty claims, we provide replacement product free of charge.
Our current sales strategy is focused on driving adoption of our technology within the hospital market, increasing test utilization amongst our existing installed base on T2Dx Instruments, which includes converting our T2SARS-CoV-2 customers to our core sepsis tests, and opportunistically increasing the installed base. Accordingly, we expect the following to occur:
•
recurring revenue from our consumable diagnostic tests will increase; and
•
become a more predictable and significant component of total revenue; and
•
we will gain manufacturing economies of scale through the growth in our sales, resulting in improving gross margins and operating margins.
Near term, however, we believe the COVID-19 pandemic may hinder our U.S. and international sales growth. Our customers may cease to comply with the terms of our sales agreements and this may impact our ability to recognize revenue and hinder receivables collections. We have a significant development contract with a United States government agency and should the agency reduce, cancel or not grant additional milestone projects our ability to continue our future product development may be impacted.
Cost of Product Revenue
Cost of product revenue includes the cost of materials, direct labor and manufacturing overhead costs used in the manufacture of our consumable diagnostic tests sold to customers and related license and royalty fees. Cost of product revenue also includes depreciation on the revenue-generating T2Dx instruments that have been placed with our customers under reagent rental agreements; costs of materials, direct labor and manufacturing overhead costs on the T2Dx instruments sold to customers; and other costs such as customer support costs, warranty and repair and maintenance expense on the T2Dx instruments that have been placed with our customers under reagent rental agreements. We manufacture the T2Dx instruments and part of our consumable diagnostic tests in our facilities. We outsource the manufacturing of components of our consumable diagnostic tests to contract manufacturers.
We expect cost of product revenue to decrease as a percentage of revenue as a result of the cost of product revenue improvement initiatives that we initiated during the year ended December 31, 2020.
At the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, we believed that the pandemic would reduce product sales and impair our ability to recover the cost of our T2-owned instruments and components. We assessed the impact on the related cash flows of the instruments and reduced their carrying values by $0.6 million during year ended December 31, 2020, which was recorded as cost of product revenue impairment expense. We took an additional $0.6 million charge to cost of product revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily for excess inventories as the COVID-19 pandemic also caused us to reassess our build plan and evaluate our inventories accordingly.
Research and development expenses
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of costs, incurred for the development of our technology and product candidates, technology improvements and enhancements, clinical trials to evaluate the clinical utility of our product candidates, and laboratory development and expansion, and include salaries and benefits, including stock-based compensation, research-related facility and overhead costs, laboratory supplies, equipment and contract services. Research and development expenses also include costs of delivering products or services associated with research and contribution revenue. We expense all research and development costs as incurred.
We anticipate our overall research and development expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue. We expect to continue developing additional product candidates, improving existing products, and conducting ongoing and new clinical trials. We have a significant development contract with a United States government agency and should the agency reduce, cancel or not grant additional milestone projects our ability to continue our future product development may be impacted.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of costs for our sales and marketing, finance, legal, human resources, business development and general management functions, as well as professional services, such as legal, consulting and accounting services. We expect selling, general and administrative expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue in future periods. Other selling, general and administrative expenses include facility-related costs, fees and expenses associated with obtaining and maintaining patents, clinical and economic studies and publications, marketing expenses, and travel expenses. We expense all selling, general and administrative expenses as incurred.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net, consists primarily of interest expense on our notes payable, changes in fair value of our derivative liability, the amortization of deferred financing costs and debt discount, and interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents.
Other income, net
Other income, net, consists of dividend and other investment income.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Product revenue
During the year ended December 31, 2020, product revenue totaled $11.7 million, compared to $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $6.4 million. The increase was driven by higher consumable sales of $5.5 million primarily driven by sales of our T2SARS-CoV-2 product, higher T2Dx instrument sales of $0.7 million and higher revenue under our service agreements of $0.2 million.
Research revenue
Research revenue was $11 thousand pertaining to an immaterial agreement for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $0.6 million. Research revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily relates to our Co-Development Agreement with Canon U.S. Life Sciences, which completed in 2019.
Contribution revenue
Contribution revenue of $6.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, relates to the BARDA contract, which began in September 2019. Contribution revenue of $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 consists of $1.5 million under the BARDA contract, which began in September 2019 and has a potential value of up to $69.0 million if all contract options are awarded, and $0.9 million under our cost-sharing agreement with CARB-X, which completed in 2019.
Cost of product revenue
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cost of product revenue totaled $21.3 million, compared to $16.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $4.5 million. The increase in cost was driven by $4.3 million of higher consumable sales primarily of our T2SARS-CoV-2, $1.1 million of higher instrument sales, a $0.6 million COVID-19 related impairment charge of our T2-owned instruments and components, $0.4 million of higher shipping related costs and $0.2 million of increased royalties. These increases were partially offset by $1.3 million of lower service costs primarily as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic travel restrictions and lower repair costs, $0.4 million of lower depreciation of our T2-owned instruments and components as a result of lower carrying value subsequent to the impairment charge in the first quarter of 2020, and $0.4 million of increased manufacturing efficiencies.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses were $16.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $16.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $0.6 million. The increase was driven by a $1.2 million increase in consulting expenses primarily related to the BARDA contract, an increase of $0.2 million in lab and facility expenses primarily for the BARDA contract and our T2SARS-CoV-2 Panel and higher study related expenses of $0.1 million for assay development. These increases were partially offset by a $0.8 million decrease in payroll related and travel expenses due to a reduction in headcount and lower materials costs of $0.1 million.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $21.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $27.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $6.0 million. The decrease is driven by a decrease in payroll related expenses of $3.8 million and travel expenses of $1.0 million, all of which are attributable to a reduction in headcount and travel restrictions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Stock compensation expense decreased by $1.0 million due to the market based restricted stock units reaching the end of the derived service periods and a reduction in headcount. Tradeshow and other marketing expenses decreased by $0.9 million, primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic cancellations. Expenses related to systems restoration from the 2019 cyber-attack decreased by $0.7 million. There was $0.2 million less of conferences, primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic cancellations, and $0.1 million less dues and subscriptions. The decreases are partially offset by an increase of $0.6 million in IT support and consulting primarily due to remediating the material weakness, an increase of $0.5 million in D&O insurance premiums, and a $0.5 million impairment charge from a vacated operating lease, and an increase of $0.1 million in consulting fees primarily related to temporary help related to final cyber-recovery efforts in early 2020, compliance with Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and a Board members search.
Interest income
Interest income was immaterial for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Interest expense
Interest expense was $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $7.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Interest expense decreased by $1.8 million primarily due to the change in fair value of the derivative associated with the CRG Term Loan Agreement.
Other income, net
Other income, net, was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Other income, net, decreased $0.3 million primarily due to decreased dividend and other investment income.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred losses and cumulative negative cash flows from operations since our inception, and as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 we had an accumulated deficit of $423.0 million and $376.2 million respectively. Having obtained clearance from the FDA and a CE mark in Europe to market the T2Dx, T2Candida, and T2Bacteria, we have incurred significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. We may seek to continue to fund our operations through public equity or private equity or debt financings, as well as other sources. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements if and when needed would have a negative impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition and our ability to develop and commercialize T2Dx, T2Candida, T2Bacteria, T2SARS-CoV-2 and other product candidates.
Historically, we have funded our operations primarily through our August 2014 initial public offering, our December 2015 public offering, our September 2016 private investment in public equity (“PIPE”) financing, our September 2017 public offering, our June 2018 public offering, our July 2019 establishment of an Equity Distribution Agreement and Equity Purchase Agreement (Note 7), private placements of redeemable convertible preferred stock and debt financing arrangements.
Equity Distribution Agreement
On July 30, 2019, we entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with Canaccord Genuity LLC, as agent (“Canaccord”), pursuant to which we may offer and sell shares of common stock in an “at the market offering” as defined in Rule 415(a)(4) of the Securities Act, for aggregate gross sale proceeds of up to $30.0 million from time to time through Canaccord. On March 9, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the Sales Agreement to increase the aggregate gross sales amount from $30.0 million to $65.0 million. On April 8, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the Sales Agreement to increase the aggregate gross sales amount from $65.0 million to $95.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had sold 101,606,667 shares of common stock with an aggregate gross sales amount of $95.0 million.
We had agreed to pay Canaccord for its services of acting as agent 3% of the gross proceeds from the sale of the Shares pursuant to the Sales Agreement. Legal and accounting fees were reclassified to share capital upon issuance of shares under the Sales Agreement.
Purchase Agreement
On July 29, 2019, we entered into a $30.0 million purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”), pursuant to which we were able to sell and issue to Lincoln Park, and Lincoln Park was obligated to purchase, up to $30.0 million in value of its shares of common stock from time to time over a 36-month period starting from the effective date of the respective registration statement. On April 7, 2020, we terminated the Purchase Agreement, effective April 8, 2020.
In consideration for the execution and delivery of the Purchase Agreement, we issued 413,349 shares of common stock to Lincoln Park.
Plan of operations and future funding requirements
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019 we had unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of approximately $16.8 million and $11.0 million respectively. Currently, the majority of our cash and cash equivalents, along with our marketable securities of $35.4 million, are held in certificates of deposit and U.S. treasury securities. Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, compensation and related expenses, costs related to our products, clinical trials, laboratory and related supplies, supplies and materials used in manufacturing, legal and other regulatory expenses and general overhead costs.
Until such time as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs, beyond what is currently available or on hand, through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings and revenue from existing and potential research and development and other collaboration agreements. If we raise additional funds in the future, we may need to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted and may continue to impact our operations. We have established protocols for continued manufacturing, distribution and servicing of our products with safe social distancing and personal protective equipment measures and for remote work for employees not essential to on-site operations. To date these measures have been mostly successful but may not continue to function should the pandemic escalate and impact our personnel. Our hospital customers have restricted our sales team’s access to their facilities and as a result, we had significantly reduced our sales and general and administrative staffing levels to reduce expenses. Our customers may reduce their purchases of our products. Our customers may cease to comply with the terms of our sales agreements and this may impact our ability to recognize revenue and hinder receivables collections. We have a significant development contract with a United States government agency and should the agency reduce, cancel or not grant additional milestone projects our ability to continue our future product development may be impacted. Our shipping carriers’ ability to deliver our products to customers may be disrupted, although raw materials for the manufacturing of reagents is in high demand, and interruptions in supply are difficult to predict. We have reviewed our suppliers and quantities of key materials and believe we have sufficient stocks and alternate sources of critical materials including personal protective equipment should our supply chains become disrupted. As further described in Note 5, at the onset of the pandemic, we believed that the pandemic’s impact on our sales would affect the recoverability of the value of our T2-owned instruments and components. The COVID-19 pandemic also caused us to reassess our build plan and evaluate our inventories accordingly, which resulted in an additional charge to cost of product revenue for excess inventories.
Going Concern
At December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $423.0 million. We have experienced cash outflows from operating activities over the past years and are required to maintain a minimum cash balance under our Term Loan Agreement with CRG Servicing LLC (“CRG”) (Note 6). There can be no assurance that any financing by us can be realized, or if realized, what the terms of any such financing may be, or that any amount that we are able to raise will be adequate.
While we believe that our cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities and restricted cash of $52.7 million at December 31, 2020 will be sufficient to fund our current operating plan at least a year from issuance of these financial statements, certain elements of our operating plan cannot be considered probable. Under ASC 205-40, the future receipt of potential funding from our Co-Development partners and other resources cannot be considered probable at this time because none of the plans are entirely within our control. During the year ended December 31, 2020, management implemented a cost improvement strategy which is focused on reducing operating expenses and improving cost of goods sold.
The Term Loan Agreement with CRG (Note 6) has certain covenants which require us to achieve certain annual revenue targets, whereby we are required to pay double the amount of any shortfall as an acceleration of principal payments, and maintain a minimum cash balance of $5.0 million. As of the date of these financial statements, we achieved the revenue target for the twenty-four month period ended December 31, 2020; however there are no assurances that we will achieve the revenue target for the twenty-four month period ended December 31, 2021. Should we fail to meet the revenue target, we would seek a waiver of this provision. There can be no assurances that we would be successful in obtaining a waiver. If we are unsuccessful in obtaining a waiver, we would pay the cure amount set forth under the Term Loan Agreement. While we believe we can continue as a going concern for at least a year from issuance of these financial statements, there can be no assurances that we will continue to be in compliance with the cash covenant in future periods without additional funding. In January 2021, CRG amended the Term Loan Agreement to significantly reduce the revenue covenant for the twenty-four month period ended December 31, 2021.
These conditions raise substantial doubt regarding the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a period of one year after the date that the financial statements are issued. Management's plans to alleviate the conditions that raise substantial doubt include raising additional funding, earning payments pursuant to the Company’s Co- Development agreements, delaying certain research projects and capital expenditures and eliminating certain future operating expenses in order to fund operations at reduced levels for the Company to continue as a going concern for a period of 12 months from the date the financial statements are issued. Management has concluded the likelihood that its plan to successfully obtain sufficient funding from one or more of these sources or adequately reduce expenditures, while reasonably possible, is less than probable. Accordingly, the Company has concluded that substantial doubt exists about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a period of at least 12 months from the date of issuance of these consolidated financial statements.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the ordinary course of business. The financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might result from the outcome of the uncertainties described above.
On April 7, 2020, we received a letter from The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC (“Nasdaq”) indicating that, for the last thirty consecutive business days, the bid price for our common stock had closed below the minimum $1.00 per share requirement for continued listing on the Nasdaq Global Market under Nasdaq Listing Rule 5450(a)(1). On June 16, 2020, we received a letter from the Nasdaq stating that we had regained compliance.
Cash flows
The following is a summary of cash flows for each of the periods set forth below:
Net cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $43.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and consisted primarily of a net loss of $46.8 million, an adjustment for non-cash items including stock-based compensation expense of $3.9 million, non-cash interest expense of $3.2 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $1.7 million, non-cash lease expense of $1.5 million, a change in fair value of derivative of $1.4 million, COVID-19 related impairment charge of $0.6 million of our T2-owned instruments and components, an impairment of one of our operating lease assets of $0.5 million, amortization of bond premium of $0.1 million, and a net change in operating assets and liabilities of $6.5 million. The net change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily driven by a decrease in operating lease liabilities of $2.7 million, an increase in accounts receivable of $2.2 million due to higher consumable and instrument sales shipped near quarter end, a decrease in accounts payable of $1.6 million due to timing of payments, and an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $1.1 million primarily related to order deposits with our contract manufacturer and increased software subscriptions, partially offset by an increase in accrued expenses of $0.4 million primarily from bonus, $0.4 million of a decrease in inventory primarily due to increased sales and an increase in deferred revenue of $0.3 million primarily due to warranty and service performance obligations associated with the recent instrument sales.
Net cash used in operating activities was $45.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, and consisted primarily of a net loss of $59.0 million, an adjustment for non-cash items including stock-based compensation expense of $5.5 million, non-cash interest expense of $2.4 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $2.2 million, amortization of operating lease assets of $1.4 million, and a change in fair value of derivative of $0.3 million and a net change in operating assets and liabilities of $1.9 million. The net change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily driven by a $3.7 million increase in accrued expenses primarily due to the transition of former Chief Executive Officer to Non-Executive Chairman of the Board, timing of interest payments and the final fee for CRG and an increase in accounts payable of $3.0 million due to timing of payments, partially offset by a decrease in operating lease liabilities of $2.3 million, a decrease in deferred revenue of $0.5 million as revenue under our Co-Development Agreement with Canon was fully recognized in 2019, an increase in accounts receivable of $1.0 million primarily from the BARDA contract, an increase in inventories, net, of $0.9 million to meet anticipated demand and an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $0.1 million mostly related to insurance.
Net cash used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $36.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and consisted of $50.7 million of purchases of marketable securities and $0.8 million of costs to acquire property and equipment, partially offset by proceeds from maturities of marketable securities of $15.3 million.
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, and consisted of costs to acquire property and equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $85.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and consisted primarily of net proceeds of $85.0 million under the Sales Agreement, net proceeds of $0.3 million under the Purchase Agreement and proceeds from the exercise of stock options and employee stock purchase plan of $0.3 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $6.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, and consisted primarily of net proceeds of $6.7 million under the Sales Agreement and proceeds from the exercise of stock options and employee stock purchase plan of $0.6 million which were partially offset by $0.9 million of repayments of finance leases.
Borrowing Arrangements
Term Loan Agreement
In December 2016, we entered into a Term Loan Agreement with CRG. We borrowed $40.0 million pursuant to the Term Loan Agreement, which has a six-year term with three years (through December 30, 2019) of interest-only payments, which period was extended to four years (through December 30, 2020) upon achieving the Approval Milestone, after which quarterly principal and interest payments would be due through the December 30, 2022 maturity date. Interest on the amounts borrowed under the Term Loan Agreement accrues at an annual fixed rate of (a) prior to the Approval Milestone, 12.50%, 4.0% of which may be deferred during the interest-only period by adding such amount to the aggregate principal loan amount and (b) following the Approval Milestone, 11.50%, 3.5% of which may be deferred during the interest-only period by adding such amount to the aggregate principal loan amount. In addition, if we achieve certain financial performance metrics, the loan will convert to interest-only until the December 30, 2022 maturity, at which time all unpaid principal and accrued unpaid interest will be due and payable. We are required to pay CRG a financing fee based on the loan principal amount drawn. We are also required to pay a final payment fee of 8%, subsequently amended to 10%, of the principal outstanding upon repayment. We are accruing the final payment fee as interest expense and it is included as a non-current liability at December 31, 2020 and a current liability at December 31, 2019 on the balance sheet.
The Term Loan Agreement with CRG is classified as a current liability on the balance sheet at December 31, 2019 based on our consideration of the probability of violating the 2020 revenue covenant, which in turn would trigger violation of the minimum liquidity covenant included in the Term Loan Agreement. The Term Loan Agreement with CRG is classified as a non-current liability at December 31, 2020, as we have sufficient cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities as of the date of this filing that the minimum liquidity covenant would not be triggered even upon default of the revenue covenant at December 31, 2021 as the cure would not be due until March 31, 2022. We have assessed the classification of the note payable as non-current based on facts and circumstances as of the date of this filing, specifically as it relates to achieving the minimum liquidity and revenue covenants. As of the date of this filing, we believe that should we be unable to meet such covenants as of December 31, 2021, it is probable that we would be able to pay the cure of default on March 31, 2022. Management continues to reassess at each balance sheet and filing date based on facts and circumstances and can provide no assurances regarding the probability of meeting its aforementioned covenants in future periods.
We may prepay all or a portion of the outstanding principal and accrued unpaid interest under the Term Loan Agreement at any time upon prior notice subject to a certain prepayment fee during the first five years of the term and no prepayment fee thereafter. As security for our obligations under the Term Loan Agreement, we entered into a security agreement with CRG whereby we granted a lien on substantially all of its assets, including intellectual property. The Term Loan Agreement also contains customary affirmative and negative covenants for a credit facility of this size and type, including a requirement to maintain a minimum cash balance of $5.0 million. The Term Loan Agreement also requires us to achieve certain revenue targets, whereby we are required to pay double the amount of any shortfall as an acceleration of principal payments. In March 2019, the Term Loan Agreement was amended to reduce the 2019 minimum revenue target to $9.0 million and eliminate the 2018 revenue covenant. In exchange for the amendment, we agreed to reset the strike price of the warrants to purchase 528,958 shares of our common stock, issued in connection with the Term Loan Agreement, from $8.06 per share to $4.35 per share.
In September 2019, the Term Loan Agreement was amended to extend the interest-only payment period through December 31, 2021, to extend the initial principal repayment to March 31, 2022, and to reduce the minimum product revenue target for 2019 from $9 million to $4 million, for the twenty-four month period beginning on January 1, 2019 from $95 million to $15 million and for the twenty-four month period beginning on January 1, 2020 from $140 million to $43 million. The final payment fee was increased from 8% to 10% of the principal amount outstanding upon repayment. We issued to CRG warrants to purchase 568,291 shares of our common stock (“New Warrants”) (Note 9) at an exercise price of $1.55, with typical provisions for termination upon a change of control or a sale of all or substantially all of our assets. We also reduced the exercise price for the warrants previously issued to CRG to purchase an aggregate of 528,958 shares of our common stock to $1.55. All of the New Warrants are exercisable any time prior to September 9, 2029, and all of the previously issued warrants are exercisable any time prior to December 30, 2026. We accounted for the March 2019 and September 2019 amendments as modifications to the Term Loan Agreement.
In January 2021, the Term Loan Agreement was amended to extend the interest-only payment period through December 31, 2022, to extend the initial principal repayment to December 31, 2022, and to significantly reduce the revenue covenant for the 24-month period beginning on January 1, 2020. We did not pay or provide any consideration in exchange for this amendment.
The Term Loan Agreement includes a subjective acceleration clause whereby an event of default, including a material adverse change in the business, operations, or conditions (financial or otherwise), could result in the acceleration of the obligations under the Term Loan Agreement. Under certain circumstances, a default interest rate of an additional 4.0% per annum will apply at the election of CRG on all outstanding obligations during the occurrence and continuance of an event of default. CRG has not exercised its right under this clause.
We assessed the terms and features of the Term Loan Agreement, including the interest-only period dependent on the achievement of the Approval Milestone and the acceleration of the obligations under the Term Loan Agreement under an event of default, of the Term Loan Agreement in order to identify any potential embedded features that would require bifurcation. In addition, under certain circumstances, a default interest rate of an additional 4.0% per annum will apply at the election of CRG on all outstanding obligations during the occurrence and continuance of an event of default, we concluded that the features of the Term Loan Agreement are not clearly and closely related to the host instrument, and represent a single compound derivative that is required to be re-measured at fair value on a quarterly basis.
The fair value of the derivative at December 31, 2020 and 2019 is $1.0 million and $2.4 million, respectively. We classified the derivative liability as a non-current liability on the balance sheet at December 31, 2020 and a current liability at December 31, 2019 to match the classification of the related Term Loan Agreement. While our fair value assessment as of December 31, 2020 assessed the likelihood of paying contingent interest as remote within the next twelve months, and as of the date of this filing, we continue to assess and believe the probability is remote that the contingent interest will commence within the next twelve months which, accordingly, provided for the non-current classification of the derivative liability. Management continues to reassess at each balance sheet and filing date based on facts and circumstances and can provide no assurances regarding the probability of payment of the contingent interest in future periods.
Equipment Lease Credit Facility
In October 2015, we signed the $10.0 million Credit Facility (the “Credit Facility”) with Essex Capital Corporation (“Essex”) to fund capital equipment needs. As one of the conditions of the Term Loan Agreement, the Credit Facility was capped at a maximum of $5.0 million. Under the Credit Facility, Essex funded capital equipment purchases presented by us. We repaid the amounts borrowed in 36 equal monthly installments from the date of the amount funded. At the end of the 36-month lease term, we had the option to (a) repurchase the leased equipment at the lesser of fair market value or 10% of the original equipment value, (b) extend the applicable lease for a specified period of time, which will not be less than one year, or (c) return the leased equipment to the Lessor.
In April 2016 and June 2016, we completed the first two draws under the Credit Facility of $2.1 million and $2.5 million, respectively. We made monthly payments of $67,000 under the first draw and $79,000 under the second draw. The borrowings under the Credit Facility were treated as capital leases and were included in property and equipment on the balance sheet. The amortization of the assets conveyed under the Credit Facility was included as a component of depreciation expense. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we repurchased the equipment for $0.3 million in accordance with the terms of the Credit Facility.
Contingent Liabilities and Commitments, Including Tax Matters
We have net deferred tax assets of $72.4 million as of December 31, 2020, which have been fully offset by a valuation allowance due to uncertainties surrounding our ability to realize these tax benefits. The deferred tax assets are primarily composed of federal net operating loss (“NOL”), tax carryforwards and research and development tax credit carryforwards. As of December 31, 2020, we had federal NOL carryforwards of $222.6 million available to reduce future taxable income, if any. Out of the total NOL carryforwards of $222.6 million, $78.7 million will expire at various dates through 2037 and $143.9 million carryforward indefinitely. As of December 31, 2020, we had state NOL carryforwards of $247.9 million, of which $215.3 million expire at various dates through 2040 and $32.6 million is carried forward indefinitely. As of December 31, 2020, we had federal tax credit carryforwards of $0.8 million and state tax credit carryforwards of $0.8 million which expire at various dates through 2040 and 2035, respectively. In 2020, we completed a 382 study of our cumulative net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. As a result, there were limitations placed on the use of our loss and credit carryforwards. The 2019 federal and state net operating loss carryforwards of $329.6 million and $292.4 million, respectively, were determined to be limited by $149.5 million and $78.9 million, respectively. The 2019 federal and state tax credit carryforwards of $5.5 million and $3.6 million, respectively, were limited by $5.4 million and $3.2 million, respectively. The decrease in the prior year tax attributes is attributable to change of control ownership shifts which were determined for the years 2013, 2016, and 2019 which caused the reduction in the value of the historical net operating loss carryforwards. Since the limitation affected the prior period, the Company has determined that its 2019 tax footnote presentation overstated the gross net operating loss deferred tax asset and corresponding valuation allowance. However, there was no net impact to the net deferred tax asset and tax expense as the decrease in the net operating loss carryforward was offset completely by a corresponding adjustment to the Company’s overall valuation allowance. For comparative purposes, the Company’s prior year tax footnote has been revised to reflect the adjustment to the net operating losses and valuation allowance. If we experience a Section 382 ownership change in connection as a result of future changes in our stock ownership, some of which changes are outside of our control, the tax benefits related to the NOL and tax credit carryforwards may be limited or lost.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC rules.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgements
This management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. These items are monitored and analyzed by us for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results for the period in which they become known. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our financial statements and understanding and evaluating our reported financial results. See Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on our accounting policies and significant judgements.