ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. Among other things, those historical consolidated financial statements include more detailed information regarding the basis of presentation for the financial data than is included in the following discussion. This report contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the “safe harbor” provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. In some cases, you can identify these statements by words such as, but not limited to, “anticipate,” “believe,” “can,” “continue,” “could,” “depend,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “might,” “plan,” “project,” “seek,” “should,” “target,” “will,” “will likely result,” “would,” and similar expressions or variations, although some forward-looking statements are expressed differently. All statements other than statements of historical fact are statements that could be deemed forward-looking statements. The forward-looking statements in this report relate to, among other things, our anticipated new store openings, remodeling plans, and growth opportunities; our business strengths, marketing strategies, competitive advantages and role in our industry and markets; our expectations regarding the potential impacts on our business of the COVID-19 pandemic, including its effect on general economic conditions and credit markets and on customer traffic to our stores, as well as the potential duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the length and adequacy of measures we have taken to attempt to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business; our ability to successfully implement our strategic plan and the anticipated benefits of our strategic plan; the effectiveness of our marketing strategy; potential fluctuations in our comparable store sales; our expectations regarding our and our customers’ financing arrangements and our ability to obtain additional capital, including potential difficulties of obtaining refinancing due to market conditions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic; supply costs and expectations, including the continued availability of sufficient products from our suppliers and the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic; our expectations with respect to ongoing compliance with the terms of the credit facility, including the possibility that the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business may result in our inability to maintain such compliance, as well as the potential impact of the phase out of LIBOR; our ability to provide timely delivery to our customers; the effect of regulations on us and our industry, and our suppliers’ compliance with such regulations; our expectations regarding the effects of employee recruiting, training, mentoring, and retention; the potential impact of cybersecurity breaches or disruptions to our management information systems; our ability to successfully implement our information technology initiatives, including our ERP system; our ability to effectively manage our online sales; our ability to remediate material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting; costs and adequacy of insurance; the potential impact of natural disasters and other catastrophic events; risks inherent in operating as a holding company; fluctuations in material and energy costs; the potential outcome of any legal proceedings; and risks related to ownership of our common stock.
These forward-looking statements are based on current expectations and assumptions that are subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause our actual results, performance, or achievements to differ materially from any expected future results, performance, or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. These risks and uncertainties, many of which have been, and may further be, exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic, include, but are not limited to:
the level of demand for our products;
our ability to grow and remain profitable in the highly competitive retail tile industry;
our ability to access additional capital;
our ability to attract and retain qualified personnel;
changes in general economic, business and industry conditions, including the current U.S. recession caused by the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic;
our ability to introduce new products that satisfy market demand; and
legal, regulatory, and tax developments, including additional requirements imposed by changes in domestic and foreign laws and regulations and any changes that may result due to the change in the U.S. presidential administration.
There is no assurance that our expectations will be realized. If one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or if our underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary materially from those expected, estimated, or projected. Such risks and uncertainties also include those set forth in Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors,” of this report. These statements are based on the beliefs and assumptions of our management based on information currently available to management. Our forward-looking statements speak only as of the time that they are made and do not necessarily reflect our outlook at any other point in time. Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update publicly any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, or for any other reason.
Overview
We are a specialty retailer of natural stone and man-made tiles, setting and maintenance materials, and related accessories in the United States. We offer a wide selection of products, attractive prices, and exceptional customer service in an extensive showroom setting. As of December 31, 2020, we operated 142 stores in 31 states and the District of Columbia, with an average size of approximately 20,000 square feet.
We purchase our tile products and accessories directly from suppliers and manufacture our own setting and maintenance materials, such as thinset, grout, and sealers. We believe that our long-term supplier relationships, together with our design and manufacturing and distribution capabilities, enable us to offer a broad assortment of high-quality products to our customers, who are primarily homeowners and professionals, at competitive prices. We have invested significant resources to develop our proprietary brands and product sources, and we believe that we are a leading retailer of natural stone and man-made tiles, setting and maintenance materials, and related accessories in the United States.
The table below sets forth information about our net sales, operating income and stores opened from 2018 to 2020.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic had a significant impact on our operations in 2020, and is likely to continue to have an impact on our business in the future. We experienced a sharp decline in traffic toward the end of the first quarter of 2020 following the onset of COVID-19 in the United States and actions taken by state and local governments to encourage shelter in place practices. In response to this development, we took steps to reduce selling, general and administrative (sometimes referred to as “SG&A”) expenses by eliminating a portion of our workforce, reducing store hours, curtailing advertising spending, reducing the number of replenishment trucks sent from our distribution centers to our stores and limiting other SG&A spending when possible.
We also took steps to conserve cash that included working with our landlords to defer rent payments for many of our retail locations throughout the second quarter of 2020. As of December 31, 2020, the deferred rent balance was $2.1 million. The deferred rent
balance is recorded as a liability within the current portion of lease liability and long-term lease liability, net balances. The majority of the remaining payments are expected to occur between the first quarter of 2021 and the third quarter of 2021. Additionally, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) contains provisions providing for the deferral of the employer portion of social security taxes incurred through the end of 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had deferred $2.7 million in social security tax payments. The deferred amounts are recorded as a liability within other current accrued liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets.
As state and local governments started lifting restrictions toward the end of the second quarter of 2020, we saw an improvement in traffic and sales trends. Throughout the remainder of 2020, we took a cautious approach to investing in activities that would increase our SG&A expenses. While many retailers elected to expand their store hours as state and local restrictions started to ease, we maintained a reduced hours schedule throughout the third quarter of 2020. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we started making limited adjustments to add hours during the week for select stores. During the first quarter of 2021, we started adding Sunday hours back to select stores. Overall, the decision to limit the number of hours that our stores were open had an adverse impact on traffic and sales; however, the SG&A savings realized help drive a substantial improvement in our net income, operating income, and Adjusted EBITDA. These actions were a key catalyst making it possible to conserve cash and fully repay our outstanding debt in 2020.
During the third and fourth quarters of 2020, we experienced an elevated level of product outages due to vendor production delays and other disruptions in our supply chain. In many instances, vendor plants were forced to close or operate at a reduced capacity pursuant to a government mandate following the onset of COVID-19. While most vendors have been able to resume normal operations, many continue to work through large backlogs. We are actively partnering with our vendors to secure delivery of backordered product.
While we are cautiously optimistic with the current business trend and the progress made distributing COVID-19 vaccinations in recent months, a resurgence of COVID-19 cases could have a negative impact on us. Specifically, we could be adversely impacted by limitations on our employees to perform their work due to illness caused by the pandemic or local, state, or federal orders requiring our stores to close or employees to remain at home; limitation of carriers to deliver our products to customers; product shortages; limitations on the ability of our customers to conduct their business and purchase our products and services; and limitations on the ability of our customers to pay us in a timely manner. These events could have a material, adverse effect on our results of operations, cash flows and liquidity. In addition, even after the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided, we may continue to experience adverse impacts to our business as a result of the economic impact of the pandemic.
Other Recent Developments
As previously reported, on February 2, 2021, our Board of Directors unanimously voted to form the Special Committee comprised of Mark J. Bonney, Linda Solheid and Deborah Glasser, three of our independent directors, to evaluate, and to make a recommendation to the Board regarding potential relisting of our common stock on Nasdaq. Thereafter, the Special Committee undertook a thorough and deliberate process to evaluate the potential benefits, costs, burdens, and process associated with applying for listing and listing our common stock with Nasdaq, and the Special Committee unanimously recommended that the Board authorize us to apply to list our common stock on Nasdaq. On March 1, 2021, after receiving the recommendation of the Special Committee, and evaluating the potential benefits, costs, burdens, and process associated with applying for listing and listing of our stock on Nasdaq, the Board unanimously voted to authorize us to apply for listing of our common stock with Nasdaq. Our common stock is currently quoted on the Pink Tier of The OTC Markets under the symbol “TTSH”. We have submitted our listing application and will be working diligently to respond to any questions posed by Nasdaq’s representatives in a timely manner. We caution our stockholders and others considering trading our securities that there is no assurance that Nasdaq will approve our listing application.
Key Components of our Consolidated Statements of Operations
Net Sales - Net sales represents total charges to customers, net of returns, and includes freight charged to customers. We recognize sales at the time that the customer takes control of the merchandise or final delivery of the product has occurred. We are required to charge and collect sales and other taxes on sales to our customers and remit these taxes back to government authorities. Total revenues do not include sales tax because we are a pass-through conduit for collecting and remitting sales tax. Sales are reduced by a reserve for anticipated sales returns that we estimate based on historical returns.
Comparable store sales growth is the percentage change in sales of comparable stores period-over-period. A store is considered comparable on the first day of the 13th full month of operation. When a store is relocated, it is excluded from the comparable store sales growth calculation. Comparable store sales growth amounts include total charges to customers less any actual returns. We include the change in allowance for anticipated sales returns applicable to comparable stores in the comparable store sales calculation. Comparable store sales data reported by other companies may be prepared on a different basis and therefore may not be useful for purposes of comparing our results to those of other businesses. Company management believes the comparable store sales (decline) growth metric provides useful information to both management and investors to evaluate the Company’s performance, the effectiveness of its strategy and its competitive position.
Cost of Sales - Cost of sales consists primarily of material costs, freight, custom and duty fees, and storage and delivery of product to the customers, as well as physical inventory losses and costs associated with manufacturing of setting and maintenance materials.
Gross Profit - Gross profit is net sales less cost of sales. Gross margin rate is the percentage determined by dividing gross profit by net sales.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses - Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation costs, occupancy, utilities, maintenance costs, advertising cost, shipping and transportation expenses to move inventory from our distribution centers to our stores, and depreciation and amortization.
Pre-opening Costs - Our pre-opening costs are those typically associated with the opening of a new store and generally include rent expense, compensation costs and promotional costs. We expense pre-opening costs as incurred and include these costs in selling, general and administrative expenses.
Income Taxes - We are subject to income tax in the United States as well as other tax jurisdictions in which we conduct business.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net Sales - Net sales decreased $15.3 million, or 4.5%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a decrease in sales at comparable stores of 5.6% during 2020. The decrease in sales at comparable stores was primarily due to weaker store traffic following the onset of COVID-19. The traffic and corresponding sales decrease peaked during initial months of the second quarter of 2020. Net sales for the fourth quarter of 2020 increased $3.0 million, or 3.8%, over the fourth quarter of 2019. Sales increased at comparable stores by 3.3% during the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019, due to improved customer conversion. The improvement in conversion was partially offset by a decrease in traffic from the fourth quarter of 2019 to the fourth quarter of 2020. Our stores continued to operate at a reduced number of hours during the fourth quarter of 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019. Additionally, we continued to experience elevated levels of in-stock outages, which had an adverse impact on sales during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Gross Profit - Gross profit decreased $14.6 million, or 6.2%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The gross margin rate was 68.1% and 69.4% for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in gross margin was primarily driven by a higher mix of freight delivery services rendered to our customers during 2020 following the onset of COVID-19 compared to 2019. Additionally, an increase in inventory write-downs incurred in connection with routine product transitions also contributed to the lower level of gross margin during 2020. Gross profit increased $2.1 million, or 3.9%, in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the fourth quarter of 2019. The gross margin rate was 68.5% and 68.4% during the fourth quarter of 2020 and 2019, respectively. The improvement in the gross margin rate was primarily due to reduced inventory write-downs and better pricing which were partially offset by a higher mix of delivery services rendered during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses - Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $22.3 million, or 9.4%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to headcount reductions following the onset of COVID-19, lower levels of variable store compensation expenses, and a decrease in advertising expenses during fiscal 2020. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $5.0 million, or 8.6%, from $58.2 million in the fourth quarter of 2019 to $53.2 million in the fourth quarter of 2020. The decrease in SG&A expense was primarily due to a decrease in store hours from the fourth quarter of 2019 to the fourth quarter of 2020, which contributed to a $1.5 million reduction in compensation and benefits expenses. In addition, depreciation expense decreased by $1.4 million and legal, accounting, and consulting fees decreased by $1.2 million.
Pre-opening Costs - During 2020 and 2019, we recorded pre-opening costs of $0.1 million and $0.6 million, respectively. The decrease in pre-opening costs was due to a decrease in the number of stores opened in 2020 compared to 2019.
Income from Operations - Income from operations increased $7.7 million in 2020 compared to 2019. Operating income margin increased to 2.0% in 2020, compared to (0.4)% in 2019, due to decreases in SG&A expenses.
Interest Expense - Interest expense decreased $1.9 million, or 50.6%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to a lower level of average debt in 2020.
Benefit for Income Taxes - The benefit for income taxes increased $0.9 million for 2020 compared to 2019. Our effective tax rate was (34.0%) in 2020 and 13.1% in 2019. The tax benefit recognized during 2020 and the improvement in the effective tax rate was primarily due to the enactment of the CARES Act, which gave us the ability to carry back federal net operating losses to years with a federal statutory tax rate of 35%.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2019 to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
A detailed discussion of the fiscal year 2019 performance compared to fiscal year 2018 is set forth in Part II, Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2019 to the Year Ended December 31, 2018,” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, as filed with the SEC on March 13, 2020, which discussion is incorporated herein by reference.
Non-GAAP Measures
We calculate Adjusted EBITDA by taking net income calculated in accordance with GAAP and adjusting for interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, and stock based compensation expense. Adjusted EBITDA margin is equal to Adjusted EBITDA divided by net sales.
We believe that these non-GAAP measures of financial results provide useful information to management and investors regarding certain financial and business trends relating to our financial condition and results of operations. Our management uses these non-GAAP measures to compare our performance to that of prior periods for trend analyses, for purposes of determining management incentive compensation, for budgeting and planning purposes, and for assessing the effectiveness of capital allocation over time. These measures are used in monthly financial reports prepared for management and our Board of Directors. We believe that the use of these non-GAAP financial measures provides an additional tool for investors to use in evaluating ongoing operating results and trends and in comparing our financial measures with other specialty retailers, many of which present similar non-GAAP financial measures to investors.
The reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss) for the years ended December 31, 2016 through December 31, 2020 is as follows:
(1)Prior to 2018, we also adjusted for special charges, which consisted of equity-related transaction costs, litigation and investigation costs, and the write-off of debt issuance costs. We have modified the Adjusted EBITDA presentation for the years ended December 31, 2016 and December 31, 2017 to conform to the current presentation.
Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net sales for the years ended December 31, 2016 through December 31, 2020 is as follows:
(1)Prior to 2018, we also adjusted for special charges, which consisted of equity-related transaction costs, litigation and investigation costs, and the write-off of debt issuance costs. We have modified the Adjusted EBITDA presentation for the years ended December 31, 2016 and December 31, 2017 to conform to the current presentation.
(2)Amounts do not foot due to rounding.
We calculate pretax return on capital employed by taking income (loss) from operations divided by capital employed. Capital employed equals total assets less accounts payable, income taxes payable, other accrued liabilities, lease liability and other long-term liabilities. We believe this non-GAAP measure is useful in assessing the effectiveness of our capital allocation over time. Other
companies may calculate pretax return on capital employed differently, which limits the usefulness of the measure for comparative purposes.
(1)Income statement accounts represent the activity for the trailing twelve months ended as of each of the balance sheet dates. Balance sheet accounts represent the average account balance for the four quarters ended as of each of the balance sheet dates.
Our management does not consider these non-GAAP measures in isolation or as an alternative to financial measures determined in accordance with GAAP. The principal limitations of these non-GAAP financial measures are that they exclude significant expenses and income that are required by GAAP to be recognized in our consolidated financial statements. In addition, they are subject to inherent limitations as they reflect the exercise of judgments by management about which expenses and income are excluded or included in determining these non-GAAP financial measures. In order to compensate for these limitations, management presents non-GAAP financial measures in connection with GAAP results. We urge investors to review the reconciliation of our non-GAAP financial measures to the comparable GAAP financial measures and not to rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity include $9.6 million of cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020, cash provided by operating activities and borrowings available under our credit facility. However, the worldwide economic disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic could materially affect our future access to our sources of liquidity. In the event of a sustained market deterioration and declines in net sales, profit and operating cash flow, we may need additional liquidity, which would require us to evaluate available alternatives and take appropriate actions.
On September 18, 2018, we entered into a credit agreement with Bank of America, N.A., Fifth Third Bank and Citizens Bank (the “Credit Agreement”). The Credit Agreement provides us with a senior credit facility consisting of a $100.0 million revolving line of credit through September 18, 2023. Borrowings pursuant to the Credit Agreement initially bear interest at a LIBOR or base rate. The LIBOR-based rate ranges from LIBOR plus 1.50% to 2.25% depending on our rent adjusted leverage ratio. The base rate is equal to the greatest of (a) the Federal funds rate plus 0.50%, (b) the Bank of America “prime rate,” and (c) the Eurodollar rate plus 1.00%, in each case plus 0.50% to 1.25% depending on our rent adjusted leverage ratio. At December 31, 2020, the LIBOR-based interest rate was 1.90% and the base rate was 4.00%.
The Credit Agreement is secured by virtually all of our assets, including but not limited to, inventory, receivables, equipment and real property. The Credit Agreement contains customary events of default, conditions to borrowings, and restrictive covenants, including restrictions on our ability to dispose of assets, make acquisitions, incur additional debt, incur liens, or make investments. The Credit Agreement also includes financial and other covenants, including covenants to maintain certain fixed charge coverage ratios and consolidated total rent adjusted leverage ratios. We were in compliance with the covenants as of December 31, 2020.
We did not have any borrowings outstanding on the revolving line of credit as of December 31, 2020. We also have standby letters of credit outstanding related to our workers’ compensation and medical insurance policies. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the standby letters of credit totaled $2.4 million and $1.3 million, respectively. There was $97.6 million available for borrowing on the revolving line of credit as of December 31, 2020, which may be used to support our growth and for working capital purposes.
During 2021, we expect to use cash to invest in opening one new store, relocating one store, purchasing additional merchandise inventory, maintaining our existing stores, and general corporate purposes. Additionally, as described further in Note 8 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of December 31, 2020, our lease liability under operating leases totaled $149.9 million as of December 31, 2020. Contractual lease payments range from $18.6 million to $37.0 million on an annual basis over the next five years. We are also obligated to fund certain self-insured employee benefits, including our medical and workers’ compensation
plans. As of December 31, 2020, accrual balances related to our estimated workers’ compensation claims and medical claims totaled $1.7 million and $0.6 million, respectively.
We currently believe that our cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operations and access to cash under our credit facility will be adequate to meet our ongoing operating requirements over the next twelve months and our long-term liquidity requirements.
Capital Expenditures
The following table summarizes our capital expenditures during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Our future capital requirements will vary based on the number of additional stores, distribution centers, and manufacturing facilities that we open and the number of stores that we choose to renovate. Our decisions regarding opening, relocating, or renovating stores, and whether to engage in strategic acquisitions, will be based in part on macroeconomic factors and the general state of the U.S. economy, as well as the local economies in the markets in which our stores are located. We intend to open one new store and relocate one store during 2021. Total capital expenditures are expected to be approximately $12 million to $15 million in 2021.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flow for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Operating Activities
Cash flows from operating activities provide us with a significant source of liquidity. Net cash provided by operating activities was $65.6 million, $38.6 million, and $18.2 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase in operating cash flows in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to a $10.8 million increase in cash flows associated with the change in inventory levels and a $10.5 million increase in net income. The increase in operating cash flows in 2019 when compared to 2018 was primarily due to a $37.3 million improvement in cash flows associated with the change in inventory that was partially offset by a $14.9 million decrease in net income.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $2.0 million, $26.4 million and $34.1 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. We intentionally took steps to curtail capital expenditures to use cash to reduce our debt in 2020. Net cash used in investing activities in 2020 was primarily for investing in store merchandising, distribution and manufacturing facilities and our internal fleet. Net cash used in investing activities in 2019 and 2018 was primarily for investing in new stores and store remodels, store merchandising, information technology, and our distribution centers, which included the expansion of our internal fleet.
Financing Activities
Net cash (used in) provided by financing activities was $(63.3) million, ($8.6) million and $14.9 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Cash used in financing activities during 2020 included $127.3 million of payments on long term debt and financing lease obligations that were partially offset by $64.1 million of advances on our line of credit. Cash used in financing activities during 2019 included $53.2 million of payments of long-term debt and financing lease obligations, $10.5 million of share repurchases and $7.7 million of dividends paid, which were partially offset by $63.0 million of advances on our revolving line of credit. Cash provided
by financing activities during 2018 included $129.1 million in advances on our revolving line of credit, which was partially offset by $103.3 million in payments of long-term debt and finance lease obligations and $10.4 million in dividends paid to stockholders.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates, assumptions, and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. We base our estimates and assumptions on historical experience and other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, but all such estimates and assumptions are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from those estimates and assumptions, and it is possible that other professionals, applying their own judgment to the same facts and circumstances, could develop and support alternative estimates and assumptions that would result in material changes to our operating results and financial condition. Our most critical accounting policies are summarized below. For further information on our critical and other significant accounting policies, see the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this report.
Recognition of Revenue
Revenues are recognized when control of promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration received in exchange for those goods or services. We recognize service revenue, which consists primarily of freight charges for home delivery, when the service has been rendered. We are required to charge and collect sales and other taxes on sales to our customers and remit these taxes back to government authorities. Total revenues do not include sales tax because we are a pass-through conduit for collecting and remitting sales tax. Net sales are reduced by an allowance for anticipated sales returns that we estimate based on historical returns. Our process to establish a sales return reserve contains uncertainties because it requires management to make assumptions and to apply judgment to estimate future sales returns and exchanges. The customer may receive a refund or exchange the original product for a replacement of equal or similar quality for a period of three months from the time of original purchase. Products received back under this policy are reconditioned pursuant to state laws and resold. We believe our estimate for sales returns is an accurate reflection of future returns. Actual return trends have not varied significantly from estimated amounts in prior periods. However, if the nature of sales returns changes significantly, our sales could be adversely impacted. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the balance of the returns reserve was $5.0 million and $5.4 million, respectively.
Inventory Valuation and Shrinkage
Our inventory consists of manufactured items and purchased merchandise held for resale. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost (determined using the moving average cost method) or net realizable value. We capitalize the cost of inbound freight, duties, and receiving and handling costs to bring purchased materials into our distribution network. The labor and overhead costs incurred in connection with the production process are included in the value of manufactured finished goods. We provide provisions for losses related to shrinkage and other amounts that are otherwise not expected to be fully recoverable. These provisions are calculated based on historical shrinkage, selling price, margin and current business trends. These estimates have calculations that require management to make assumptions based on the current rate of sales, age, salability and profitability of inventory, historical percentages that can be affected by changes in our merchandising mix, customer preferences, rates of sell through and changes in actual shrinkage trends. We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the assumptions we use to calculate our inventory provisions. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates and assumptions, we may be exposed to losses that could be material. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the balance of the inventory reserves was $0.6 million and $0.2 million, respectively.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment are carried at cost less accumulated depreciation, which is amortized over the useful life of the assets. Leasehold improvements are amortized over the shorter of their estimated useful lives or lease period (including expected renewal periods). As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, net property, plant, and equipment balances were $99.0 million and $130.5 million, respectively.
Property, plant, equipment, and right of use assets are evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. The evaluation is performed at the lowest level of identifiable cash flows independent of other assets, which typically occurs at an individual store level. An impairment loss is recognized when estimated undiscounted future cash flows from the operations and/or disposition of the assets are less than the carrying amount. Significant assumptions used in developing undiscounted cash flow analyses include estimates of future sales, gross margin and operating expenses. Measurement of an impairment loss is based on the excess of the carrying amount of the asset group over its fair value. Fair value is measured using discounted cash flows or independent opinions of value, as appropriate. Significant assumptions used in the fair value analyses include estimates of future sales, gross margin, operating expenses, comparable market rents and discount rates. If actual results are not consistent with our estimates and assumptions used in determining future cash flows and asset fair values, we may be exposed to losses that could be material.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax liabilities and assets are determined based on the difference between the financial statement basis and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. We estimate the degree to which tax assets and loss carryforwards will result in a benefit based on expected profitability by tax jurisdiction. A valuation allowance for such tax assets and loss carryforwards is provided when it is determined to be more likely than not that the benefit of such deferred tax asset will not be realized in future periods. If it becomes more likely than not that a tax asset will be used, the related valuation allowance on such assets would be reduced.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) issued a final standard that primarily requires organizations that lease assets to recognize the rights and obligations created by those leases on the consolidated balance sheet. This standard also requires expanded disclosures to help financial statement users better understand the amount, timing and uncertainty of cash flows arising from leases. We adopted this standard effective January 1, 2019, using a modified retrospective approach through a cumulative effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the beginning of the period of adoption.
This standard provided a number of optional practical expedients in transition. We elected the package of three practical expedients permitted under the transition guidance within this standard, which, among other things, allowed us to carryforward the historical lease classification. We did not separate non-lease components from lease components by class of underlying assets and we did not apply the recognition requirements of the standard to short-term leases, as allowed by the standard.
We also elected to apply the hindsight practical expedient. The election of the hindsight practical expedient resulted in the shortening of lease terms for certain existing leases and the useful lives of corresponding leasehold improvements. In the application of the hindsight practical expedient, we considered recent investments in leased properties and the overall real estate strategy, which resulted in the determination that most renewal options would not be reasonably certain in determining the expected lease term.
Upon adopting this standard, we established a right of use asset of $147.2 million and lease liabilities of $169.9 million, reduced deferred rent by $44.6 million, and recorded a cumulative effect adjustment to retained earnings of $22.0 million. This retained earnings impact was due to the election of the hindsight practical expedient, which resulted in a decrease in the cumulative difference between the straight-line rent expense and rental payments that had been made between the inception of each lease and January 1, 2019. The change in the useful life assigned to certain leasehold improvements resulted in a $15.3 million reduction in fixed assets and retained earnings. The net impact of the cumulative effect adjustments also resulted in a $1.7 million reduction of deferred tax assets and a corresponding adjustment to retained earnings. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on net income or cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2019. See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements included in this report for further details.
Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
In June 2016, the FASB issued a final standard on accounting for credit losses. The new standard was initially effective for us in 2020, and requires a change in credit loss calculations using the expected loss method. In November 2019, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update 2019-10, “Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326), Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815), and Leases (Topic 842): Effective Dates,” which, among other things, defers the effective date of Accounting Standards Update 2016-13, the standard on accounting for credit losses, for public filers that are considered smaller reporting companies as defined by the SEC to fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within those years. Early adoption is permitted. We intend to early adopt the standard effective January 1, 2021. We have evaluated the effect of the new standard on our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures, and have determined the impact will be immaterial.
In March 2020, the FASB issued guidance providing optional expedients and exceptions to account for the effects of reference rate reform to contracts, hedging relationships, and other transactions that reference LIBOR or another reference rate expected to be discontinued. The optional guidance is effective as of the beginning of the reporting period when the election is made through December 31, 2022. We are currently evaluating the impact this guidance will have on our consolidated financial statements.