Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with and our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Background
We are one of the original off-price retailers and a leading destination for unique home and lifestyle goods, selling high-quality products at prices generally below those found in boutique, specialty and department stores, catalogs and on-line retailers. Our customers come to us for an ever-changing, exceptional assortment of brand names at great prices. Our strong value proposition has established a loyal customer base, who we engage regularly with social media, email, direct mail and digital media.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had an adverse effect on our business operations, store traffic, employee availability, financial conditions, results of operations, liquidity and cash flow. On March 25, 2020, we temporarily closed all of our 687 stores nationwide, severely reducing revenues and resulting in significant operating losses and the elimination of substantially all operating cash flow. As allowed by state and local jurisdictions, 685 of our stores gradually reopened as of the end of June 2020. Two stores were permanently closed during the fourth quarter 2020. In accordance with our bankruptcy plan of reorganization, described below, we completed the permanent closure of 197 stores in the first quarter of 2021 and the closure of our Phoenix distribution center in second quarter of 2021. In addition, as part of our restructuring, we secured financing to pay creditors in accordance with the plan of reorganization and to fund planned operations and expenditures.
Future impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic will depend on the potential further geographic spread and duration of the ongoing pandemic, the timing and extent of recovery in traffic and consumer spending in our stores, the extent and duration of ongoing impacts to domestic and international supply chains and the related impacts on the flow, availability and cost of products, the production and administration of effective medical treatments and vaccines, and the actions that may be taken by various governmental authorities and other third parties in response to the pandemic.
Emergence from Chapter 11 Bankruptcy Proceedings
•
In May 2020, we filed voluntary petitions under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code. During the pendency of the Chapter 11 Cases, we continued to operate our businesses as “debtors-in-possession” under the jurisdiction of the Bankruptcy Court.
•
In early June 2020, in accordance with the orders of the Bankruptcy Court, we commenced the process to close 132 store locations in a first wave of store closings. By the end of July 2020 all of these stores were permanently closed. In mid-July, 2020, we closed an additional 65 stores following negotiations with our landlords and those store closures were completed in August 2020. In total, we closed 197 stores during fiscal 2021. In addition, we also closed our Phoenix distribution center in the second quarter of fiscal 2021.
•
On December 23, 2020, the Bankruptcy Court entered an order confirming our Plan of Reorganization. On December 31, 2020, all of the conditions precedent to the Plan of Reorganization were satisfied and we legally emerged from bankruptcy, resolving all material conditions precedent listed in the Plan of Reorganization. However, the closing of the Rights Offering was considered a critical component to the execution of our confirmed Plan of Reorganization, therefore, we continued to apply the requirements of ASC 852 - Reorganizations until that transaction closed on February 9, 2021. In connection with our legal emergence from bankruptcy on December 31, 2020, we completed the debt financing and sale-leaseback transactions contemplated by the Plan of Reorganization. See Notes 1, 2, 3, 7 and 8 to the consolidated financial statements.
•
In February 2021, the Company completed the equity financing transaction contemplated by the Plan of Reorganization with a $40 million Rights Offering that expired in February, 2021. Eligible holders of our common stock subscribed to purchase approximately $19.8 million of shares, at $1.10 per share, with the Backstop Party purchasing the remaining $20.2 million of shares. The Company closed on the Rights Offering and in February, 2021, recorded proceeds of $40.0 million and recognized a non-cash charge of approximately $14.5 million for a change in fair value of the company’s common stock issued to the Backstop Party. See Notes 7 and 11 to the consolidated financial statements.
Key Metrics for Fiscal 2021
Key operating metrics for continuing operations for the year ended June 30, 2021 include:
•
Net sales for fiscal 2021 were $690.8 million, a decrease of $184.1 million or 21.0%, compared to $874.9 million for the same period last year, primarily due to the permanent closure of 197 stores, partially offset by an increase in comparable store sales of 0.7%.
•
Gross margin for fiscal 2021 was 29.8%, compared to 32.6% for fiscal 2020.
•
Selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal 2021 decreased $86.4 million to $244.2 million, from $330.6 million for fiscal 2020.
•
Restructuring, impairment and abandonment charges were $10.8 million during fiscal 2021, compared to $113.5 million during fiscal 2020, related to the executive severance and employee retention cost of $3.6 million, and intangible impairment charge of $1.6 million, as well as abandonment costs of $5.6 million related to the permanent closure of our stores and the Phoenix distribution center.
•
Reorganization items, were a net benefit of $60.0 million during fiscal 2021 related primarily to a $66.2 million net gain from store lease terminations and the termination of Phoenix distribution center lease under our permanent closure plan and a $49.6 million gain on the sale-leaseback transactions under the Plan of Reorganization. These gains were partially offset by $34.6 million in professional and legal fees related to our reorganization as well as $20.0 million in non-cash charges related to execution of the Rights Offering.
•
Our net earnings for fiscal 2021 were $3.0 million, or diluted net earnings per share of $0.05 compared to a net loss for fiscal 2020 of $166.3 million, or diluted net loss per share of $3.68
•
As shown under the heading “Non-GAAP Financials Measures” below, EBITDA was $26.9 million for fiscal 2021 compared to a negative $135.3 million for fiscal 2020. Adjusted EBITDA was negative $20.3 million for fiscal 2021 compared to a negative $15.4 million for fiscal 2020.
Key balance sheet and liquidity metrics for the year ended June 30, 2021 include:
•
Cash and cash equivalents at June 30, 2021 decreased $40.2 million to $6.5 million from $46.7 million at June 30, 2020. Cash and cash equivalents, including restricted cash, at June 30, 2021 decreased $17.8 million to $28.9 million from $46.7 million at June 30, 2020. The decrease in cash and cash equivalents including restricted cash were primarily driven by payments for bankruptcy court approved petition claims, legal and professional fees and payments to the Company vendors for inventory. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
•
As of June 30, 2021, total liquidity, defined as cash and cash equivalents plus $38.9 million availability for borrowing under the New ABL Facility, was $45.4 million. In addition, as of June 30, 2021, we had $12.0 million of borrowings outstanding under the New ABL Facility and, $12.1 million of letters of credit outstanding. Taking into account $10.0 million of borrowing capacity that is unavailable until December 31, 2021, we have borrowing availability of $38.9 million under the New ABL Facility, as of June 30, 2021.
•
Inventory levels at June 30, 2021 increased $30.1 million to $145.1 million from $114.9 million at June 30, 2020. Inventory levels at June 30, 2020 were low driven primarily by the disruption to our business caused by the COVID-19 pandemic in the back half of fiscal 2020. Inventory turnover for the trailing five quarters as of June 30, 2021 was 3.9 turns, an increase from the trailing five quarter turnover as of June 30, 2020 of 2.8 turns, and was favorably impacted by lower than optimal current inventory levels and higher merchandise sell-through rates.
Store Data
The following table presents information with respect to our stores in operation during each of the fiscal periods:
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, selected statement of operations data, expressed as a percentage of net sales. There can be no assurance that the trends in sales or operating results will continue in the future.
See Note 2 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements herein for a discussion of restructuring, impairment, and abandonment charges, as well as reorganization items.
2021 Compared with 2020
Net sales for fiscal 2021 were $690.8 million, a decrease of 21.0%, compared to $874.9 million for the same period last year, primarily due to the completion of our permanent store closing plans approved through bankruptcy proceedings of 197 stores, partially offset by an increase in comparable store sales of 0.7%. New stores are included in the same store sales calculation starting with the sixteenth month following the date of the store opening. A store that relocates within the same geographic market or modifies its available retail space is generally considered the same store for purposes of this computation. Stores that are closed are included in the computation of comparable store sales until the month of closure. The slight increase in comparable store sales was due to an 8.7% increase in average ticket and by the temporary closure of all stores on March 25, 2020 related to COVID-19, largely offset by a 7.4% decrease in customer transactions. As of June 30, 2021, store inventory levels on a comparable store basis, were approximately 41.1% higher than last year. Store level inventory challenges were due in part to the closure of much of our merchant and supply chain operations during the third quarter of fiscal 2020, at the height of the spring 2020 COVID outbreak as well as pandemic-related disruptions to the supply chain. Non-comparable store sales decreased by a total of $187.3 million primarily due to the permanent closure of 199 stores since the third quarter of fiscal 2020. Non-comparable store sales include the net effect of sales from new stores and sales from stores that have closed. We expect inventory levels to increase throughout the fall and expect supply chain costs to remain elevated due to higher freight costs and other supply chain conditions.
Gross margin for fiscal 2021 was $206.0 million, a decrease of 27.7% compared to $284.9 million for fiscal 2020. As a percentage of net sales, gross margin decreased to 29.8% in fiscal 2021 compared with 32.6% in fiscal 2020. The decrease in gross margin as a percentage of net sales was primarily a result of higher supply chain and transportation costs recognized in the current year, partially offset by lower markdowns.
Selling, general and administrative expenses (‘SG&A”) decreased $86.4 million to $244.2 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $330.6 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease was due to lower store expenses on a smaller store base, including a significant decrease in store rents for both closed stores and renegotiated rents for the ongoing store base. Subsequent to the filing of the Chapter 11 proceedings, we commenced negotiations with our landlords on substantially all of our ongoing leases, resulting in significant modifications and reduced lease costs. Labor costs and depreciation were also lower on the smaller base. Also contributing to the favorable comparison were reduced advertising costs and lower corporate expenses. As a percentage of net sales, SG&A decreased 250 basis points to 35.3% for fiscal 2021, compared to 37.8% in fiscal year 2020.
Restructuring, impairment and abandonment charges were $10.8 million during fiscal 2021, compared to $113.5 million during fiscal 2020, related to the executive severance and employee retention cost of $3.6 million, and intangible impairment charge of $1.6 million, as well as abandonment costs of $5.6 million related to the permanent closure of our stores and the Phoenix distribution center. These costs during fiscal 2020, were charges primarily related to (i) $80.1 million in impairment cost and $25.1 million in abandonment cost relating to our permanent store closing plan along with our decision to close the Phoenix distribution center; (ii) $5.2 million in pre-filing incremental professional fees; and (iii) $3.1 million in compensation costs related to a reorganization reduction in force completed prior to the filing of the Chapter 11 Cases. Decisions regarding store closures and the Phoenix distribution center were made in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, prior to filing the Chapter 11 Cases; however, the closure of the Phoenix distribution center was not completed until the second quarter of fiscal 2021.
Our operating loss was $49.0 million during fiscal 2021 as compared to an operating loss of $159.2 million for fiscal 2020, a decrease of $110.2 million. The operating loss in the current year was primarily the result of the lower net sales which were significantly driven by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, together with an increased cost of sales, significant impairment and abandonment charges recognized for the approved permanent store and Phoenix distribution center closures.
Interest expense increased $4.4 million to $8.2 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $3.8 million in the prior year. The increase in fiscal 2021 primarily due to the amortization of financing fees incurred on our new revolving credit facility our debtor-in-possession financing agreements, and accrued interest on our term loan. See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Reorganization items were a net benefit of $60.0 million for fiscal 2021 compared to a net expense of $3.6 million in fiscal 2020. The net benefit during fiscal 2021 related primarily to a $66.2 million net gain from store lease terminations and the termination of our Phoenix distribution center lease under our permanent closure plan and a $49.6 million gain due from the sale-leaseback transactions pursuant to the Plan of Reorganization. These benefits were partially offset by $34.6 million in professional and legal fees related to our reorganization as well as $20.0 million in non-cash charges related to execution of our Rights Offering. For fiscal 2020, reorganization items, net represent professional fees of $3.6 million incurred during our Chapter 11 proceedings.
Income tax expense for fiscal 2021 was $0.3 million compared to $0.2 million in fiscal 2020. The effective tax rates for fiscal 2021 and 2020 were 8.9% and (0.1%), respectively. We currently believe the expected effects on future year effective tax rates to continue to be nominal until the cumulative losses and valuation allowance are fully utilized. A full valuation allowance is currently recorded against substantially all of our net deferred tax assets at June 30, 2021. The total valuation allowance at the end of fiscal years 2021, 2020, and 2019 was $53.7 million, $67.6 million and $27.5 million, respectively. A deviation from the customary relationship between income tax benefit and pretax income results from utilization of the valuation allowance.
Our net earnings/(loss) for fiscal 2021 was $3.0 million, or diluted net earnings per share of $0.05 compared to a net loss for fiscal 2020 of $166.3 million, or diluted net loss per share of $3.68
Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2020 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2019
For a discussion of fiscal 2020 results of operations as compared to fiscal 2019 results of operations, please refer to Part II, Item 7, Management’s Discussion of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, filed with the SEC on September 14, 2020.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We define EBITDA as net income or net loss before interest, income taxes, depreciation, and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA reflects further adjustments to EBITDA to eliminate the impact of certain items, including certain non-cash items and other items that we believe are not representative of our core operating performance. These measures are not presentations made in accordance with GAAP. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as alternatives to net income or loss as a measure of operating performance. In addition, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not presented as a measure of liquidity. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation, or as substitutes for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP and Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by such adjustments. We believe it is useful for investors to see these EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA measures that management uses to evaluate our operating performance. These non-GAAP financial measures are included to supplement our financial information presented in accordance with GAAP and because we use these measures to monitor and evaluate the performance of our business as a supplement to GAAP measures and we believe the presentation of these non-GAAP measures enhances investors’ ability to analyze trends in our business and evaluate our performance. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are also frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate companies in our industry. The non-GAAP measures presented may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
The following table reconciles net earnings (loss), the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, each of which is a non-GAAP financial measure (in thousands):
1)
Adjustment includes charges related to share-based compensation programs, which vary from period to period depending on volume, timing and vesting of awards. We adjust for these charges to facilitate comparisons from period to period.
2)
For the year-ended June 30, 2021, adjustments include restructuring and abandonment costs primarily related to $3.6 million to executive severance and employee retention cost, intangible impairment charge of a $1.6 million as well as abandonment cost of $5.6 million related to the permanent closure of our stores and the Phoenix distribution center. For the year-ended June 30 2020, adjustments include restructuring, impairment and abandonment charges primarily related to: $80.1 million in impairment cost and $25.1 million in abandonment cost relating to our permanent store closing plan along with our decision to close the Phoenix distribution center; $5.2 million in pre-filing incremental professional fees; and $3.1 million in compensation costs related to a reorganization reduction in force completed prior to the filing of the Chapter 11 Cases. Decisions regarding store closures and the Phoenix distribution center were made in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, prior to filing the Chapter 11 Cases; however, the closure of the Phoenix distribution center was not completed until the second quarter of fiscal 2021.
3)
For the year-ended June 30, 2021, adjustments include a net $66.2 million gain due to the leases for store locations related to our permanent closure plan, as well as the lease for our Phoenix distribution center, which were rejected and the related lease liabilities were reduced to the amount of estimated claims allowable by the Bankruptcy Court (See note 1) as well as a $49.6 million gain due to the execution of a sale-leaseback agreement during the second quarter of 2021 on our owned real estate as part of our Plan of Reorganization (see note 1 and note 8). These were partially offset by reorganization costs primarily related to $34.6 million in professional & legal fees related to our reorganization as well as $20.0 million in non-cash charges related to the execution of our Rights Offering (see Note 1 and 7).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
In fiscal 2021, cash used in operating activities was $158.1 million, compared to cash provided by operating activities of $93.9 million in the prior fiscal year. Net cash used in operations in fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by payments for bankruptcy court approved pre-petition claims, legal and professional fees and payments to the Company’s vendors for inventory. In fiscal 2020, cash provided by operating activities of $93.9 million related to primarily to a $126.4 million larger decrease in inventory. This increase was partially offset by our higher net loss in fiscal 2020, adjusted for the non-cash impacts of asset impairment and abandonment charges, totaling $105.2 million, as well as a $9.6 million cash outlay for July 2020 rents, which were paid at the end of June 2020, and a $4.5 million higher cash usage in accounts payable and accrued liabilities.
Cash flows from Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities for fiscal 2021 of $66.7 million related primarily to $68.6 million of proceeds from the sale of our corporate office and Dallas distribution center properties in a sale-leaseback transaction under our Plan of Reorganization, along with $1.9 million of property and equipment at the 197 stores that we permanently closed, and was partially offset by $3.8 million of capital expenditures. For additional information regarding the sale-leaseback transaction, see Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements. Net cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2020 of $13.9 million related primarily to $15.8 million of capital expenditures offset by $1.9 million in proceeds received from the sale of assets.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $73.6 million for fiscal 2021 related primarily to the proceeds of $12.0 million from borrowings of $386.0 million and repayments of $376.0 million on our new revolving credit facility, $25.0 million from a term loan and
$40.0 million from the Rights Offering, partially offset by the payment of financing fees of $3.2 million. For additional information regarding our new revolving credit facility, the term loan and the Rights Offering, see Notes 2, 3 and 7 to our consolidated financial statements. The proceeds of these financings were used primarily to pay pre-petition claims of general unsecured in our bankruptcy proceedings and for purchases of inventory. Net cash used in financing activities of $44.7 million in fiscal 2020 related to $34.6 million in net repayments on our revolving credit facility, a $5.0 million lower cash overdraft provision, and the payment of $4.9 million in financing costs related to obtaining debtor-in-possession financing.
Capital Resources
Historically, we have financed our operations with funds generated from operating activities, available cash and cash equivalents, and borrowings under an asset-based, senior secured revolving credit facility. During the pendency of our bankruptcy proceedings, we financed our operations with funds generated from operating activities and available cash and cash equivalents, and also had in place debtor-in-possession financing arrangements. We made no borrowings under the DIP ABL Credit Agreement (defined below) and the DIP DDTL Agreement (defined below) and both were terminated on December 31, 2020 in connection with our legal emergence from bankruptcy.
On December 31, 2020, as contemplated by our Plan of Reorganization, the Company and its subsidiaries entered into a Credit Agreement (the “New ABL Credit Agreement”) with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. and Bank of America, N.A. that provides for a revolving credit facility in an aggregate amount of $110.0 million (the “New ABL Facility”). The New ABL Credit Agreement includes conditions to borrowings, representations and warranties, affirmative and negative covenants, and events of default customary for financings of this type and size. The New ABL Credit Agreement requires the Company to maintain a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio if borrowing availability falls below certain minimum levels, after the first anniversary of the agreement. For additional information regarding the New ABL Facility, see Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements.
On December 31, 2020, the Company, Alter Domus (US), LLC, as administrative agent, and the lenders named therein including Tensile Capital Partners Master Fund LP and affiliates of Osmium Partners, LLC, entered into a Credit Agreement (the “Term Loan Credit Agreement”) providing for a term loan of $25.0 million to the Company (the “Term Loan”).
Pursuant to the terms of the Term Loan Credit Agreement, the Term Loan has a maturity date of December 31, 2024 and bears interest at a rate of 14% per annum, with interest payable in-kind. Under the terms of the Term Loan Credit Agreement, the Term Loan is secured by a second lien on the collateral securing the New ABL Facility and a first lien on certain other assets of the Company as described in the Term Loan Credit Agreement. The Term Loan is subject to optional prepayment after the first anniversary of the date of issuance at prepayment price equal to the greater of (1) the original principal amount of the Term Loan plus accrued interest thereon, and (2) 125% of the original principal amount of the Term Loan. The Term Loan is subject to mandatory prepayment in connection with a change of control of the Company as described in the Term Loan Credit Agreement. The Term Loan Credit Agreement also includes customary covenants and events of default. As of June 30, 2021, the outstanding principal balance of the Term Loan was $26.4 million, net of debt issuance costs. For additional information regarding the Term Loan, see Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements.
In addition, in February 2021, we completed the Rights Offering and recorded proceeds of $40.0 million and recognized a non-cash charge of approximately $14.5 million for a change in fair value of the company’s common stock issued to the Backstop Party.
Going forward, we expect to fund our operations with funds generated from operating activities, available cash and cash equivalents, and borrowings under the New ABL Facility.
As of June 30, 2021, cash and cash equivalents, excluding restricted cash, were $6.5 million and total liquidity, defined as cash and cash equivalents plus the $38.9 million availability for borrowing under the New ABL Facility, was $45.5 million as of June 30, 2021.
We incurred capital expenditures, net of construction allowances received from landlords, of approximately $3.8 million in fiscal year 2021, which reflects reduced capital spending as one of the liquidity preservation measures we have taken due to the financial impact of COVID-19. Capital expenditures are anticipated to be $9.1 million for fiscal year 2022. The amounts include the expected costs to open approximately eight stores, costs of enhancements to our store fleet, investment in technology as well as our Dallas distribution center.
We do not presently have any plans to pay dividends or repurchase shares of our common stock. Under the terms of the New ABL Credit Agreement and the Term Loan, we are subject to restrictions on our ability to pay dividends or repurchase shares of our common stock. Under the terms of the New ABL Credit Agreement, we must maintain certain minimum levels of borrowing availability, and under the Term Loan any amounts paid for these purposes may not exceed $2 million.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based upon our audited year end 2021 consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of certain assets, liabilities, sales and
expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On a recurring basis, we evaluate our significant estimates which are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets-We evaluate long-lived assets, principally property and equipment, and intangible assets, as well as lease right-of-use assets, for indicators of impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate their carrying values may not be recoverable. Management's judgments regarding the existence of impairment indicators are based on market conditions and financial performance. Indicators of impairment may also include the planned closure of a store or facility, among others.
Impairment is indicated when the sum of the estimated future cash flows, on an undiscounted basis, is less than the asset’s (asset group’s) carrying amount. Then, when the fair value of the estimated future cash flows, on a discounted basis, is less than carrying amount, an impairment charge is recorded. The testing of an asset group for recoverability involves assumptions regarding the future cash flows of the asset group, the growth rate of those cash flows, and the remaining useful life over which an asset group is expected to generate cash flows. In the event we determine an asset group is not recoverable, the measurement of an estimated impairment loss involves a number of management judgments, including the selection of an appropriate discount rate, as well as various unobservable inputs incorporated in valuation techniques used to determine fair value. These assumptions are required to be consistent with market participant assumptions. Fair value determinations require considerable judgment and are sensitive to changes in underlying assumptions and factors. Key market participant assumptions used for purposes of determining the fair value of our long-lived assets, including lease right-of-use assets, in connection with the fiscal 2020 impairment discussed above included market rent assumptions and the discount rate.
If actual results are not consistent with our estimates and assumptions used to calculate estimated future cash flows, we may be exposed to impairment losses that could be material. Additionally, we can provide no assurance that we will not have additional impairment charges in future periods as a result of changes in our operating results or assumptions.
Asset impairment and abandonment charges totaled $5.6 million and $80.1 million for Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively, which were the result of our closing plans for stores and the Phoenix distribution center.
Our property and equipment, combined with our operating lease right-of-use assets totaled $231.0 million as of June 30, 2021, or approximately 55% of total assets, compared to $327.1 million as of June 30, 2020 or approximately 65% of total assets.
Inventory- Our inventories consist of finished goods and are stated at the lower of cost or market using the retail inventory method for store inventory and the specific identification method for warehouse inventory. We have a perpetual inventory system that tracks on-hand inventory and inventory sold at a stock-keeping unit (“SKU”) level. Inventory is relieved and cost of goods sold is recorded based on the current calculated cost of the item sold. Buying, distribution, freight and certain other costs are capitalized as part of inventory and are charged to cost of sales as the related inventory is sold. The retail inventory method, which is used by a number of our competitors, involves management estimates with regard to items such as markdowns. Such estimates may significantly impact the ending inventory valuation at cost as well as the amount of gross margin recognized.
Our stores conduct annual physical inventories, staggered during the second half of the fiscal year. During periods in which physical inventory observations do not occur, we utilize an estimate for recording inventory shrink based on the historical results of our previous physical inventories. We have loss prevention and inventory controls programs that we believe minimize shrink. The estimated shrink rate may require a favorable or unfavorable adjustment to actual results to the extent that our subsequent actual physical inventory results yield a different result. Although inventory shrink rates have not fluctuated significantly in recent years, if the actual rate were to differ from our estimates, then an adjustment to inventory shrink would be required.
Markdowns-We utilize markdowns to promote the effective and timely sale of merchandise which allows us to consistently provide new merchandise to our customers. We also utilize markdowns coupled with promotional events to drive traffic and stimulate sales. Markdowns may be temporary or permanent. Temporary markdowns are for a designated period of time with markdowns recorded to cost of sales based on quantities sold during the period. Permanent markdowns are charged to cost of sales immediately based on the total quantities on hand at the time of the markdown. Markdowns and damages were 4.3% in fiscal 2021 and were 5.9% in fiscal 2020. Markdowns may vary throughout the quarter or year in timing.
The effect of a 0.5% markdown in the value of our inventory at June 30, 2021 would result in a decline in Gross margin and a reduction in our diluted earnings per share for fiscal 2021, of $0.7 million and $0.01 respectively.
Leases- Prior to fiscal 2020, rent expense on operating leases, including rent holidays and scheduled rent increases, was recorded on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease, commencing on the date we take possession of the leased property. Rent expense is recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses. The net excess of rent expense over the actual cash paid has been recorded as deferred rent in our consolidated balance sheets. Tenant improvement allowances are also included in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets as deferred rent liabilities and are amortized as a reduction of rent expense over the term of the lease from the possession date. Contingent rental payments, typically based on a percentage of sales, are recognized in rent expense when payment of the contingent rent is probable.
Starting in fiscal 2020, upon the adoption of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-02, “Leases (Topic 842)” (“ASU 842”), we determine whether an agreement contains a lease at inception based on our right to obtain substantially all of the economic benefits from the use of the identified asset and the right to direct the use of the identified asset. Lease liabilities represent the present value of future lease payments and the right-of-use (“ROU”) assets represent our right to use the underlying assets for the respective lease terms.
The operating lease liability is measured as the present value of the unpaid lease payments and the ROU asset is derived from the calculation of the operating lease liability. As our leases do not generally provide an implicit rate, we use our incremental borrowing rate as the discount rate to calculate the present value of lease payments. The incremental borrowing rate represents an estimate of the interest rate that would be required to borrow over a similar term, on a collateralized basis in a similar economic environment.
Rent escalations occurring during the term of the leases are included in the calculation of the future minimum lease payments and the rent expense related to these leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. In addition to minimum lease payments, certain leases require payment of a proportionate share of real estate taxes and certain building operating expenses allocated on a percentage of sales in excess of a specified base. These variable lease costs are not included in the measurement of the ROU asset or lease liability due to unpredictability of the payment amount and are recorded as lease expense in the period incurred. We include the lease renewal option periods in the calculation of our operating lease assets and liabilities when it is reasonably certain that we will renew the lease.
Insurance and Self-Insurance Reserves-We use a combination of insurance and self-insurance plans to provide for the potential liabilities associated with workers’ compensation, general liability, property insurance, director and officers’ liability insurance, vehicle liability and employee health care benefits. Our stop loss limits per claim are $0.5 million for workers’ compensation, $0.3 million for general liability, and $0.2 million for medical. Liabilities associated with the risks that are retained by us are estimated, in part, by historical claims experience, severity factors and the use of loss development factors by third-party actuaries.
The insurance liabilities we record are primarily influenced by the frequency and severity of claims and include a reserve for claims incurred but not yet reported. Our estimated reserves may be materially different from our future actual claim costs, and, when required adjustments to our estimated reserves are identified, the liability will be adjusted accordingly in that period. Our self-insurance reserves for workers’ compensation, general liability and medical were $7.3 million, $1.2 million, and $1.0 million, respectively, at June 30, 2021 and $8.4 million, $1.3 million, and $0.9 million, respectively, at June 30, 2020.
We recognize insurance expenses based on the date of an occurrence of a loss including the actual and estimated ultimate costs of our claims. Claims paid reduce our reserves and our current period insurance expense is adjusted for the difference in prior period recorded reserves and actual payments. Current period insurance expenses also include the amortization of our premiums paid to our insurance carriers. Expenses for workers’ compensation, general liability and medical insurance were $1.4 million, $3.7 million and $7.8 million, respectively, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021; $2.7 million, $3.3 million and $8.7 million, respectively, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020; and $2.1 million, $2.3 million and $7.9 million, respectively, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2019.
Income taxes- We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between financial reporting and income tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded in our consolidated balance sheets. A valuation allowance is recorded to reduce the carrying amounts of deferred tax assets unless it is more likely than not that such assets will be realized. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, all available evidence is considered including past operating results, future reversals of taxable temporary differences, estimates of future income and tax planning strategies. We have elected to utilize the “with and without” method for purposes of determining when excess tax benefits will be realized. We are subject to income tax in many jurisdictions, including the United States, various states and localities. At any point in time, we may not be subject to audit by any of the various jurisdictions; however, we record estimated reserves for uncertain tax benefits for potential domestic tax audits. The timing of these audits and negotiations with taxing authorities may affect the ultimate settlement of these issues. If different assumptions had been used, our tax expense or benefit, assets and liabilities could have varied from recorded amounts. If actual results differ from estimated results or if we adjust these assumptions in the future, we may need to adjust our reserves for uncertain tax benefits or our deferred tax assets or liabilities, which could impact our effective tax rate.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements as of June 30, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
We have 490 stores with total rent expense for fiscal 2021 of $73.5 million compared to rent expense of $118.3 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease is due to the closure of 197 stores and our negotiations with our landlords on substantially all of our ongoing leases, resulting in significant modifications and remeasurement recorded in fiscal 2021. See Notes 1, 2 and 8 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion. Our distribution center rent for fiscal 2021 was $9.6 million compared to $7.3 million in fiscal 2020. The increase is due to our having sold our corporate office and Dallas distribution center properties and land, in a sale-leaseback transaction and the additional rent incurred by that change and partially offset by a decrease in rent associated with Phoenix distribution center.
Contractually required payments for maintenance, insurance and taxes on our leased properties are estimated as a percentage of rent based on historical trends. These amounts can vary based on multiple factors including inflation, macroeconomic conditions, various local tax rates and appraised values of our rental properties. The operating lease obligations include the lease obligations of our corporate office and Dallas distribution center properties. See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion.
We do not consider most merchandise purchase orders to be contractual obligations due to designated cancellation dates on the face of the purchase order.
On December 31, 2020, the Company and its subsidiaries entered into the New ABL Credit Agreement. Outstanding principal as of June 30, 2021 was approximately $12.0 million. The New ABL Facility matures on December 31, 2023.
On December 31, 2020, the Company, Alter Domus (US), LLC, as administrative agent, and the lenders named therein including Tensile Capital Partners Master Fund LP and affiliates of Osmium Partners, LLC, entered into the Term Loan Credit Agreement, which provided for a Term Loan of $25.0 million to the Company.
Pursuant to the terms of the Term Loan Credit Agreement, the Term Loan has a maturity date of December 31, 2024 and bears interest at a rate of 14% per annum, with interest payable in-kind. The Term Loan is subject to optional prepayment after the first anniversary of the date of issuance at prepayment price equal to the greater of (1) the original principal amount of the Term Loan plus accrued interest thereon, and (2) 125% of the original principal amount of the Term Loan. The Term Loan is subject to mandatory prepayment in connection with a change of control of the Company as described in the Term Loan Credit Agreement. The Term Loan Credit Agreement also includes customary covenants and events of default. As of June 30, 2021, the outstanding principal balance of the Term Loan was $26.4 million, net of debt issuance costs. For additional information regarding the New ABL Facility and the Term Loan, see Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements.
Though our self-insurance reserves represent an estimate of our future obligation and not a contractual payment obligation, we have disclosed our self-insurance reserves under "Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates - Insurance and Self-Insurance Reserves."
Seasonality
Our business is subject to seasonality, with a higher level of our net sales and operating income generated during the quarter ending December 31, which includes the holiday shopping season. Net sales in the quarters ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 accounted for approximately 29%, 37% and 34% of our annual net sales for fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The rate for fiscal 2021 is impacted by store closures during the first quarter of fiscal 2021.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.