ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (MD&A) is designed to provide a reader of the financial statements included in this annual report with a narrative from the perspective of the management of Titan International, Inc. (together with its subsidiaries, Titan, or the Company) on Titan’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and other factors which may affect the Company’s future results. You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data." The following discussion includes forward-looking statements about our business, financial condition,
and results of operations, including discussions about management’s expectations for our business. These statements represent projections, beliefs, and expectations based on current circumstances and conditions and in light of recent events and trends, and you should not construe these statements either as assurances of performance or as promises of a given course of action. Instead, various known and unknown factors are likely to cause our actual performance and management’s actions to vary, and the results of these variances may be both material and adverse. See “Forward-Looking Statements” and "Item 1A. Risk Factors" in Part 1 of this Form 10-K.
COVID-19 Pandemic
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus ("COVID-19") was reported in Wuhan, China. During March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 as a global pandemic. The emergence of COVID-19 and its global spread presents significant risks to the Company, some of which the Company is unable to fully evaluate or even foresee. The COVID-19 pandemic adversely affected the Company’s financial results and business operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 and economic and health conditions in the United States and across most of the globe have continued to change since then. In some of the countries where the Company has operations and where COVID-19 has been widespread (such as the Company’s European and Latin America locations), the Company’s operations were significantly curtailed during March through May 2020. The Company’s operations resumed with additional sanitary and other protective health measures, which increased operating costs throughout the year. We expect these additional measures to continue into the foreseeable future and we seek to ensure the safety and welfare of Titan’s employees. The Company's operations did not return to historical levels until later in the second half of 2020.
Due to the above circumstances and as described generally in this Form 10-K, the Company’s results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 are not necessarily indicative of the results to be expected in the future. Management cannot predict the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economic conditions generally, on the Company’s customers and, ultimately, on the Company. The nature, extent and duration of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company are highly uncertain and will depend on future developments, and such effects could exist for an extended period of time even after the pandemic might end.
BUSINESS
For a description of the Company’s business and segments see Part 1, Item 1 of this Form 10-K.
MARKET CONDITIONS AND OUTLOOK
AGRICULTURAL MARKET OUTLOOK
Agriculture-related commodity prices began to improve in 2020, particularly during the fourth quarter. Market conditions across the globe are expected to improve in 2021. Improved farmer income, an aging large equipment fleet and lower equipment inventory levels are all factors which are anticipated to support improved demand for our products. Many of our customers are forecasting growth, providing further optimism of sustained stability in the market. North America and Latin America are currently expected to experience the largest growth in 2021. Many more variables, including weather, volatility in the price of commodities, grain prices, export markets, foreign currency exchange rates, government policies, subsidies, and the demand for used equipment can greatly affect the Company's performance in the agricultural market in a given period.
EARTHMOVING/CONSTRUCTION MARKET OUTLOOK
The earthmoving/construction market experienced declines in 2020 due in large part to global economic uncertainty and the impacts of COVID-19. The construction market is primarily driven by GDP by country and the need for infrastructure developments. Demand for larger construction equipment used for highways and infrastructure began to tighten in 2019 and continued throughout 2020. Mining industry equipment demand also began to soften within certain regions in the second half of 2019 and continued throughout 2020. The market outlook for 2021 is expected to improve modestly over 2020 sales volumes achieved, but remains relatively uncertain and will depend on the pace of improvement to global economic conditions including the return to normalized supply and demand levels in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. Mining is primarily driven by both the demand for and pricing of commodities. Demand for Titan's products in the mining industry is expected to improve modestly compared to 2020 for the full year, as customers have been cautious in spending on capital and replacement parts due to the COVID-19 pandemic and concerns regarding near-term global economic stability. The earthmoving/construction segment is affected by many variables, including commodity prices, road construction, infrastructure, government appropriations, housing starts, and other macroeconomic drivers, in addition to the impact of COVID-19.
CONSUMER MARKET OUTLOOK
The consumer market consists of several distinct product lines within different regions. These products include light truck tires, turf equipment, specialty products, and train brakes. Overall, the Company expects the markets to stabilize through 2021 due to pent up demand from historically lower sales volume achieved during 2020. The consumer segment is affected by many variables including consumer spending, interest rates, government policies, and other macroeconomic drivers.
SUMMARY OF RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table sets forth the Company’s statement of operations expressed as a percentage of net sales for the periods indicated. This table and subsequent discussions should be read in conjunction with the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this annual report.
In addition, the following table sets forth components of the Company’s net sales classified by segment:
FISCAL YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020, COMPARED TO FISCAL YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Highlights for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019 (amounts in thousands):
Net Sales
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $1.26 billion, compared to $1.45 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of 13.1%, driven by sales decreases in all segments. This decrease reflects the challenges in the earthmoving/construction market as a result of a slowdown of the global construction market, particularly in Europe. Approximately $57 million in reduced sales, compared to the same period of 2019, was attributable to disrupted markets in Europe, Latin America and Asia resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, primarily in the second and third quarters of 2020. Overall, net sales volume was down 8.1% and unfavorable currency translation further decreased net sales by 5.0%.
Cost of Sales, Asset Impairment and Gross Profit
Cost of sales was $1.13 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1.32 billion for 2019. Gross profit for 2020 was $114.3 million, or 9.1% of net sales, compared to $129.0 million, or 8.9% of net sales, for 2019. The decrease in gross profit was driven by lower sales volume and an approximately $15 million unfavorable gross profit impact from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross profit was negatively impacted by an asset impairment charge of $13.8 million related to certain machinery and equipment located at Titan Tire Reclamation Corporation (TTRC) in Canada as a result of market declines, which indicated the remaining book value of the equipment was more than the fair market value. In addition, there were restructuring charges recorded during 2020 totaling $1.7 million relating to a plant closure in the United States, along with redundancy payments as part of a program to reduce production costs in Italy. Excluding the impact of the impairment and restructuring charges, the gross profit margin improved from 2019, based on several factors, most notably lower raw material costs from tailwinds in the commodity markets throughout the year, primarily caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, management had a strong focus on reducing variable overhead costs in production facilities to combat the effects of lower sales volume.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, were $130.9 million, or 10.4% of net sales, down 4.9%, compared to $137.7 million, or 9.5% of net sales, for 2019. The decrease in SG&A was primarily due to lower professional fees related to investments in information technology related to ongoing stabilization of an enterprise resource planning (ERP) software implementation within North America during 2019, lower payroll, marketing and travel related expenses resulting from company-wide initiatives to lower costs, as well as, $2.7 million in costs related to the Company's proposed ITM undercarriage public listing in 2019. These reductions were partially offset by a $5.0 million contingent legal accrual related to the settlement of the Dico case and an impairment charge of $6.0 million related to certain customer relationships in Australia as a result of attrition of several customers since the business was initially acquired in 2012.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development (R&D) expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, were $9.0 million, or 0.7% of net sales, compared to $9.9 million, or 0.7% of net sales, for 2019. R&D spending reflects initiatives to improve product designs and an ongoing focus on quality. The decrease in R&D expenses was primarily attributable to lower payroll related costs and other professional fees, as a result of management initiatives to decrease costs to manage through the downturn in sales and the COVID-19 pandemic, while maintaining a balance to continue to drive product innovation.
Royalty Expense
The Company has trademark license agreements with The Goodyear Tire & Rubber Company to manufacture and sell certain farm tires under the Goodyear name. These agreements cover sales in North America, Latin America, Europe, the Middle East, Africa, Russia, and other Commonwealth of Independent States countries. Each of these agreements is scheduled to expire in 2025. Royalty expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $9.7 million compared to $9.9 million for 2019.
Loss from Operations
Loss from operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $35.4 million, or 2.8% of net sales, compared to loss of $28.4 million, or 2.0% of net sales, for 2019. This increase in the loss from operations was primarily driven by lower net sales and the net result of the items previously discussed, but most notably the asset impairment charges totaling $20.8 million and the restructuring charges of $1.7 million recorded in 2020. The asset impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 are comprised of the following: $13.8 million is related to certain machinery and equipment located at TTRC as a result of market declines, $6.0 million is related to certain customer relationships in Australia as a result of attrition of several customers since the business was initially acquired, and $1.0 million is related to inventory impairment as part of the closure of the Saltville, Virginia wheel operations.
OTHER PROFIT/LOSS ITEMS
Interest Expense
Interest expense for 2020 and 2019 was $30.6 million and $32.0 million, respectively. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to reduction in borrowings under Titan's revolving credit facility and lower interest rates on borrowings.
Foreign Exchange (Loss) Gain
Foreign currency loss was $11.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a gain of $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Foreign currency exchange gain or loss is the result of the significant movements in foreign currency exchange rates in many of the geographies in which we conduct business and translation of intercompany loans at certain foreign subsidiaries, which are denominated in local currencies rather than the reporting currency, which is the United States dollar. Since such loans are expected to be settled at some point in the future, these loans are adjusted each reporting period to reflect the current exchange rates. A portion of the foreign currency loss in 2020 was due to closeout of loans as part of an ongoing initiative to rationalize Titan's legal entity structure and ongoing management of the intercompany capital structure.
Other Income
Other income was $18.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to other income of $8.4 million for 2019, an increase of $9.3 million. The increase in other income was primarily attributable to the proceeds of $8.6 million related to a property insurance settlement at TTRC, a $4.9 million gain on the sale of our Brownsville, Texas facility, offset by a $0.7 million loss on the sale of shares of our investment in Wheels India Limited during 2020. A $4.7 million gain was realized on the sale of shares of our investment in Wheels India Limited in September 2019.
Provision for Income Taxes
The Company recorded tax expense for income taxes of $6.9 million and $3.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company's effective tax rate was (11.9)% in 2020 and (7.2)% in 2019.
The Company’s 2020 and 2019 income tax expense and rates differed from the amount of income tax determined by applying the U.S. Federal income tax rate to pre-tax income primarily as a result of U.S. and certain foreign jurisdictions that incurred a full valuation allowance on deferred tax assets created by current year projected losses and a reduction of the liability for unrecognized tax positions. In addition, there were non-deductible royalty expenses and statutorily required income adjustments made in certain foreign jurisdictions that negatively impacted the tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Net Loss
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $65.1 million, compared to net loss of $51.5 million for 2019. Basic loss per share was $0.99 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.84 for 2019. Diluted loss per share was $(0.99) for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.84 for 2019. The Company's lower net income and earnings per share were due to the items previously discussed.
SEGMENT INFORMATION
Segment Summary (Amounts in thousands)
Agricultural Segment Results
Agricultural segment results were as follows:
Net sales in the agricultural market were $634.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $652.6 million for 2019, a decrease of 2.7%. Overall, unfavorable foreign currency translation of 6.8% and unfavorable price/mix of 0.8% contributed to the decrease in net sales which was partially offset by a volume increase of 4.8% experienced by the majority of our geographic locations except for our North America wheel operations and our undercarriage business in Europe. Lower sales volumes for these businesses were primarily caused by challenging market conditions and economic softness due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross profit in the agricultural market was $65.4 million, or 10.3% of net sales, for 2020, compared to $56.0 million, or 8.6% of net sales, for 2019. The increase in gross profit and margin was driven by favorable global raw material prices and operational improvements and efficiencies experienced during 2020. Particularly, North American wheel improved operations and experienced efficient supply chains during 2020 compared to elevated steel inventories and related costs in the second and third quarters of 2019. Income from operations in the agricultural market was $9.8 million for the year 2020, compared to $11.0 million for 2019.
Earthmoving/Construction Segment Results
Earthmoving/construction segment results were as follows:
The Company's earthmoving/construction market net sales were $510.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $648.8 million for 2019, a decrease of 21.4%. The decrease in earthmoving/construction net sales was driven by decreased volume of 19.4% and unfavorable foreign currency translation of 2.3% of net sales. Price/mix was flat year over year. The direct impact of the COVID-19 pandemic accounted for approximately $53 million of the sales decrease due to plant shutdowns and market disruptions in Europe and Asia, primarily in the first half of 2020. Lower sales volume was experienced in all geographies and also a result of tightening within the construction market which was most impactful in our undercarriage business.
Gross profit in the earthmoving/construction market was $37.9 million, or 7.4% of net sales, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $57.7 million, or 8.9% of net sales, for the year ended December 31, 2019. During 2020, there were impairment charges of $13.8 million related to certain machinery and equipment located at TTRC in Canada, as a result of market declines, which indicated the remaining book value of the equipment is more than the fair market value. In addition, an impairment charge of $6.0 million related to certain customer relationships in Australia as a result of attrition of several customers since the business was initially acquired. The Company's earthmoving/construction market loss from operations was $21.6 million for the year 2020, compared to loss from operations of $1.9 million for 2019. The decrease in both gross profit and income from operations in 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, was primarily due to the impairment charges, coupled with lower sales volume due to tightening within the construction market particularly in our undercarriage business and as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Consumer Segment Results
Consumer segment results were as follows:
Consumer market net sales were $114.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $147.4 million for 2019, a decrease of 22.3%. The decrease in consumer net sales was primarily due to unfavorable sales volumes of 15.5% and unfavorable foreign currency translation, primarily in Latin America, which negatively impacted net sales by 8.9%. This was partially offset by favorable price/mix of 2.1%. During a significant portion of 2020, sales in Latin America’s light utility truck tire sector were negatively impacted by dislocation in the market from effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross profit from the consumer market was $11.0 million for 2020, or 9.6% of net sales, compared to $15.4 million, or 10.4% of net sales, for 2019, which was primarily caused by certain production inefficiencies from lower sales volume. Consumer segment income from operations was $1.1 million for 2020, compared to $1.8 million for 2019.
Corporate & Unallocated Expenses
Income from operations on a segment basis does not include corporate expenses of approximately $24.7 million and $39.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Unallocated expenses are primarily comprised of corporate selling, general and administrative expenses. The decrease year-over-year was due to the continued refinement of the allocation process, which enabled the Company to identify previously unallocated expenses that belonged within other segments along with management actions to reduce SG&A costs at the corporate level.
FISCAL YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019, COMPARED TO FISCAL YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2018
The comparison of the 2019 results to 2018 has been omitted from this Form 10-K and can be found in the Company's Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 filed with the SEC on March 4, 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Cash Flows
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $117.4 million of cash, an increase of $50.6 million from December 31, 2019, due to the following items:
Operating Cash Flows
Summary of cash flows from operating activities:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities provided cash of $57.2 million, driven by decreases in inventories of $37.7 million and increases in accounts payable and other current liabilities of $11.9 million and $24.0 million partially offset by increases in accounts receivable $15.2 million. Included in net loss of $65.1 million were non-cash charges for depreciation and amortization of $54.7 million and asset impairments of $20.8 million primarily related to TTRC property, plant and equipment and the customer relationships intangible asset in Australia.
Cash provided by operating activities increased by $11.8 million when comparing 2020 to 2019. This increase was due to the overall improvement of working capital as a result of company-wide initiatives surrounding inventory management partially offset by the impact of lower sales in 2020, which resulted in a decrease of $13.6 million in net income.
Summary of the components of cash conversion cycle:
Cash conversion cycle decreased by 17 days during 2020 from 2019 due to strategic improvement in inventory management including more accurate demand forecasting and strategic sourcing of raw materials. Further, the decrease is also due to continued focus on customer cash collections and favorable management of accounts payable and supplier payment terms.
Investing Cash Flows
Summary of cash flows from investing activities:
Net cash provided by investing activities was $33.2 million in 2020, compared to cash used of $92.6 million in 2019. Other investing activities during 2020 includes $32.9 million from the sale of shares of our investment in Wheels India Limited, $8.6 million from the proceeds of a property insurance settlement and $11.4 million from the sale of our Brownsville, Texas facility. In September 2019, the Company sold shares of its investment in Wheels India Limited for $19.0 million.
The Company invested a total of $21.7 million in capital expenditures in 2020, compared to $36.4 million in 2019. Capital expenditures represent various equipment purchases and improvements to enhance production capabilities of Titan’s existing business and maintain existing equipment. The overall capital outlay for 2020 was suppressed as a direct response to cash preservation activities as a result of COVID-19 impacts on the business. During 2019, the Company made payments of $71.7 million in satisfaction of obligations relating to the settlement put option under the Shareholders' Agreement. Refer to Note 13 for additional information.
Financing Cash Flows
Summary of cash flows from financing activities:
Net cash used for financing activities was $38.6 million in 2020 due to proceeds from borrowings of $91.6 million partially offset by debt payments of $126.4 million. The Company continued to focus on reduction of its overall debt levels during 2020 resulting in an overall decrease in the borrowings on the revolving credit facility from $36 million as of December 31, 2019 to no borrowings as of December 31, 2020.
Debt Restrictions
The Company’s revolving credit facility (credit facility) and indenture relating to the 6.50% senior secured notes due 2023 contain various restrictions which include:
•When remaining availability under the credit facility is less than 10% of the total commitment under the credit facility ($12.5 million as of December 31, 2020), the Company is required to maintain a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio of not less than 1.0 to 1.0 (calculated quarterly on a trailing four quarter basis);
•Limits on dividends and repurchases of the Company’s stock;
•Restrictions on the ability of the Company to make additional borrowings, or to consolidate, merge, or otherwise fundamentally change the ownership of the Company;
•Limitations on investments, dispositions of assets, and guarantees of indebtedness; and
•Other customary affirmative and negative covenants.
These restrictions could limit the Company’s ability to respond to market conditions, provide for unanticipated capital investments, raise additional debt or equity capital, pay dividends, or take advantage of business opportunities, including future acquisitions.
LIQUIDITY OUTLOOK
At December 31, 2020, the Company had $117.4 million of cash and cash equivalents. At December 31, 2020, under the Company's $125 million credit facility, there were no outstanding borrowings, $19.7 million in outstanding letters of credit, and the amount available totaled $50.9 million. Titan’s availability under this domestic facility may be less than $125 million as a result of any outstanding letters of credit and eligible accounts receivable and inventory balances at certain of its domestic subsidiaries. The cash and cash equivalents balance of $117.4 million includes $100.4 million held in foreign countries.
Capital expenditures for 2021 are forecasted to be approximately $35 million to $40 million. These capital expenditures are anticipated to be used primarily to enhance the Company’s existing facilities and manufacturing capabilities and drive productivity gains.
Cash payments for interest are currently forecasted to be approximately $30 million in 2021, based on the Company's year-end 2020 debt balances and debt maturities. The forecasted interest payments are comprised primarily of the semi-annual interest payments totaling approximately $26 million (paid in May and November) for the 6.50% senior secured notes.
Subject to the terms of the agreements governing Titan's outstanding indebtedness, the Company may finance future acquisitions or joint ventures with cash on hand, cash from operations, additional indebtedness, issuing additional equity securities, and divestitures.
Cash and cash equivalents, totaling $117.4 million at December 31, 2020, along with anticipated internal cash flows from operations, and utilization of remaining available credit facilities, are expected to provide sufficient liquidity for working capital needs, debt maturities and capital expenditures. Potential divestitures and unencumbered assets are also a means to provide for future liquidity needs. Titan has taken actions to obtain additional financial flexibility and credit capabilities from our banking partners and other sources throughout our global operations during 2020, to gain flexibility as the markets recover in the future. We are managing the business cycle and disruption due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic; however, we do not anticipate that this impact will cause the Company to violate any financial covenants with respect to its debt agreements. In addition, as a result of the measures undertaken by management, the Company does not anticipate any significant liquidity constraints during the foreseeable future.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS
The Company’s contractual obligations at December 31, 2020, consisted of the following (amounts in thousands):
(a)Interest expense is estimated based on the Company’s year-end 2020 debt balances, maturities, and interest rates. The estimates assume the credit facility borrowings are paid off during 2021. The Company’s actual debt balances and interest rates may fluctuate in the future; therefore, actual interest payments may vary from those payments detailed in the above table.
(b)Other long-term liabilities represent the Company’s estimated funding requirements for defined benefit pension plans. The Company’s liability for pensions is based on a number of assumptions, including discount rates, rates of return on investments, mortality rates, and other factors. Certain of these assumptions are determined with the assistance of outside actuaries. Assumptions are based on past experience and anticipated future trends and are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties and may lead to significantly different pension liability funding requirements.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
As of December 31, 2020, the Company did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements (as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K).
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in compliance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires the application of technical accounting rules and guidance, as well as the use of estimates. The Company’s application of such rules and guidance involves assumptions that require difficult subjective judgments regarding many factors, which, in and of themselves, could materially impact the financial statements and disclosures. A future change in the estimates, assumptions, or judgments applied in determining the following matters, among others, could have a material impact on future financial statements and disclosures.
Asset and Business Acquisitions
The allocation of purchase price for asset and business acquisitions requires management estimates and judgment as to expectations for future cash flows of the acquired assets and business and the allocation of those cash flows to identifiable intangible assets in determining the estimated fair value for purchase price allocations. If the actual results differ from the estimates and judgments used in determining the purchase price allocations, impairment losses could occur. To aid in establishing the value of any intangible assets at the time of acquisition, the Company typically engages a professional appraisal firm.
Inventories
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Net realizable value is estimated based on current selling prices. Inventory costs are calculated using the first in, first out (FIFO) method or average cost method. Estimated provisions are established for slow-moving and obsolete inventory.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the respective tax basis of assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the enacted tax rates that are expected to apply in the years the temporary differences are expected to be settled or realized. A valuation allowance is recorded for the portion of the deferred tax assets for which it is more likely than not that a tax benefit will not be realized. Management’s judgment is required to determine the provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and valuation allowances against deferred tax assets.
Retirement Benefit Obligations
Pension benefit obligations are based on various assumptions used by third-party actuaries in calculating these amounts. These assumptions include discount rates, expected return on plan assets, mortality rates, and other factors. Revisions in assumptions and actual results that differ from the assumptions affect future expenses, cash funding requirements, and obligations. The Company has three frozen defined benefit pension plans in the United States and pension plans in several foreign countries. For more information concerning these obligations, see Note 23 for additional information.
The effect of hypothetical changes to selected assumptions on the Company’s frozen pension benefit obligations would be as follows (amounts in thousands):
(a)Projected benefit obligation (PBO) for pension plans.
Product Warranties
The Company provides limited warranties on workmanship on its products in all market segments. The majority of the Company's products are subject to a limited warranty that ranges between less than one year and ten years, with certain product warranties being prorated after the first year. Actual warranty experience may differ from historical experience. The Company calculates an estimated warranty liability based on past warranty experience and the sales of products subject to that experience. The Company records warranty expense based on warranty payments made and changes to the estimated warranty liability. The Company's warranty liability was $15.0 million at December 31, 2020, and $14.3 million at December 31, 2019. The Company recorded warranty expense of $6.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and $5.0 million for the year ended
December 31, 2019. The Company's estimated warranty liability and expense increased primarily as the result of higher net sales of product with historical warranty experience.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
The Company reviews fixed assets to assess recoverability from future operations whenever events and circumstances indicate that the carrying values may not be recoverable. Factors that could result in an impairment review include, but are not limited to, a current period cash flow loss combined with a history of cash flow losses, current cash flows that may be insufficient to recover the investment in the property over the remaining useful life, or a projection that demonstrates continuing losses associated with the use of a long-lived asset, significant changes in the manner of use of the assets, or significant changes in business strategies. Impairment losses are recognized in operating results when expected undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying value of the asset. Impairment losses are measured as the excess of the carrying value of the asset over the discounted expected future cash flows or the estimated fair value of the asset.
MARKET RISK
Foreign Currency Risk
The Company is exposed to the impact of foreign currency fluctuations in certain countries in which it operates. The exposure to foreign currency movements is limited in many countries because the operating revenues and expenses of the Company's various subsidiaries and business units are substantially in the local currency of the country in which they operate. To the extent that borrowings, sales, purchases, revenues, expenses or other transactions are not in the local currency of the subsidiary, the Company is exposed to currency risk and may enter into foreign exchange derivative contracts to mitigate the currency risk. The Company is exposed to fluctuations in the Australian dollar, Brazilian real, British pound, euro, Russian ruble and other global currencies. The Company’s net investment in foreign entities translated into U.S. dollars was $283.0 million at December 31, 2020, and $287.0 million at December 31, 2019. The hypothetical potential loss in value of the Company’s net investment in foreign entities resulting from a 10% adverse change in foreign currency exchange rates at December 31, 2020, would have been approximately $28.3 million.
Commodity Price Risk
The Company does not generally enter into long-term commodity pricing contracts and does not use derivative commodity instruments to hedge its exposures to commodity market price fluctuations. Therefore, the Company is exposed to price fluctuations of its key commodities, which consist primarily of steel, natural rubber, synthetic rubber, and carbon black. The Company attempts to pass on certain material price increases and decreases to its customers, depending on market conditions.
Interest Rate Risk
The Company is exposed to interest rate risk on its variable debt. The Company has a $125 million credit facility that has a variable interest rate. As of December 31, 2020, the amount available under the credit facility was $50.9 million. If the credit facility were fully drawn to available funds, a change in the interest rate of 100 basis points, or 1%, would have changed the Company’s interest expense by approximately $0.5 million. At December 31, 2020, there were no borrowings under the credit facility.