Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Special Note Regarding Smaller Reporting Company Status
Under SEC Release 33-10513; 34-83550, Amendments to Smaller Reporting Company Definition, the Company qualifies as a smaller reporting company based on its public float as of the last business day of the second quarter of fiscal 2021. Accordingly, it has scaled some of its disclosures of financial and non-financial information in this annual report. The Company will continue to determine whether to provide additional scaled disclosures of financial or non-financial information in future quarterly reports, annual reports and/or proxy statements if it remains a smaller reporting company under SEC rules.
Note on Forward-Looking Statements
Statements in this report (including but not limited to certain statements in Items 1, 3 and 7) and in other Company communications that are not historical facts are forward-looking statements, which are based on management’s current expectations. These statements involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from what appears here.
Forward-looking statements include the Company’s description of plans and objectives for future operations and assumptions behind those plans. The words “anticipates,” “believes,” “intends,” “estimates,” and “expects,” or similar anticipatory expressions, usually identify forward-looking statements. In addition, goals established by the Company should not be viewed as guarantees or promises of future performance. There can be no assurance the Company will be successful in achieving its goals.
In addition to the assumptions and information referred to specifically in the forward-looking statements, other factors, including, but not limited to those factors discussed under Item 1A, Risk Factors, could cause actual results to be materially different from what is presented in any forward-looking statements.
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
Net Sales
Net sales for fiscal 2021 decreased 11.4%, or $28.3 million, to $218.6 million from $246.8 million in fiscal 2020. The Company experienced a broad-based softening in demand through the first three fiscal quarters across the industrial and marine markets, due in large part to the continued impacts of the COVID-19 crisis on the Company’s global markets. The weakness in the North American oil and gas market experienced throughout fiscal 2020 persisted through fiscal 2021, with some improvement in aftermarket activity in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021. The Company began to see a general market recovery trend starting at the end of the fiscal second quarter, which continued through the fiscal fourth quarter. With a recovering global economy following a relaxation of COVID-19 restrictions, the Company has seen renewed demand for its products across all segments. With improving volume levels through the year, the Company reported a fourth quarter favorable variance to the prior year of 11.5%, its first favorable year-over-year variance since the third quarter of fiscal 2019. Currency translation had a favorable impact on fiscal 2021 sales compared to the prior year totaling $11.6 million primarily due to the strengthening of the euro and Australian dollar against the U.S. dollar
Sales at our manufacturing segment decreased 15.8%, or $36.1 million, versus the same period last year. The largest decline was seen at the Company’s North American manufacturing operation, the largest, which experienced a 28.0% decline in sales compared to fiscal 2020. The primary driver for this decrease was a broad reduction in demand created by the global economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company’s Veth Propulsion operation in the Netherlands experienced an 18.5% decrease in sales in fiscal 2021, also due to the global market impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company’s Italian manufacturing operations reported a 16.6% increase in sales from fiscal 2020, with foreign currency contributing half of that increase and a recovering European industrial market in the second half of the fiscal year driving the remaining volume growth. Similarly, the Company’s Belgian manufacturing operation saw a 12.2% increase in sales in fiscal 2021 on a favorable foreign exchange impact and an economic recovery in the fourth fiscal quarter. The Company’s Swiss manufacturing operation, which supplies customized propellers for the global mega yacht and patrol boat markets, experienced a 7.2% increase in sales, primarily due to a favorable currency impact.
Sales at our distribution segment were up 4.6%, or $4.4 million, compared to fiscal 2020, with the entire increase coming in the fourth fiscal quarter. The Company’s Asian distribution operation in Singapore, China and Japan experienced an 8.3% decrease in sales due to the weakened global demand resulting from COVID-19, partially offset by stable demand for the Company’s oil and gas transmissions. The Company’s European distribution operation saw an increase of $0.4 million thanks to a positive currency impact of $1.3 million. The operational decline is the result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company’s North American distribution operation saw an increase of 3.0% thanks to improving market conditions in the fourth fiscal quarter driving additional demand. The Company’s distribution operation in Australia, which provides boat accessories, propulsion and marine transmission systems primarily for the pleasure craft market, saw sales increase sharply (52.8%), driven by a significant favorable currency impact (15.9%) and strong demand for the Company’s product in the pleasure craft market.
Net sales for the Company’s marine transmission, propulsion and boat management systems were down 16.6% compared to the prior fiscal year. This decrease reflects a general weakening of the global economy primarily as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. While most marine markets were significantly impacted, the pleasure craft market in Australia was an area of strength. In the off-highway transmission market, the year-over-year decrease of 6.8% can also be attributed primarily to the global impact of the COVID-19 pandemic through the first three quarters, while the year-over-year comparisons turned positive in the fourth quarter. Sale of the Company’s pressure pumping transmission systems into China remained steady and consistent with the prior year. The decrease experienced in the Company’s industrial products of 11.0% was also seen primarily in the first three quarters of the fiscal year, brought on by a weakening global economy and the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. This comparison also turned positive in the fourth fiscal quarter, as the global recovery started to gain traction.
Geographically, sales to the U.S. and Canada declined 23% in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, representing 32% of consolidated sales for fiscal 2021 compared to 36% in fiscal 2020. The reduction is primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Sales into the Asia Pacific market actually increased 2% compared to fiscal 2020 and represented approximately 24% of sales in fiscal 2021, compared to 21% in fiscal 2020. The increase in fiscal 2021 reflects a strong Australian pleasure craft market and consistent Chinese demand for the Company’s oil and gas transmission. Sales into the European market declined approximately 11% from fiscal 2020 levels while accounting for 37% of consolidated net sales in both fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020. The decrease, similar to North America, is primarily the result of the global economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. See Note J, Business Segments and Foreign Operations, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for more information on the Company’s business segments and foreign operations.
Gross Profit
In fiscal 2021, gross profit decreased $4.9 million, or 8.7%, to $50.9 million on a sales decrease of $28.3 million. Gross profit as a percentage of sales increased 70 basis points in fiscal 2021 to 23.3%, compared to 22.6% in fiscal 2020. The table below summarizes the gross profit trend by quarter for fiscal years 2021 and 2020:
There were a number of factors that impacted the Company’s overall gross profit rate in fiscal 2021. Gross profit for the year was primarily impacted by reduced volumes and a continued unfavorable product mix. This was driven by the global economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and very limited sales of high-margin oil and gas transmissions and parts. Margin was favorably impacted by the recording of a benefit related to the Employee Retention Credit (“ERC”), a COVID-19 relief program of the U.S. government, totaling $2.4 million, split evenly between the third and fourth quarters. The Company estimates the net unfavorable impact of reduced volumes on gross margin in fiscal 2021 was approximately $6.5 million. The unfavorable shift in product mix, primarily related to the reduced shipments of the Company’s high margin oil and gas transmission units and aftermarket products, had an estimated unfavorable impact of $3.7 million.
Marketing, Engineering and Administrative (ME&A) Expenses
Marketing, engineering, and administrative (ME&A) expenses of $55.8 million were down $7.5 million, or 11.8%, compared to the prior fiscal year. As a percentage of sales, ME&A expenses decreased slightly to 25.5% of sales versus 25.6% of sales in fiscal 2020. The decrease in spending in fiscal 2021 compared to the prior year was driven by reduced domestic salaries and benefits ($3.4 million), a reclassification of certain costs from ME&A to COGS ($2.4 million), lower amortization expense ($1.0 million), reduced marketing activities ($1.5 million) and a benefit related to the domestic ERC ($1.2 million), reduced corporate travel ($0.9 million) and the impact of global expense containment measures ($1.5 million). These decreases were partially offset by an increase in global bonus expense ($2.4 million) and an exchange driven increase ($2.0 million).
Restructuring of Operations
During the course of fiscal 2021, the Company incurred $7.4 million in restructuring charges. Included in this amount is $2.3 million related to the provision for an announced restructuring program at the Company’s Belgian operation resulting in the elimination of 23 positions. The action was taken to allow the Belgian operation to focus resources on core manufacturing processes, while allowing for savings on the outsourcing of non-core processes. The Company anticipates annual pre-tax savings upon completion of the restructuring of approximately $1.6 million. The Company also recorded a $4.3 million charge for the impairment of its corporate office building, which is currently held for sale. The remaining $0.8 million of restructuring charges relates to productivity and cost reduction actions at the Company’s domestic and European operations. The Company continues to focus on actively managing its cost structure and reducing fixed costs in light of the ongoing market challenges.
Income from Extinguishment of Loan
During the fourth fiscal quarter, the Company received formal forgiveness of its PPP Loan in the amount of $8.2 million. The Company recorded $8.2 million in income from extinguishment of loan in its consolidated statement of operations in fiscal 2021. See Note G, Debt, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on the PPP loan.
Interest Expense
Interest expense of $2.4 million for fiscal 2021 was $0.5 million higher than fiscal 2020 on a higher average interest rate, partially offset by a lower average balance on the domestic revolver.
Other income (expense), net
In fiscal 2021, other expense, net, increased $1.8 million primarily due to the impact of currency movements related to the euro and Asian currencies.
Income Taxes
The effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 is -200.0% compared to 9.5% for fiscal 2020. During the current fiscal year, the Company received full forgiveness of its PPP loan which resulted in an increase to the effective tax rate of 17.5%. In the prior year, the Company’s management determined that the carrying value of certain goodwill and intangibles exceeded the fair value and a $27.6 million impairment loss was calculated, which resulted in a decrease to the prior year effective tax rate of 13.8%. During the current fiscal year, the Company was able to take advantage of the newly enacted high tax exception regulations. The Company filed its federal tax return utilizing this exception and had no global intangible low taxed income (“GILTI”) inclusion increasing the current rate by 12.4%. Due to continued historical domestic losses and uncertain future domestic earnings, the Company recognized a full domestic valuation allowance reducing the effective tax rate by 248.2%.
The Company maintains valuation allowances when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. Changes in valuation allowances from period to period are included in the tax provision in the period of change. In determining whether a valuation allowance is required, the Company takes into account such factors as prior earnings history, expected future earnings, carry-back and carry-forward periods, and tax strategies that could potentially enhance the likelihood of realization of a deferred tax asset. The Company has evaluated the likelihood of whether the net domestic deferred tax assets would be realized and concluded that it is more likely than not that all of deferred tax assets would not be realized. Management believes that it is more likely than not that the results of future operations will not generate sufficient taxable income and foreign source income to realize all the domestic deferred tax assets, therefore, a valuation allowance in the amount of $24.4 million, included in income tax expense (benefit) on the consolidated statement of operations, has been recorded for fiscal year 2021.
Order Rates
As of June 30, 2021, the Company’s backlog of orders scheduled for shipment during the next six months (six-month backlog) was $70.3 million or approximately 6% higher than the six-month backlog of $66.6 million as of June 30, 2020. The increased backlog is primarily attributable to the improvement in order rates through the second half of the fiscal year, as the global economy began to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Fiscal Years 2021 and 2020
The net cash provided by operating activities in fiscal 2021 totaled $6.5 million, a decrease of $2.6 million from the prior fiscal year. The positive operating cash flow was generated by continued progress in working capital reduction efforts, which contributed $3.4 million during the year before considering the $3.2 million reclassification, net of the $4.8 million impairment recorded to restructuring expenses, of the corporate office building as a current asset held for sale as of June 30, 2021. The largest contributions came from inventory reduction ($5.6 million) and increased trade payables ($5.3 million). These improvements were partially offset by an increase in trade receivables ($8.8 million) resulting from the increased sales volume in the fourth quarter of the current fiscal year.
The net cash used by investing activities for fiscal 2021 primarily represents capital spending activity totaling $4.5 million, partially offset by the receipt of $1.5 million on the note receivable related to the sale of the assets of a previously owned subsidiary of the Company in fiscal 2019. The capital spending amount reflects a $6.2 million (58.3%) decrease in spending on capital projects compared to fiscal 2020. Given the extreme economic uncertainty brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company limited fiscal 2021 capital spending to critical replacement items and spending needed to bring the new Lufkin facility online.
The net cash used by financing activities relates primarily to payments of long-term debt ($3.9 million), along with payments for withholding taxes on stock compensation ($0.2 million) and dividends paid to a non-controlling interest ($0.2 million). During fiscal 2021, the Company did not purchase any shares as part of its Board-authorized stock repurchase program. The Company has 315,000 shares remaining under its authorized stock repurchase plan.
Future Liquidity and Capital Resources
On June 29, 2018, the Company entered into a Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with BMO Harris Bank N.A. (“BMO”) that provided for the assignment and assumption of the previously existing loans between the Company and Bank of Montreal (the “2016 Credit Agreement”) and subsequent amendments into a term loan (the “Term Loan”) and revolving credit loans (each a “Revolving Loan” and, collectively, the “Revolving Loans,” and, together with the Term Loan, the “Loans”). Pursuant to the Credit Agreement, BMO agreed to make the Term Loan to the Company in a principal amount not to exceed $35.0 million and the Company may, from time to time prior to the maturity date, enter into Revolving Loans in amounts not to exceed, in the aggregate, $50.0 million (the “Revolving Credit Commitment”). The Credit Agreement also allows the Company to obtain Letters of Credit from BMO, which if drawn upon by the beneficiary thereof and paid by BMO, would become Revolving Loans. Under the Credit Agreement, the Company may not pay cash dividends on its common stock in excess of $3.0 million in any fiscal year.
On March 4, 2019, the Company entered into a second amendment (the “Second Amendment”) to the Credit Agreement. The Second Amendment reduced the principal amount of the term loan commitment under the Credit Agreement from $35.0 million to $20.0 million. In connection with the Second Amendment, the Company issued an amended and restated term note in the amount of $20.0 million to the Bank, which amended the original $35.0 million note provided under the Credit Agreement.
Prior to entering into the Second Amendment, the outstanding principal amount of the term loan (the “Term Loan”) under the Credit Agreement was $10.8 million. On the date of the Second Amendment, the Bank made an additional advance on the Term Loan to the Company in the amount of $9.2 million. The Second Amendment also extended the maturity date of the Term Loan from January 2, 2020 to March 4, 2026, and added a requirement that the Company make principal installments of $0.5 million per quarter starting with the quarter ending June 30, 2019.
The Second Amendment also reduced the applicable margin for purposes of determining the interest rate applicable to the Term Loan. Previously, the applicable margin was 3.00%, which was added to the Monthly Reset LIBOR Rate or the Adjusted LIBOR, as applicable. Under the Second Amendment, the applicable margin was between 1.375% and 2.375%, depending on the Company’s total funded debt to EBITDA ratio.
The Second Amendment also adjusted certain financial covenants made by the Company under the Credit Agreement. Specifically, the Company covenanted (i) not to allow its total funded debt to EBITDA ratio to be greater than 3.00 to 1.00 (the cap had previously been 3.50 to 1.00 for quarters ending on or before September 30, 2019 and 3.25 to 1.00 for quarters ending on or about December 31, 2019 through September 30, 2020), and (ii) that its tangible net worth will not be less than $100.0 million plus 50% of net income for each fiscal year ending on and after June 30, 2019 for which net income is a positive number (the $100.0 million figure had previously been $70.0 million).
On January 28, 2020, the Company entered into a third amendment (the “Third Amendment”) to the Credit Agreement. The Third Amendment restated the financial covenant provisions related to the maximum allowable ratio of total funded debt to EBITDA from 3.00 to 1.00 to 4.00 to 1.00 for the quarter ended December 27, 2019, 5.00 to 1.00 for the quarter ending March 27, 2020, 4.00 to 1.00 for the quarter ending June 30, 2020, 3.50 to 1.00 for the quarter ending September 25, 2020 and 3.00 to 1.00 for quarters ending on or after December 25, 2020. For purposes of determining EBITDA, the Third Amendment added back extraordinary expenses (not to exceed $3.9 million) related to the previously reported isolated product performance issue on one of the Company’s oil and gas transmission models at certain installations. Under the Third Amendment, the applicable margin for revolving loans, letters of credit, and term loans was between 1.25% and 3.375%, depending on the Company’s total funded debt to EBITDA ratio.
On April 17, 2020, the Company entered into a promissory note (the “PPP Note”) evidencing an unsecured loan in the amount of $8.2 million (the “PPP Loan”) made to the Company under the PPP. The PPP was established under the CARES Act and is a program under the U.S. SBA. The PPP Loan to the Company is administered by BMO. The PPP Loan has a two-year term and bears interest at a rate of 1.0% per annum. Monthly principal payments are deferred until April 2022.
In connection with the PPP Loan, the Company entered into a fourth amendment to the Credit Agreement (the “Fourth Amendment”) on April 17, 2020. The Fourth Amendment: (1) permits the Company to incur indebtedness in the form of the PPP Loan notwithstanding the Credit Agreement’s restrictions limiting the Company’s ability to incur indebtedness, and (2) provides that the PPP Loan (to the extent that the PPP Loan is forgiven) shall be disregarded for purposes of calculating financial covenants in the Credit Agreement. Any unforgiven portion of the PPP Loan and the interest thereon will not be disregarded for purposes of calculating the financial covenants.
On July 22, 2020, the Company entered into a fifth amendment (the “Fifth Amendment”) to the Credit Agreement that amends the Credit Agreement dated as of June 29, 2018, as amended between the Company and BMO. The Fifth Amendment reduced BMO’s Revolving Credit Commitment from $50.0 million to $45.0 million. The Fifth Amendment also gives the Company the option to make interest-only payments on the Term Loan for quarterly payments occurring on September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020, and limits the Company’s Capital Expenditures for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2021 to $10.0 million.
The Fifth Amendment provides the Company with relief from its Total Funded Debt to EBITDA ratio financial covenant under the Credit Agreement through (and including) the earlier of June 30, 2021 or a date selected by the Company. During the financial covenant relief period:
●
The “Applicable Margin” to be applied to Revolving Loans, the Term Loan, and the Commitment/Facility Fee will be increased to 3.25%, 3.875%, and 0.20%, respectively.
●
The Company may not make certain restricted payments (specifically, cash dividends, distributions, purchases, redemptions or other acquisitions of or with respect to shares of its common stock or other common equity interests).
●
The Company must maintain liquidity (as defined in the Fifth Amendment) of at least $15.0 million.
●
The Company must maintain minimum EBITDA of at least (1) $1.0 million for the fiscal quarter ending June 30, 2020 and the two fiscal quarters ending on or about September 30, 2020; (2) $2.5 million for the three fiscal quarters ending on or about December 31, 2020; (3) $6.0 million for the four fiscal quarters ending on or about March 31, 2021; and (4) $10.0 million for the four fiscal quarters ending June 30, 2021.
For purposes of the minimum EBITDA financial covenant and the Total Funded Debt to EBITDA ratio, the Fifth Amendment clarified that EBITDA shall exclude any gain that is realized on the forgiveness of the Small Business Administration (“SBA”) Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan that the Company previously received.
The Fifth Amendment also changed the definition of “LIBOR” (used in calculating interest on Eurodollar Loans), “Monthly Reset LIBOR Rate” (used in calculating interest on LIBOR Loans), and “LIBOR Quoted Rate” (used in the definition of “Base Rate,” which is used in calculating interest on Letters of Credit that are drawn upon and not timely reimbursed).
The Company also entered into a Deposit Account Control Agreement with the Bank, reflecting the Bank’s security interest in deposit accounts the Company maintains with the Bank. Under the Fifth Amendment, the Bank may not provide a notice of exclusive control of a deposit account (thereby obtaining exclusive control of the account) prior to the occurrence or existence of a Default or an Event of Default under the Credit Agreement or otherwise upon the occurrence or existence of an event or condition that would, but for the passage of time or the giving of notice, constitute a Default or an Event of Default under the Credit Agreement.
On January 27, 2021, the Company entered into a Forbearance Agreement and Amendment No. 6 to the Credit Agreement (the “Forbearance Agreement”) that further amended the Credit Agreement.
The Company entered into the Forbearance Agreement because the Company was not in compliance with its financial covenant to maintain a minimum EBITDA of at least $2.5 million for the three fiscal quarters ended as of December 25, 2020. In the Forbearance Agreement, the Bank has agreed to forbear from exercising its rights and remedies against the Company under the Credit Agreement with respect to the Company’s noncompliance with the minimum EBITDA financial covenant during the period (the “Forbearance Period”) commencing January 27, 2021 and ending on the earlier of (i) September 30, 2021, and (ii) the date on which a default under the Forbearance Agreement or Credit Agreement occurs. During the Forbearance Period, the Bank may continue to honor requests of the Company for draws on the revolving note provided by the Bank under the Credit Agreement, except that the revolving credit commitment is reduced from $45.0 million to $42.5 million during the Forbearance Period.
The Forbearance Agreement also added to the Company’s financial reporting requirements under the Credit Agreement by requiring the Company to provide the Bank with monthly forecasts of the Company’s financial statements, and monthly reports on the Company’s six-month backlog.
When the Forbearance Period ends on September 30, 2021, the Bank’s forbearance under the Forbearance Agreement will cease, and, therefore, on December 31, 2021, the Company is subject to the Total Funded Debt to EBITDA ratio financial covenant of 3.00 to 1.00. Further, upon an event of default and upon notice from the Bank, the Company’s obligations under the Loan Documents would be accelerated and become due at the default rate, and the Bank may exercise its rights and remedies under the Credit Agreement for any occurrence and continuation of default under the Credit Agreement.
For the quarter ended June 30, 2021, as a result of the Forbearance Agreement, the Company was not required to meet the minimum EBITDA financial covenant. The Company expects to be in compliance with the terms of the Credit Agreement following the forbearance period, and therefore continues to classify its debt as long term.
The Company remains in compliance with its liquidity and other financial covenants, and has agreed to provide additional financial reports to BMO.
Borrowings under the Credit Agreement are secured by substantially all of the Company’s personal property, including accounts receivable, inventory, machinery and equipment, and intellectual property. The Company has also pledged 100% of its equity interests in certain domestic subsidiaries and 65% of its equity interests in certain foreign subsidiaries. The Company also entered into a Collateral Assignment of Rights under Purchase Agreement for its acquisition of Veth Propulsion. To effect these security interests, the Company entered into various amendment and assignment agreements that consent to the assignment of certain agreements previously entered into between the Company and the Bank of Montreal in connection with the 2016 Credit Agreement. The Company also amended and assigned to BMO a Negative Pledge Agreement that it has previously entered into with Bank of Montreal, pursuant to which it agreed not to sell, lease or otherwise encumber real estate that it owns except as permitted by the Credit Agreement and the Negative Pledge Agreement.
Upon the occurrence of an Event of Default, BMO may take the following actions upon written notice to the Company: (1) terminate its remaining obligations under the Credit Agreement; (2) declare all amounts outstanding under the Credit Agreement to be immediately due and payable; and (3) demand the Company to immediately Cash Collateralize L/C Obligations in an amount equal to 105% of the aggregate L/C Obligations or a greater amount if BMO determines a greater amount is necessary. If such Event of Default is due to the Company’s bankruptcy, BMO may take the three actions listed above without notice to the Company.
On March 3, 2021 the Company submitted its application for forgiveness of the PPP Loan. The application was supported by documentation of qualified expenses and compliance of eligibility with the program. On June 16, 2021 the Company was notified by the SBA that the PPP loan was fully forgiven. The Company recorded the forgiveness as income from extinguishment of loan. This is described further in Note G, Debt, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
The Company’s balance sheet remains strong, there are no material off-balance-sheet arrangements, and it continues to have sufficient liquidity for near-term needs. The Company had approximately $27.1 million of available borrowings under the Credit Agreement as of June 30, 2021. The Company expects to continue to generate enough cash from operations, as well as its credit facilities, to meet its operating and investing needs. As of June 30, 2021, the Company also had cash of $12.3 million, primarily at its overseas operations. These funds, with some restrictions and tax implications, are available for repatriation as deemed necessary by the Company. In fiscal 2022, the Company expects to contribute $0.7 million to its defined benefit pension plans, the minimum contribution required.
Net working capital increased $6.2 million, or 5.7%, during fiscal 2021 and the current ratio (calculated as total current assets divided by total current liabilities) decreased from 2.6 at June 30, 2020 to 2.4 at June 30, 2021. The increase in net working capital was primarily the result of the reclassification of the assets currently held for sale ($9.5 million) from long term assets to current assets. Excluding this one-off movement, working capital decreased by $3.4 million. This reduction was the result of a focused inventory reduction effort ($5.6 million), increased trade payables ($5.3 million) and accrued expenses ($9.2 million), partially offset by a volume driven increase to trade receivables ($8.8 million) and a reclassification of a component of short term debt back to long term ($2.7 million).
The Company expects capital expenditures to be approximately $10 million - $12 million in fiscal 2022. These anticipated expenditures reflect the Company’s plans to invest in modern equipment to drive efficiencies, quality improvements and cost reductions.
Management believes that available cash, the BMO credit facility, cash generated from future operations, and potential access to debt markets will be adequate to fund the Company’s capital requirements for the foreseeable future.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
The Company had no material off-balance sheet arrangements as of June 30, 2021 and 2020.
Other Matters
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of this Annual Report requires management’s judgment to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the dates of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. There can be no assurance that actual results will not differ from those estimates.
The Company’s significant accounting policies are described in Note A, Significant Accounting Policies, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements. Not all of these significant accounting policies require management to make difficult, subjective, or complex judgments or estimates. However, the policies management considers most critical to understanding and evaluating its reported financial results are the following:
Accounts Receivable
The Company performs ongoing credit evaluations of its customers and adjusts credit limits based on payment history and the customer’s credit-worthiness as determined by review of current credit information. The Company continuously monitors collections and payments from its customers and maintains a provision for estimated credit losses based upon its historical experience and any specific customer-collection issues. In addition, senior management reviews the accounts receivable aging on a monthly basis to determine if any receivable balances may be uncollectible. Although the Company’s accounts receivable are dispersed among a large customer base, a significant change in the liquidity or financial position of any one of its largest customers could have a material adverse impact on the collectability of its accounts receivable and future operating results.
Inventory
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost has been determined by the last-in, first-out (LIFO) method for the majority of the inventories located in the United States, and by the first-in, first-out (FIFO) method for all other inventories. Management specifically identifies obsolete products and analyzes historical usage, forecasted production based on future orders, demand forecasts, and economic trends when evaluating the adequacy of the reserve for excess and obsolete inventory. The adjustments to the reserve are estimates that could vary significantly, either favorably or unfavorably, from the actual requirements if future economic conditions, customer demand or competitive conditions differ from expectations.
Assets Held for Sale
Assets that will be recovered principally through sale rather than in its continuing use in operations are reclassified out of property, plant and equipment and into assets held for sale if all of the following criteria are met: (a) management, having the authority to approve the action, commits to a plan to sell the asset(s); (b) the asset is available for immediate sale in its present condition subject only to terms that are usual and customary for sales of such assets; (c) an active program to locate a buyer, and other actions required to complete the plan to sell the asset have been initiated; (d) the sale of the asset is probable and the transfer of the asset is expected to qualify for recognition as a completed sale within a year; (e) the asset is being actively marketed for sale at a price that is reasonable in relation to its current fair value; and (f) actions required to complete the plan indicate that it is unlikely that significant changes to the plan will be made or that plan will be withdrawn.
Assets Held for Sale are carried at fair value less costs to sell, or net book value, whichever is lower. The Company ceases to record depreciation expense at the time of designation as held for sale.
Long-lived Assets
The Company reviews long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in business circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be fully recoverable. For property, plant and equipment and other long-lived assets, including intangible assets, the Company performs undiscounted operating cash flow analyses to determine if an impairment exists. If an impairment is determined to exist, any related impairment loss is calculated based on fair value. Fair value is primarily determined using discounted cash flow analyses; however, other methods may be used to substantiate the discounted cash flow analyses, including third party valuations when necessary.
Warranty
The Company engages in extensive product quality programs and processes, including actively monitoring and evaluating the quality of its suppliers. However, its warranty obligation is affected by product failure rates, the extent of the market affected by the failure and the expense involved in satisfactorily addressing the situation. The warranty reserve is established based on the Company’s best estimate of the amounts necessary to settle future and existing claims on products sold as of the balance sheet date. When evaluating the adequacy of the reserve for warranty costs, management takes into consideration the term of the warranty coverage, historical claim rates and costs of repair, knowledge of the type and volume of new products and economic trends. While the Company believes that the warranty reserve is adequate and that the judgment applied is appropriate, such amounts estimated to be due and payable in the future could differ materially from what actually transpires.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
The Company provides a wide range of benefits to employees and retired employees, including pensions and postretirement health care coverage. Plan assets and obligations are recorded annually based on the Company’s measurement date utilizing various actuarial assumptions such as discount rates, expected return on plan assets, compensation increases, retirement and mortality tables, and health care cost trend rates as of that date. The approach used to determine the annual assumptions are as follows:
●
Discount Rate - based on the Willis Towers Watson BOND:Link model at June 30, 2021 as applied to the expected payouts from the pension plans. This yield curve is made up of Corporate Bonds rated AA or better.
●
Expected Return on Plan Assets - based on the expected long-term average rate of return on assets in the pension funds, which is reflective of the current and projected asset mix of the funds and considers historical returns earned on the funds.
●
Compensation Increase - reflect the long-term actual experience, the near-term outlook and assumed inflation.
●
Retirement and Mortality Rates - based upon the Society of Actuaries PRI-2012 base tables for annuitants and non-annuitants, adjusted for generational mortality improvement based on the Society of Actuaries modified MP-2020 projection scale.
●
Health Care Cost Trend Rates - developed based upon historical cost data, near-term outlook and an assessment of likely long-term trends.
Measurements of net periodic benefit cost are based on the assumptions used for the previous year-end measurements of assets and obligations. The Company reviews its actuarial assumptions on an annual basis and makes modifications to the assumptions when appropriate. The effects of the modifications are recorded currently or amortized over future periods. Based on information provided by its independent actuaries and other relevant sources, the Company believes that the assumptions used are reasonable; however, changes in these assumptions could impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Income Taxes and Valuation Allowances
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The Company maintains valuation allowances when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. In determining whether a valuation allowance is required, the Company takes into account such factors as prior earnings history, expected future earnings, carry-back and carry-forward periods, and tax strategies that could potentially enhance the likelihood of realization of a deferred tax asset. Based on the above criteria the Company has determined that a full valuation allowance is appropriate as relates to its domestic operations. A full domestic valuation allowance of $24.4 million has been recognized in fiscal 2021. The recognition of a valuation allowance does not affect the availability of the tax credits as the Company realizes earnings.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note A, Significant Accounting Policies, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recently issued accounting standards.