Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on May 29, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
Recent Developments
On March 1, 2021, we entered into the Business Combination Agreement with Merger Sub, QOMPLX and the QOMPLX Stockholder Representative.
QOMPLX is a cloud-native leader in risk analytics that provides technology solutions in the cybersecurity, risk transfer, and finance spaces. QOMPLX’s customers rapidly ingest, transform, and contextualize large, complex, and disparate data sources using our platform and solutions in order to better quantify, model, and predict risks and make critical operational decisions. QOMPLX’s technology platform delivers valuable operational services that are enhanced by QOMPLX’s domain expertise to help organizations develop more informed risk strategies and make quality decisions in demanding areas, such as cybersecurity, insurance, finance and government.
The Business Combination Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby were approved by the boards of directors of each of Tailwind, Merger Sub and QOMPLX.
The Business Combination Agreement provides for, among other things, the following transactions: (i) QOMPLX will change its name to “QOMPLX Operations, Inc.”; (ii) our certificate of incorporation and bylaws will be amended and restated; and (iii) Merger Sub will merge with and into QOMPLX, with QOMPLX as the surviving company in the Merger, and after giving effect to such Merger, continuing as our wholly owned subsidiary. In addition, in connection with the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement, we are expected to change our name to “QOMPLX, Inc.” and QOMPLX is expected to consummate each of the acquisitions of Sentar and substantially all assets of Tyche.
Immediately prior to the effective time of the Business Combination, in accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions of the Business Combination Agreement, outstanding shares of QOMPLX (other than treasury shares and shares with respect to which appraisal rights under the Delaware General Corporation Law are properly exercised and not withdrawn) will be exchanged for shares of New QOMPLX Common Stock and outstanding QOMPLX vested options to purchase shares of QOMPLX will be exchanged for comparable options to purchase New QOMPLX Common Stock, in each case, based on an implied QOMPLX equity value of $850,000,000. This implied equity value of $850,000,000 is increased by the aggregate exercise price of vested options used to purchase shares of QOMPLX and is reduced by the accrued and unpaid interest under the Notes issued pursuant to the Bridge Financing Agreement. Unvested and unexercised QOMPLX options will also be exchanged for comparable options to purchase New QOMPLX Common Stock based on the same exchange ratio that is used for the exchange of the vested options to purchase shares of QOMPLX.
Concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, we entered into (i) the Subscription Agreements with certain investors, including, among others, Cannae and additional third party investors and (ii) the Bridge Financing Agreement with QOMPLX, Cannae and certain other stockholders of QOMPLX. Pursuant to the Subscription Agreements, (A) each investor agreed to subscribe for and purchase, and we agreed to issue and sell to such investors, on the closing date of the Business Combination substantially concurrently with the closing of the Business Combination, an aggregate of 16,000,000 shares of New QOMPLX Common Stock for a purchase price of $10.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $160,000,000 and (B) we agreed to issue an additional 835,539 shares of New QOMPLX Common Stock to Cannae in exchange for its agreement to act as the lead investor in the PIPE Financing with a $50,000,000 commitment. Pursuant to the Bridge Financing Agreement, QOMPLX has agreed to issue the Notes to the investors party thereto in an aggregate principal amount of $20,000,000 and we have agreed to, subject to, and conditioned upon the occurrence of, and effective as of immediately prior to, the closing of the Business Combination, assume the Notes and satisfy and discharge the principal amount and accrued and unpaid interest under each Note as of such time by way of issuance of one share of New QOMPLX Common Stock for every $10.00 of principal amount and accrued and unpaid interest payable on a Note as of such time.
Consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement are subject to customary conditions of the respective parties, including receipt of approval from stockholders of each of Tailwind and QOMPLX for consummation of the transactions and certain other actions related thereto by our stockholders.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from May 29, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering described below and, subsequent to our initial public offering, identifying a target company for a business combination, including the Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the initial public offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from May 29, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $281,904, which consists of operating costs of $387,335, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account of $105,431.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On September 9, 2020, we consummated our initial public offering of 33,421,570 units at a price of $10.00 per unit, which includes the partial exercise by the underwriter of its over-allotment option in the amount of 3,421,570, generating gross proceeds of $334,215,700. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 9,700,000 private placement warrants at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant in a private placement to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $9,700,000.
Following the initial public offering, the partial exercise of the over-allotment option by the underwriter’s and the sale of the private placement warrants, a total of $334,215,700 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $18,847,894 in transaction costs, including $6,684,314 of underwriting fees, $11,697,550 of deferred underwriting fees and $466,030 of other offering costs.
For the period from May 29, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $454,858. Net loss of $281,904 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $105,431. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $67,523 of cash.
As of December 31, 2020, we had marketable securities held in the trust account of $334,321,131. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account to complete our business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $2,245,798 of cash held outside of the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we would repay the working capital loans out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. Otherwise, the working capital loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the trust account. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the trust account to repay the working capital loans but no proceeds held in the trust account would be used to repay the working capital loans. The working capital loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a business combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such working capital loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant, of the post business combination entity. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such working capital loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. For example, in connection with the Business Combination, we intend to issue securities in the PIPE Financing pursuant to the Subscription Agreements. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of our sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial, and administrative support services to the Company. We began incurring these fees on September 9, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of our business combination and the Company’s liquidation.
The underwriter in the initial public offering is entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, or $11,697,550 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that the Company completes a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the period reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, the common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Common Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Net income per common share, basic and diluted for Class A common stock is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the trust account, net of applicable franchise and income taxes, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A common stock outstanding for the period. Net loss per common share, basic and diluted for Class B common stock is calculated by dividing net income less income attributable to Class A common stock, by the weighted average number of shares of Class B common stock outstanding for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.