Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in Item 1A “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a leading packaged food company focused on developing, manufacturing, marketing, selling and distributing snack products in North America, providing a wide range of snack cakes, donuts, sweet rolls, breakfast pastries, cookies, snack pies and related products. As of December 31, 2020, we operate five baking facilities and utilize distribution centers and third-party warehouses to distribute our products. Our DTW product distribution system allows us to deliver to our customers’ warehouses. Our customers in turn distribute to their retail stores and/or distributors.
The Company has one reportable segment: Snacking (formerly referred to as Sweet Baked Goods, or “SBG”). The Snacking segment consists of sweet baked goods, cookies, bread and buns and frozen retail products that are sold under the Hostess®, Dolly Madison®, Cloverhill®, Big Texas®, and Voortman® brands. Through August 30, 2019, we operated in two reportable segments: SBG and In-Store Bakery (“ISB”). The In-Store Bakery segment consisted of Superior on Main® and private label products sold through the in-store bakery section of grocery and club stores. The Company divested its In-Store Bakery segment's operations on August 30, 2019.
Hostess® is the second leading brand by market share within the Sweet Baked Goods ("SBG") category, according to Nielsen U.S. total universe. For the 52-week period ended December 26, 2020 our branded SBG products (which include Hostess®, Dolly Madison®, Cloverhill®, and Big Texas®) market share was 19.5% per Nielsen’s U.S. SBG category data. Our Voortman® branded products include the #1 creme wafer and sugar-free cookie products within the larger cookie category.
Principal Components of Operating Results
Net Revenue
We generate revenue through selling packaged snacks under the Hostess® group of brands, which includes iconic products such as CupCakes, Twinkies®, Donettes®, Ding Dongs®, Zingers®, Danishes, Honey Buns and Coffee Cakes, as well as cookies, wafers and sugar-free products under the Voortman® brand. We also sell products under the Dolly Madison®, Cloverhill® and Big Texas® brands along with private label products. Our product assortment is sold to customers’ warehouses and distribution centers by the case or in display-ready corrugate units. Retailers display and sell our products to the end consumer in single-serve, multi-pack or club-pack formats. We sell our products primarily to supermarket chains, national mass merchandisers and convenience and dollar stores, along with a smaller portion of our product sales going to club stores, vending, drug, and other retail outlets.
Our revenues are driven by average net price and total volume of products sold. Factors that impact unit pricing and sales volume include product mix, the cost of ingredients, promotional activities, industry capacity, new product initiatives and quality and consumer preferences. We do not keep a significant backlog of finished goods inventory, as our baked products are promptly shipped to our distribution centers after being produced and then distributed to customers.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold consists of ingredients, packaging, labor, energy, other production costs, warehousing and transportation costs including in-bound freight, inter-plant transportation and distribution of our products to customers. The cost of ingredients and packaging represent the majority of our total costs of goods sold. All costs that are incurred at the bakeries, including the depreciation of bakery facilities and equipment, are included in cost of goods sold. We do not allocate any corporate functions into cost of goods sold.
Our cost of ingredients consists principally of flour, sweeteners, edible oils and compound coating, which are subject to substantial price fluctuations, as is the cost of paper, corrugate, films and plastics used to package our products. The prices for raw materials are influenced by a number of factors, including the weather, crop production, transportation and processing costs, government regulation and policies and worldwide market supply and demand. We also rely on fuel products, such as natural gas, diesel, propane and electricity, to operate our bakeries and produce our products. Fluctuations in the prices of the
raw materials or fuel products used in the production, packaging or transportation of our products affect the cost of products sold and our product pricing strategy. We utilize forward buying strategies through short-term and long-term advance purchase contracts to lock in prices for certain high-volume raw materials, packaged components and certain fuel inputs. Through these initiatives, we believe we are able to obtain competitive pricing.
Advertising and Marketing
Our advertising and marketing expenses relate to wire racks and corrugate displays delivered to customers to display our products off shelf, field marketing and merchandising services to reset and check our store inventory on a regular basis. We also invest in advertising campaigns, which include social media, print, online advertising, local promotional events, monthly agency fees and payroll costs.
Selling Expense
Selling expenses primarily include sales management, employment, travel, and related expenses, as well as broker fees. We utilize brokers for sales support, including managing promotional activities and order processing.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses primarily include employee and related expenses for the accounting, planning, customer service, legal, human resources, corporate operations, research and development, purchasing, logistics and executive functions. Also included are professional service fees related to audit and tax, legal, outsourced information technology functions, transportation planning, headquarters and other office sites and insurance costs, as well as the depreciation and amortization of corporate assets.
Non-Controlling Interest
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, Mr. Metropoulos and the Metropoulos Entities held equity investment in us primarily through Class B limited partnership units in the Company’s subsidiary, Hostess Holdings (“Class B Units”), and an equal number of shares of the Company’s Class B common stock (“Class B Stock”). Our Class B Stock had voting, but no economic rights, while Hostess Holdings’ Class B Units had economic, but no voting rights. Each Class B Unit, together with a share of Class B Stock held by the Metropoulos Entities, was exchangeable for a share of the Company’s Class A common stock (or at the option of the Company, the cash equivalent thereof). The Company holds 100% of the general partnership interest in Hostess Holdings and, since the final exchange described below, all of the limited partnership interests and consolidates Hostess Holdings in the Company’s consolidated financial statements. The interest of the Metropoulos Entities in Hostess Holdings’ Class B Units prior to the final exchange is reflected in our consolidated financial statements as a non-controlling interest. The Metropoulos Entities have eliminated their ownership through a series of exchanges of shares of Class B Stock and Class B Units for an equal number of Class A shares. As part of the final exchange, we repurchased 0.4 million shares of Class A common stock from the Metropoulos Entities. The remaining shares were purchased by third parties. At December 31, 2020, there were no outstanding shares of Class B common stock.
Factors Impacting Recent Results
COVID-19
The acute and far-reaching impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken by governments to contain the spread of the virus have impacted our operations during the year ended December 31, 2020. As consumers prepared for extended stays at home, we experienced an increase in consumption during the first and second quarters, particularly in our multi-pack products sold through grocery and mass retailer channels. Conversely, we experienced lower consumption of single-serve products, often consumed away from home. This trend has moderated during the remainder of the year; however, we cannot predict if these trends will sustain or reverse in future periods.
We have established a COVID-19 task force to monitor the rapidly evolving situation and recommend risk mitigation actions as deemed necessary. To date, we have experienced minimal disruption to our supply chain or distribution network, including the supply of our ingredients, and packaging or other sourced materials, though it is possible that more significant disruptions could occur if the COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact markets around the world. We are also working closely with all of our contract manufacturers, distributors and other external business partners. As a food producer, we are an essential service and our production and distribution facilities continue to operate. To protect our employees and ensure continuity of operations, we have implemented additional safety and sanitation measures in all of our facilities. We are monitoring our employees’ health and providing additional resources and protocols to enable effective social distancing and adherence to our stringent internal food safety guidelines, industry best practices and evolving CDC and other governmental guidelines. Although our corporate headquarters and other offices have remained open with additional safety and sanitation protocols, many non-production and warehouse team members, including sales, marketing and corporate employees, are adhering to social distancing guidelines by working from home and reducing person-to-person contact while supporting our ability to bring products to consumers.
We have adequate liquidity to pay for the costs associated with these additional measures while servicing our on-going operating and capital needs. However, we continue to actively monitor and will take action, as necessary, to preserve adequate liquidity and ensure that our business can continue to operate in this dynamic environment.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act was signed into law. The CARES Act provided a substantial stimulus and assistance package intended to address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including tax relief and government loans, grants and investments. Under the provisions of this act, we were able to defer the payment of $5.6 million of 2020 employer payroll taxes until 2021. Apart from this deferral and their impact on the general economy, including the labor market and consumer demand, neither the CARES Act nor any other government program intended to address COVID-19 had any material impact on our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020. We continue to monitor any effects that may result from the CARES Act and other stimulus programs.
Acquisition
On January 3, 2020, we completed the acquisition of all of the shares of the parent company of Voortman Cookies Limited (“Voortman”), a manufacturer of premium, branded wafers and cookies as well as sugar-free products. By adding the Voortman® brand, we believe we have greater growth opportunities provided by a more diverse portfolio of brands and products. Our consolidated statement of operations includes the operation of these assets from January 3, 2020 through December 31, 2020. In December 2020, we asserted claims for indemnification against the sellers under the terms of the Share Purchase Agreement pursuant to which we acquired Voortman for an aggregate of approximately $90 million Canadian Dollar (“CAD”) in damages arising out of alleged breaches by the sellers of certain representations, warranties and covenants contained in such agreement relating to periods prior to the closing of the acquisition. We have also submitted claims relating to these alleged breaches under the representation and warranty insurance policy we purchased in connection with the acquisition. Such insurance policy has a coverage limit of $42.5 million CAD. Although we strongly believe that our claims are meritorious, no assurance can be given as to whether we will recover all, or any part, of the amounts for which we have made such claims. No gains or receivables have been recognized related to these claims as of December 31, 2020.
Disposition
On August 30, 2019, we sold the In-Store Bakery operations, including relevant trademarks and licensing agreements, to an unrelated party. The In-Store Bakery operations provided products that were primarily sold in the in-store bakery section of the U.S. retail channels under the Superior on Main® brand or store-branded. We divested the operations to focus more on future investment in areas of our business that better leverage our core competencies.
Results of Operations
Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net Revenue
Net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $108.9 million, or 12.0%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Excluding In-Store Bakery, net revenue increased $137.6 million or 15.7%. The acquisition of Voortman contributed $96.2 million of net revenue. The remaining increase was attributed to higher volume of Hostess® branded multi-pack and bagged-donut products due to strong demand partially offset by lower sales of private label and non-Hostess® branded products. From a sales channel perspective, strong growth in the grocery, convenience and dollar channels was offset by lower sales in the mass channel.
Gross Profit
Gross profit was 35.0% of net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 195 basis points from a gross margin of 33.0% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase resulted primarily from the accretion from Voortman and efficiencies from higher sales volume as well as lower promotional activity. These benefits were partially offset by higher operating costs due to COVID-19.
Operating Costs and Expenses
Operating costs and expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by 34.6% from the year ended December 31, 2019. These costs increased primarily due to transition costs incurred to shift Voortman from a direct-to-store delivery operating model to a direct-to-warehouse model including contract termination costs for the independent distributors and severance costs, as well as normal costs of Voortman's continuing operations. 2020 operating costs also increased due to higher employee incentive compensation and an impairment charge related to the planned disposition of production equipment. 2019 operating costs reflect a $7.1 million gain on the valuation of a foreign currency contract originated to hedge the January 2020 purchase of Voortman in Canadian dollars.
Operating Income
Operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $135.3 million compared to $136.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The additional profits from Voortman's operations and higher Hostess® branded sales volume were offset by transition costs to shift Voortman to a warehouse model and lapping the prior year gain on remeasurement of the foreign currency contract.
Other Expense
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, interest expense related to our term loan was $41.8 million and $43.3 million, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020 we also recognized unrealized losses related to the remeasurement of certain CAD denominated liabilities.
Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate was 23.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 17.9% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in the effective tax rate was primarily due to the Class B for Class A share exchanges during 2019 and 2020. Subsequent to these exchanges, more income from Hostess Holdings, L.P was allocated to Hostess Brands, Inc. This increase was partially offset by state tax credits generated in 2020.
Net Income
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net income was $68.4 million compared to $77.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Higher gross margin due to the accretion of Voortman and the benefit of higher Hostess® branded sales volume was offset by costs incurred to transition Voortman DSD to warehouse distribution. In 2020, we also lapped the $7.1 million foreign currency contract remeasurement gain in 2019.
Earnings Per Share
Our earnings per Class A share was $0.52 (basic) and $0.51 (dilutive) for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.57 (basic) and $0.55 (dilutive) for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in basic and diluted earnings per share was due to the net income impacts noted above.
For a discussion of our results for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to our results for the year ended December 31, 2018, please see Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 26, 2020.
Segments
We have one reportable segment: Snacking (formerly referred to as Sweet Baked Goods, or “SBG”). The Snacking segment consists of sweet baked goods, cookies, bread and buns retail products that are sold under the Hostess®, Dolly Madison®, Cloverhill®, Big Texas®, and Voortman® brands. Through August 30, 2019, we operated in two reportable segments: SBG and In-Store Bakery. The In-Store Bakery segment consisted of Superior on Main® and private label products sold through the in-store bakery section of grocery and club stores. The Company divested its In-Store Bakery segment's operations on August 30, 2019.
We evaluate performance and allocate resources based on net revenue and gross profit. Information regarding the operations of these reportable segments is as follows:
(1)For all periods presented, capital expenditures consists of purchases of property and equipment and acquisition and development of software assets paid in cash or acquired through accounts payable.
RECONCILIATION OF NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
Adjusted net revenue, adjusted gross profit, adjusted operating income, adjusted net income, adjusted Class A net income, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EPS collectively referred to as “Non-GAAP Financial Measures,” are commonly used in our industry and should not be construed as an alternative to net revenue, gross profit, operating income, net income, net income attributed to Class A stockholders or earnings per share as indicators of operating performance (as determined in accordance with GAAP). These Non-GAAP Financial Measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. We included these Non-GAAP Financial Measures because we believe the measures provide management and investors with additional information to measure the Company's performance, estimate the Company's value and evaluate the Company's ability to service debt.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures are adjusted to exclude certain items that affect comparability. The adjustments are itemized in the tables below. You are encouraged to evaluate these adjustments and the reason we consider them appropriate for supplemental analysis. In evaluating adjustments, you should be aware that in the future the Company may incur expenses that are the same as or similar to some of the adjustments set forth below. The presentation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures should not be construed as an inference that future results will be unaffected by unusual or recurring items.
For example, we define adjusted EBITDA as net income adjusted to exclude (i) interest expense, net, (ii) depreciation and amortization (iii) income taxes and (iv) share-based compensation, as further adjusted to eliminate the impact of certain items that the Company does not consider indicative of its ongoing operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of the Company's results as reported under GAAP. For example, adjusted EBITDA:
•does not reflect the Company's capital expenditures, future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, the Company's working capital needs;
•does not reflect the significant interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, on the Company's debt; and
•does not reflect payments related to income taxes, the Tax Receivable Agreement or distributions to the non-controlling interest to reimburse its tax liability.
(1) Adjustments to net revenue represent initial slotting fees paid to to customers to obtain space in customer warehouses for the Voortman transition. Adjustments to operating costs included $8.0 million of selling expense, $8.9 million of general and administrative expenses and $4.3 million of business combination transaction costs on the consolidated statement of operations.
(2) Facility transition operating costs are included in general and administrative expenses on the consolidated statement of operations.
(3) COVID-19 operating costs are included in general and administrative expenses on the consolidated statement of operations. Total COVID-19 non-GAAP adjustments primarily consist of costs of incremental cleaning and sanitation, personal protective equipment and employee bonuses in the first half of 2020.
(1) Special employee incentive compensation is included in general and administrative expenses on the consolidated statement of operations.
(2) Facility transition costs are included in general and administrative expenses on the consolidated statement of operations.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA was $240.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $204.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The improvement in adjusted EBITDA was driven by the contribution of Voortman and higher volume of Hostess® branded products.
Adjusted EPS
Adjusted EPS was $0.75 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.61 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The improvement in adjusted EPS was driven by Voortman profitability and strong demand for Hostess® branded products.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are from the cash and cash equivalents on the balance sheet, future cash flow generated from operations, and availability under our revolving credit agreement (“Revolver”). We believe that cash flows from operations and the current cash and cash equivalents on the balance sheet will be sufficient to satisfy the anticipated cash requirements associated with our existing operations for at least the next 12 months. Our future cash requirements include the purchase commitments for certain raw materials and packaging used in our production process, scheduled rent on leased facilities, scheduled debt service payments on our term loan and settlements on related interest rate swap contracts, payments on our Tax Receivable Agreement, settlements on our outstanding foreign currency contracts and outstanding purchase orders on capital projects.
Our ability to generate sufficient cash from our operating activities depends on our future performance, which is subject to general economic, political, financial, competitive and other factors beyond our control. In addition, our future capital expenditures and other cash requirements could be higher than we currently expect as a result of various factors, including any expansion of our business that we undertake, including acquisitions. We consider all highly liquid investments purchased with an original maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents.
We had working capital, excluding cash, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 of $7.0 million and $8.1 million, respectively. We have the ability to borrow under our Revolver to meet obligations as they come due. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $94.5 million available for borrowing, net of letters of credit, under our Revolver.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash flows provided by operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $159.2 million and $144.0 million, respectively. The increase in operating cash flows was driven by an increase in net income after adjusting for non-cash items such as the current year increase in depreciation and amortization and prior year gain on the remeasurement of foreign currency contracts. Our operating cash flow also benefited from the deferral of certain employer payroll taxes allowed under the CARES Act.
Cash Flows provided by and used in Investing Activities
Investing activities used $374.3 million of cash for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to providing $22.9 million of cash for the year ended December 31, 2019. During 2020, we funded $316.0 million of the net cash required to purchase Voortman from cash on hand and the proceeds from an incremental term loan on our existing credit facility. During 2019, we received proceeds of $63.3 million from the sale of our In-Store Bakery business. Cash used for the purchase of property and equipment reflects planned investments in our bakeries, including Voortman, and our centralized distribution center.
Cash Flows provided by and used in Financing Activities
Financing activities provided $103.2 million of cash for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to using $28.1 million of cash for the year ended December 31, 2019. During 2020, cash proceeds of $140.0 million from the incremental term loan used to finance the purchase of Voortman were partially offset by related charges of $3.1 million. This incremental term loan increased the amount of principal repayments during 2020. Also during 2020, we paid $8.0 million to repurchase 2.0 million warrants and 0.4 million shares from the Metropoulos Entities as part of the exchange of their last remaining Class B units in Hostess Holdings, LP. In 2019, we incurred costs to refinance our First Lien Term Loan. Payments on the Tax Receivable Agreement increased in 2020 due to additional taxable basis created by Metropoulos Entity exchanges in 2019, which were monetized in 2020. These same exchanges decreased the amount of distributions to the non-controlling interest to cover tax liabilities related to net income allocated to Class B units.
Long-Term Debt
As of December 31, 2020, $1,102.8 million aggregate principal amount of our term loan and $5.5 million aggregate principal amount of letters of credit, reducing the amount available under the Revolver, were outstanding. See Note 15. Commitments and Contingencies to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding the letters of credit. We had no outstanding borrowings under our Revolver as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants under our term loan and the Revolver. The Revolver contains certain restrictive financial covenants. Based on our current and projected financial performance, we believe that we will comply with these covenants for the foreseeable future.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States requires the use of judgment, estimates and assumptions. We make such subjective determinations after careful consideration of our historical performance, management’s experience, current economic trends and events and information from outside sources. Inherent in this process is the possibility that actual results could differ from these estimates and assumptions for any particular period.
Our significant accounting policies are detailed in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements within Item 8. The following areas are the most important and require the most difficult, subjective judgments.
Trade and consumer promotion programs
We offer various sales incentive programs to customers, such as feature price discounts, in-store display incentives, cooperative advertising programs and new product introduction fees. The mix between promotional programs, which are classified as reductions in revenue in the statements of operations, and advertising or other marketing activities, which are classified as marketing and selling expenses in the consolidated statements of operations, fluctuates between periods based on our overall marketing plans, and such fluctuations have an impact on revenues. These trade programs also require management to make estimates about the expected total cost of the programs and related allocations amongst participants (who might have different levels of incentives based on various program requirements). These estimates are inherently uncertain and are generally based on historical experience, adjusted for any new facts or circumstances that might impact the ultimate cost estimate for a particular program or programs.
Goodwill and Indefinite-lived trade names
When evaluating goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment under U.S. GAAP, we may first perform an assessment of qualitative factors to determine if the fair value of the reporting unit or the intangible asset is more-likely-than-not greater than the carrying amount. Such qualitative factors include, but are not limited to, macro-economic conditions, market and industry conditions, cost considerations, competitive environment, share price fluctuations, overall financial performance and results of past impairment tests. Based on a review of the qualitative factors, if we determine it is not more-likely-than-not that the fair value is less than the carrying value, we may bypass the quantitative impairment test. We also may elect not to perform the qualitative assessment for some or all reporting units and perform a quantitative impairment test. For our 2020 and 2019 annual impairment testing, we elected to perform qualitative assessments for our reporting units. No indicators of impairment were noted.
If a quantitative test were to be utilized for any reporting unit, it would estimate the fair value of the reporting units and compared it to its carrying value. To the extent the fair value was in excess of the carrying value, no impairment would be recognized. Otherwise, an impairment loss would be recognized for the amount that the carrying value of a reporting unit, including goodwill, exceeded its fair value. In performing the quantitative test of goodwill, fair value would be determined based on a calculation which would give consideration to an income approach utilizing the discounted cash flow method and the market approach using the market comparable and market transaction methods.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized an impairment charge to the In-Store Bakery reporting segment goodwill of $1.0 million reflecting a change in certain market assumptions (level 1 inputs).
Our indefinite-lived intangible assets consist of trademarks and trade names. The $1,538.6 million and $1,408.6 million balances at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, were recognized as part of the Hostess Business Combination and the Voortman and Cloverhill acquisitions. The trademarks and trade names are integral to the Company’s identity and are expected to contribute indefinitely to our corporate cash flows. Fair value for trademarks and trade names was determined using the income approach. The application of the income approach was premised on a royalty savings method, whereby the trademark and trade names are valued by reference to the amount of royalty income they could generate if they were licensed, in an arm’s-length transaction, to a third party. These assets have been assigned an indefinite life and therefore are not amortized but rather evaluated for impairment annually using the qualitative or quantitative methods similar to goodwill. For 2020 and 2019, we performed a qualitative test. No indicators of impairment were noted.
Changes in certain significant assumptions could have a significant impact on the estimated fair value, and therefore, a future impairment or additional impairments could result for a portion of goodwill, long-lived assets or intangible assets.
Business Combinations
We account for business acquisitions using the purchase method of accounting. Assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and non-controlling interests are recorded at their estimated fair values at the acquisition date. The excess of purchase price over fair value of the net assets acquired, including the amount assigned to identifiable intangible assets, is recorded as goodwill. Given the time it takes to obtain pertinent information to finalize the acquired company’s balance sheet, it may be multiple quarters before we are able to finalize those initial fair value estimates. Accordingly, it is not uncommon for the initial estimates to be subsequently revised.
Tax Receivable Agreement
We recognize a liability on the consolidated balance sheet based on the undiscounted estimated future payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement. See Note 9. Tax Receivable Agreement to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information on the Tax Receivable Agreement. The most significant estimates utilized by management to calculate the corresponding liability is the Company’s increase in tax basis related to exchanges, future cash tax savings rates, which are projected based on current tax laws and the Company’s historical and future tax profile, and the allocation of the liability between short-term and long-term based on when the Company realizes certain tax attributes.
New Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding recently issued accounting standards.