Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
General
We are a Maryland corporation focused on investing in and managing Agency residential mortgage-backed securities, or Agency RMBS, mortgage servicing rights, or MSR, and other financial assets, which we collectively refer to as our target assets. We operate as a real estate investment trust, or REIT, as defined under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or the Code.
Our objective is to provide attractive risk-adjusted total return to our stockholders over the long term, primarily through dividends and secondarily through capital appreciation. We acquire and manage an investment portfolio of our target assets, which include the following:
•Agency RMBS (which includes inverse interest-only Agency securities classified as “Agency Derivatives” for purposes of U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP), meaning RMBS whose principal and interest payments are guaranteed by the Government National Mortgage Association (or Ginnie Mae), the Federal National Mortgage Association (or Fannie Mae), or the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (or Freddie Mac), or collectively, the government sponsored entities, or GSEs;
•MSR; and
•Other financial assets comprising approximately 5% to 10% of the portfolio (includes certain non-hedging transactions that may produce non-qualifying income for purposes of the REIT gross income tests).
Historically, we viewed our target assets in two strategies that were based on our core competencies of understanding and managing prepayment and credit risk. Our rates strategy included assets that were primarily sensitive to changes in interest rates and prepayment speeds, specifically Agency RMBS and MSR. Our credit strategy included assets that were primarily sensitive to changes in inherent credit risk, including non-Agency securities, meaning securities that are not issued or guaranteed by Ginnie Mae, Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac. In the first quarter of 2020, we experienced unprecedented market conditions as a result of the global COVID-19 pandemic, including unusually significant spread widening in both Agency RMBS and non-Agency securities. In response, we focused our efforts on raising excess liquidity and de-risking our portfolio. On March 25, 2020, we sold substantially all of our non-Agency securities in order to eliminate the risks posed by continued margin calls and ongoing funding concerns associated with the significant spread widening on these assets. We also sold approximately one-third of our Agency RMBS during the first quarter in order to reduce risk and raise cash to establish a strong defensive liquidity position to weather potential ongoing economic and market instability. Throughout the remainder of 2020, we focused on the composition of our Agency RMBS and MSR portfolio, deploying risk as the market entered a period of stabilization and asset price recovery. Going forward, management expects our capital to be fully allocated to our strategy of pairing Agency RMBS and MSR.
Our Agency RMBS portfolio is comprised of adjustable rate and fixed rate mortgage-backed securities backed by single-family and multi-family mortgage loans. All of our principal and interest Agency RMBS are Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac mortgage pass-through certificates or collateralized mortgage obligations that carry an implied rating of “AAA,” or Ginnie Mae mortgage pass-through certificates, which are backed by the guarantee of the U.S. government. The majority of these securities consist of whole pools in which we own all of the investment interests in the securities.
Within our MSR business, we acquire MSR assets, which represent the right to control the servicing of residential mortgage loans and the obligation to service the loans in accordance with relevant standards, from high-quality originators. We do not directly service the mortgage loans underlying the MSR we acquire; rather, we contract with appropriately licensed third-party subservicers to handle substantially all servicing functions in the name of the subservicer. As the servicer of record, however, we remain accountable to the GSEs for all servicing matters and, accordingly, provide substantial oversight of each of our subservicers.
We believe MSR are a natural fit for our portfolio over the long term. Our MSR business leverages our core competencies in prepayment and credit risk analytics and the MSR assets provide offsetting risks to our Agency RMBS, hedging both interest rate and mortgage spread risk. One of our goals is to create long-lasting relationships with high quality originators in order to facilitate our acquisition of MSR through both flow and bulk transactions.
In making our capital allocation decisions, we take into consideration a number of factors, including the opportunities available in the marketplace, the cost and availability of financing, and the cost of hedging interest rate, prepayment, credit and other portfolio risks. We have expertise in mortgage credit and may choose to invest again in those assets should the opportunity arise.
For the three months ended December 31, 2020, our net spread realized on the portfolio was slightly lower than the prior quarter, but higher than recent periods. Our average annualized portfolio yield was lower primarily due to higher amortization recognized on Agency RMBS due to prepayments, offset by lower servicing expenses on MSR. Cost of financing was lower as a result of the lower interest rate environment. The following table provides the average annualized yield on our assets, including Agency RMBS, non-Agency securities and MSR for the three months ended December 31, 2020, and the four immediately preceding quarters:
____________________
(1)Average annualized yield includes interest income on Agency RMBS and non-Agency securities and MSR servicing income, net of estimated amortization, and servicing expenses.
(2)Cost of financing includes swap and cap interest rate spread and amortization of upfront payments made or received upon entering.
We seek to deploy moderate leverage as part of our investment strategy. We generally finance our Agency RMBS securities through short- and long-term borrowings structured as repurchase agreements. We also finance our MSR through revolving credit facilities, term notes payable and convertible senior notes.
Our Agency RMBS, given their liquidity and high credit quality, are eligible for higher levels of leverage, while MSR, with less liquidity and/or more exposure to prepayment, utilize lower levels of leverage. As a result, our debt-to-equity ratio is determined by our portfolio mix as well as many additional factors, including the liquidity of our portfolio, the availability and price of our financing, the diversification of our counterparties and their available capacity to finance our assets, and anticipated regulatory developments. Over the past several quarters, we have generally maintained a debt-to-equity ratio range of 5.0 to 7.0 times to finance our securities portfolio and MSR, on a fully deployed capital basis. Our debt-to-equity ratio is directly correlated to the composition of our portfolio; specifically, the higher percentage of Agency RMBS we hold, the higher our debt-to-equity ratio is. Following the sale of substantially all of our non-Agency securities in the first quarter of 2020, debt-to-equity may increase over time. We may alter the percentage allocation of our portfolio among our target assets depending on the relative value of the assets that are available to purchase from time to time, including at times when we are deploying proceeds from offerings we conduct. See Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Financial Condition - Repurchase Agreements” for further discussion.
We recognize that investing in our target assets is competitive and we compete with other entities for attractive investment opportunities. We believe that our significant focus in the residential market, the extensive mortgage market expertise of our investment team, our strong analytics and our disciplined relative value investment approach give us a competitive advantage versus our peers.
We have elected to be treated as a REIT for U.S. federal income tax purposes. To qualify as a REIT we are required to meet certain investment and operating tests and annual distribution requirements. We generally will not be subject to U.S. federal income taxes on our taxable income to the extent that we annually distribute all of our net taxable income to stockholders, do not participate in prohibited transactions and maintain our intended qualification as a REIT. However, certain activities that we may perform may cause us to earn income which will not be qualifying income for REIT purposes. We have designated certain of our subsidiaries as taxable REIT subsidiaries, or TRSs, as defined in the Code, to engage in such activities. We also operate our business in a manner that will permit us to maintain our exemption from registration under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, or the 1940 Act. While we do not currently originate or service residential mortgage loans, certain of our subsidiaries have obtained the requisite licenses and approvals to own and manage MSR.
Through August 14, 2020, we were externally managed and advised by PRCM Advisers LLC, a subsidiary of Pine River Capital Management L.P., under the terms of a Management Agreement between us and PRCM Advisers. We terminated the Management Agreement effective August 14, 2020 for “cause” in accordance with Section 15(a) thereof. On August 15, 2020, we completed our transition to self-management and directly hired the senior management team and other personnel who had historically provided services to us.
Factors Affecting our Operating Results
Our net interest income includes income from our securities portfolio, including the amortization of purchase premiums and accretion of purchase discounts. Net interest income, as well as our servicing income, net of subservicing expenses, will fluctuate primarily as a result of changes in market interest rates, our financing costs and prepayment speeds on our assets. Interest rates, financing costs and prepayment rates vary according to the type of investment, conditions in the financial markets, competition and other factors, none of which can be predicted with any certainty.
On January 1, 2020 we adopted Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which changed the impairment model for most financial assets and certain other instruments. Valuation allowances for credit losses on available-for-sale, or AFS, debt securities are recognized, rather than direct reductions in the amortized cost of the investments, regardless of whether the impairment is considered to be other-than-temporary. We use a discounted cash flow method to estimate and recognize an allowance for credit losses on AFS securities. The estimated allowance for credit losses is equal to the difference between the prepayment adjusted contractual cash flows with no credit losses and the prepayment adjusted expected cash flows with credit losses, discounted at the effective interest rate on the AFS security that was in effect upon adoption of the standard. The contractual cash flows and expected cash flows are based on management’s best estimate and take into consideration current prepayment assumptions, lifetime expected losses based on past loss experience, current market conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts of future conditions. The allowance for credit losses causes an increase in the AFS security amortized cost and recognizes an allowance for credit losses in the same amount.
Fair Value Measurement
A significant portion of our assets and liabilities are reported at fair value and, therefore, our consolidated balance sheets and statements of comprehensive (loss) income are significantly affected by fluctuations in market prices. At December 31, 2020, approximately 83.7% of our total assets, or $16.3 billion, consisted of financial instruments recorded at fair value. See Note 10 - Fair Value to the consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for descriptions of valuation methodologies used to measure material assets and liabilities at fair value and details of the valuation models, key inputs to those models and significant assumptions utilized. Although we execute various hedging strategies to mitigate our exposure to changes in fair value, we cannot fully eliminate our exposure to volatility caused by fluctuations in market prices.
Any temporary change in the fair value of our AFS securities, excluding certain Agency interest-only mortgage-backed securities, is recorded as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income and does not impact our reported income (loss) for U.S. GAAP purposes, or GAAP net income (loss). However, beginning on January 1, 2020 (as discussed above), changes in the provision for credit losses on AFS securities are recognized immediately in GAAP net income (loss). Our GAAP net income (loss) is also affected by fluctuations in market prices on the remainder of our financial assets and liabilities recorded at fair value, including interest rate swap, cap and swaption agreements and certain other derivative instruments (i.e., TBAs, put and call options for TBAs, U.S. Treasury futures, Markit IOS total return swaps and inverse interest-only securities), which are accounted for as derivative trading instruments under U.S. GAAP, Agency interest-only mortgage-backed securities and MSR.
We have numerous internal controls in place to help ensure the appropriateness of fair value measurements. Significant fair value measures are subject to detailed analytics and management review and approval. Our entire investment portfolio reported at fair value is priced by third-party brokers and/or by independent pricing vendors. We generally receive three or more broker and vendor quotes on pass-through principal and interest (P&I) Agency RMBS, and generally receive multiple broker or vendor quotes on all other securities, including interest-only Agency RMBS and inverse interest-only Agency RMBS. We also receive three vendor quotes for the MSR in our investment portfolio. For Agency RMBS, the third-party pricing vendors and brokers use pricing models that commonly incorporate such factors as coupons, primary and secondary mortgage rates, rate reset periods, issuer, prepayment speeds, credit enhancements and expected life of the security. For MSR, vendors use pricing models that generally incorporate observable inputs such as principal balance, note rate, geographical location, loan-to-value (LTV) ratios, FICO, appraised value and other loan characteristics, along with observed market yields and trading levels. Pricing vendors will customarily incorporate loan servicing cost, servicing fee, ancillary income, and earnings rate on escrow as observable inputs. Unobservable or model-driven inputs include forecast cumulative defaults, default curve, forecast loss severity and forecast voluntary prepayment.
We evaluate the prices we receive from both third-party brokers and pricing vendors by comparing those prices to actual purchase and sale transactions, our internally modeled prices calculated based on market observable rates and credit spreads, and to each other both in current and prior periods. We review and may challenge valuations from third-party brokers and pricing vendors to ensure that such quotes and valuations are indicative of fair value as a result of this analysis. We then estimate the fair value of each security based upon the median of the final broker quotes received, and we estimate the fair value of MSR based upon the average of prices received from third-party vendors, subject to internally-established hierarchy and override procedures.
We utilize “bid side” pricing for our Agency RMBS and, as a result, certain assets, especially the most recent purchases, may realize a markdown due to the “bid-offer” spread. To the extent that this occurs, any economic effect of this would be reflected in accumulated other comprehensive income.
Considerable judgment is used in forming conclusions and estimating inputs to our Level 3 fair value measurements. Level 3 inputs such as interest rate movements, prepayments speeds, credit losses and discount rates are inherently difficult to estimate. Changes to these inputs can have a significant effect on fair value measurements. Accordingly, there is no assurance that our estimates of fair value are indicative of the amounts that would be realized on the ultimate sale or exchange of these assets. The Company classified 8.2% of its total assets as Level 3 fair value assets at December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP requires us to make certain judgments and assumptions, based on information available at the time of our preparation of the financial statements, in determining accounting estimates used in preparation of the statements. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements, included under Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Accounting estimates are considered critical if the estimate requires us to make assumptions about matters that were highly uncertain at the time the accounting estimate was made and if different estimates reasonably could have been used in the reporting period or changes in the accounting estimate are reasonably likely to occur from period to period that would have a material impact on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows.
The methods used by us to estimate fair value for AFS securities and MSR may produce a fair value calculation that may not be indicative of net realizable value or reflective of future fair values. Furthermore, while we believe that our valuation methods are appropriate and consistent with other market participants, the use of different methodologies, or assumptions, to determine the fair value of certain financial instruments could result in a different estimate of fair value at the reporting date. We use inputs that are current as of the measurement date, which in periods of market dislocation, may have reduced transparency.
Classification and Valuation of Available-for-Sale Securities
Our securities investments consist primarily of Agency RMBS and non-Agency securities that we classify as available-for-sale, or AFS. All assets classified as AFS, excluding certain Agency interest-only mortgage-backed securities, are reported at estimated fair value with changes in fair value included in accumulated other comprehensive income, a separate component of stockholders’ equity, on an after-tax basis. On July 1, 2015, we elected the fair value option for Agency interest-only securities acquired on or after such date. All Agency interest-only securities acquired on or after July 1, 2015 are carried at estimated fair value with changes in fair value recorded as a component of (loss) gain on investment securities in the consolidated statements of comprehensive (loss) income.
In accordance with ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, we use a discounted cash flow method to estimate and recognize an allowance for credit losses on both Agency and non-Agency AFS securities that are not accounted for under the fair value option. The estimated allowance for credit losses is equal to the difference between the prepayment adjusted contractual cash flows with no credit losses and the prepayment adjusted expected cash flows with credit losses, discounted at the effective interest rate on the AFS security that was in effect upon adoption of the standard. The contractual cash flows and expected cash flows are based on management’s best estimate and take into consideration current prepayment assumptions, lifetime expected losses based on past loss experience, current market conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts of future conditions. The allowance for credit losses on Agency AFS securities relates to prepayment assumption changes on interest-only Agency RMBS. The allowance for credit losses causes an increase in the AFS security amortized cost and recognizes an allowance for credit losses in the same amount, with the provision for credit losses recognized in earnings (within (loss) gain on investment securities) and the balance of the unrealized loss recognized in either other comprehensive (loss) income, net of tax, or (loss) gain on investment securities, depending on the accounting treatment.
Classification and Valuation of Mortgage Servicing Rights
We account for our MSR at fair value, with changes in fair value recorded in GAAP net (loss) income, rather than at amortized cost. Fair value is generally determined based on prices obtained from third-party pricing vendors. Although MSR transactions are observable in the marketplace, the details of those transactions are not necessarily reflective of the value of our MSR portfolio. Third-party vendors use both observable market data and unobservable market data (including prepayment speeds, delinquency levels, discount rates and cost to service) as inputs into models, which help to inform their best estimates of fair value market price.
Interest Income Recognition
Interest income on securities is accrued based on the outstanding principal balance and their contractual terms. Premiums and discounts associated with Agency RMBS and non-Agency securities rated AA and higher at the time of purchase, are amortized and accreted, respectively, as an adjustment to interest income over the life of such securities using the contractual method under ASC 310-20, Nonrefundable Fees and Other Costs, which is applied at the individual security level based upon each security’s effective interest rate. Each security’s effective interest rate is calculated at the time of purchase by solving for the discount rate that equates the present value of that security’s remaining contractual cash flows, assuming no principal prepayments, to its purchase price. When applying the contractual effective interest method, as principal prepayments occur, an amount of the unamortized premium or discount is recognized in interest income such that the contractual effective interest rate on the remaining security balance is unaffected.
Interest income on non-Agency securities that were purchased at a discount to par value and were rated below AA at the time of purchase and Agency and non-Agency interest-only securities that can be contractually prepaid or otherwise settled in such a way that we would not recover substantially all of our recorded investment is recognized based on the security’s effective interest rate using the prospective method under ASC 325-40, Investments - Other: Beneficial Interests in Securitized Financial Assets. At the time of acquisition, the security’s effective interest rate is calculated by solving for the single discount rate that equates the present value of our best estimate of the amount and timing of the cash flows expected to be collected from the security to its purchase price. On at least a quarterly basis, we review and, if appropriate, make adjustments to our cash flow projections based on input and analysis received from external sources, internal models, and management’s judgment about interest rates, prepayment rates, the timing and amount of credit losses, and other factors. Changes in cash flows from those originally projected, or from those estimated at the last evaluation, may result in a prospective change in the effective interest rate and interest income recognized on such securities.
Derivative Financial Instruments and Hedging Activities
We apply the provisions of ASC 815, which requires the recognition of all derivatives as either assets or liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets and to measure those instruments at fair value. The fair value adjustments of our current derivative instruments affect net income as the hedge for accounting purposes is being treated as an economic, or trading, hedge and not as a qualifying hedging instrument.
Derivatives are primarily used for hedging purposes rather than speculation. We utilize third-party pricing vendors and broker quotes to value our financial derivative instruments. If our hedging activities do not achieve their desired results, our reported GAAP net (loss) income may be adversely affected.
Income Taxes
Our financial results are generally not expected to reflect provisions for current or deferred income taxes, except for those taxable benefits or provisions recognized by our TRSs. We estimate, based on existence of sufficient evidence, the ability to realize the remainder of any deferred tax asset our TRSs recognize. Any adjustments to such estimates will be made in the period such determination is made. We plan to operate in a manner that will allow us to qualify for taxation as a REIT. As a result of our expected REIT qualification, we do not generally expect to pay U.S. federal corporate level taxes. However, many of the REIT requirements are highly technical and complex. If we were to fail to meet the REIT requirements, we would be subject to U.S. federal, state and local income taxes.
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, or TCJA, significantly changed how the U.S. taxes corporations. The TCJA requires complex computations to be performed that were not previously required in U.S. tax law, significant judgments to be made in interpretation of the provisions of the TCJA and significant estimates in calculations, and the preparation and analysis of information not previously relevant or regularly produced. Technical corrections or other amendments of the TCJA or administrative guidance interpreting the TCJA may be forthcoming at any time. While we do not anticipate a material effect on our operations, we continue to analyze and monitor the application of the TCJA to our business, our peers and the economic environment.
Market Conditions and Outlook
The U.S. Federal Reserve, or the Fed, moved overnight interest rates to the zero bound in early 2020 and is expected to hold overnight interest rates near current levels for an extended period of time. During the fourth quarter, the overnight rate cleared at less than 10 basis points and term overnight indexed swap markets indicate expectations for continued low levels in the near term. In addition, the Fed remains committed to large scale asset purchases. After announcing QE4 in March, the Fed has purchased more than $1.25 trillion MBS and more than $2.0 trillion U.S. Treasuries, increasing its overall balance sheet to approximately $7 trillion. This overwhelming purchase activity resulted in significant mortgage spread tightening and price stability since its onset. Interest rates across the yield curve remain low. All U.S. Treasuries yield less than 175 basis points, with all maturities through five years yielding less than 50 basis points. Realized and implied volatility levels continue to be subdued. Primary and secondary mortgage spreads remain wide, but decreased somewhat during the fourth quarter, and constant prepayment rates remain at elevated levels.
The economic outlook for 2021 is quite uncertain and much will depend on the course of the global pandemic and the successful distribution and efficacy of vaccines. The traditional macro influences of GDP growth, job growth and inflation may be secondary to the global economy’s progression through the health crisis. Additional fiscal support from the U.S. government, or lack thereof, will also have a hand in shaping the upcoming year. The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act, was passed in March 2020 and extended in December 2020 to address the economic fallout of the COVID-19 pandemic. One provision of the Act provides up to 360 days of forbearance relief from mortgage loan payments for borrowers with federally backed (e.g. Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac) mortgages who experience financial hardship related to the pandemic. Subsequently, in February 2021, the FHFA announced extensions to the foreclosure moratorium and forbearance periods for borrowers with Fannie Mae- or Freddie Mac-backed mortgages, and the Biden administration announced similar foreclosure moratorium and forbearance extensions for borrowers with Federal Housing Administration, U.S. Department of Agriculture or U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs mortgages. Much uncertainty has arisen around the ultimate effect on delinquencies, defaults, prepayment speeds, low interest rates and home price appreciation. These provisions of the CARES Act also impact MSR owners, like Two Harbors, that are required for certain of the MSR assets to advance principal, interest, taxes and insurance payments during the time when borrowers are in forbearance or while foreclosure moratorium is in effect. After increasing in the months following the passage of the Act, the number of loans in forbearance in our servicing portfolio has subsequently decreased. If the economy is further impacted by future surges in COVID-19 virus cases across the country, more borrowers could opt for forbearance relief from their mortgage loan payments. As a result, we could see the number of loans in forbearance in our servicing portfolio increase.
We believe our current portfolio allocation and our investing expertise, as well as our operational capabilities to invest in MSR, will allow us to navigate the dynamic mortgage market while future regulatory and policy activities take shape. Our portfolio, consisting as it does of Agency RMBS and MSR, with offsetting risk characteristics, allows us to mitigate a variety of risks, including interest rate and RMBS spread volatility.
The following table provides the carrying value of our investment portfolio by product type:
Prepayment speeds and volatility due to interest rates
Our portfolio is subject to market risks, primarily interest rate risk and prepayment risk. We seek to offset a portion of our Agency pool market value exposure through our MSR and interest-only Agency RMBS portfolios. Generally, rising prepayment speeds will cause the market value of our RMBS trading at a premium to par (including interest-only securities) and MSR to decrease, and our RMBS trading at a discount to par to increase. The inverse relationship occurs when prepayment speeds slow. During periods of decreasing interest rates, the market value of our Agency pools generally increases and the market value of our interest-only securities and MSR generally decreases. We believe the low interest rate environment is expected to persist in the near term. Changes in home price performance, key employment metrics and government programs, among other macroeconomic factors, could cause prepayment speeds to increase on many RMBS, which could lead to less attractive reinvestment opportunities. Nonetheless, we believe our portfolio management approach, including our asset selection process, positions us to respond to a variety of market scenarios, including an overall faster prepayment environment.
The following table provides the three-month average constant prepayment rate, or CPR, experienced by Agency RMBS and MSR owned by us as of December 31, 2020, and the four immediately preceding quarter-ends:
Although we are unable to predict future interest rate movements, our strategy of pairing Agency RMBS with MSR, with a focus on managing various associated risks, including interest rate, prepayment, credit, mortgage spread and financing risk, is intended to generate attractive yields with a low level of sensitivity to changes in the yield curve, prepayments and interest rate cycles.
Our Agency RMBS are collateralized by pools of fixed-rate mortgage loans and hybrid adjustable-rate mortgage loans, or hybrid ARMs, which are mortgage loans that have interest rates that are fixed for an initial period and adjustable thereafter. Our Agency portfolio also includes securities with implicit prepayment protection, including lower loan balances (securities collateralized by loans of less than $200,000 in initial principal balance), higher LTVs (securities collateralized by loans with LTVs greater than or equal to 80%), certain geographic concentrations and lower FICO scores. Our overall allocation of Agency RMBS and holdings of pools with specific characteristics are viewed in the context of our aggregate rates strategy, including MSR and related derivative hedging instruments. Additionally, the selection of securities with certain attributes is driven by the perceived relative value of the securities, which factors in the opportunities in the marketplace, the cost of financing and the cost of hedging interest rate, prepayment, credit and other portfolio risks. As a result, Agency RMBS capital allocation reflects management’s flexible approach to investing in the marketplace.
The following tables provide the carrying value of our Agency RMBS portfolio by underlying mortgage loan rate type:
Counterparty exposure and leverage ratio
We monitor counterparty exposure in our broker, banking and lending counterparties on a daily basis. We believe our broker and banking counterparties are well-capitalized organizations and we attempt to manage our cash balances across these organizations to reduce our exposure to any single counterparty.
As of December 31, 2020, we had entered into repurchase agreements with 45 counterparties, 20 of which had outstanding balances at December 31, 2020. In addition, we held short- and long-term borrowings under revolving credit facilities, long-term term notes payable and long-term unsecured convertible senior notes. As of December 31, 2020, the debt-to-equity ratio funding our AFS securities, MSR and Agency Derivatives, which includes unsecured borrowings under convertible senior notes, was 5.2:1.0.
As of December 31, 2020, we held $1.4 billion in cash and cash equivalents, approximately $7.4 million of unpledged Agency securities and derivatives and $10.4 million of unpledged non-Agency securities. As a result, we had an overall estimated unused borrowing capacity on our unpledged securities of approximately $13.1 million. As of December 31, 2020, we held approximately $449.4 million of unpledged MSR and $52.3 million of unpledged servicing advances. Overall, we had unused committed borrowing capacity on MSR asset and servicing advance financing facilities of $215.2 million and $191.0 million, respectively. Generally, unused borrowing capacity may be the result of our election not to utilize certain financing, as well as delays in the timing in which funding is provided, insufficient collateral or the inability to meet lenders’ eligibility requirements for specific types of asset classes.
We also monitor exposure to our MSR counterparties. We may be required to make representations and warranties to investors in the loans underlying the MSR we own; however, some of our MSR were purchased on a bifurcated basis, meaning the representation and warranty obligations remain with the seller. If the representations and warranties we make prove to be inaccurate, we may be obligated to repurchase certain mortgage loans, which may impact the profitability of our portfolio. Although we obtain similar representations and warranties from the counterparty from which we acquired the relevant asset, if those representations and warranties do not directly mirror those we make to the investor, or if we are unable to enforce the representations and warranties against the counterparty for a variety of reasons, including the financial condition or insolvency of the counterparty, we may not be able to seek indemnification from our counterparties for any losses attributable to the breach.
Proposed changes to LIBOR
LIBOR is used extensively in the U.S. and globally as a “benchmark” or “reference rate” for various commercial and financial contracts, including corporate and municipal bonds and loans, floating rate mortgages, asset-backed securities, consumer loans, and interest rate swaps and other derivatives. It had been expected that a number of private-sector banks currently reporting information used to set LIBOR would stop doing so after 2021 when their current reporting commitment ends, which would either cause LIBOR to stop publication immediately or cause LIBOR’s regulator to determine that its quality has degraded to the degree that it is no longer representative of its underlying market. On November 30, 2020, Intercontinental Exchange Inc. announced that ICE Benchmark Administration Limited, the administrator of LIBOR, does not intend to stop publication of the majority of USD-LIBOR tenors until June 30, 2023. In the U.S., the Alternative Reference Rates Committee, or ARRC, has identified the Secured Overnight Financing Rate, or SOFR, as its preferred alternative rate for U.S. dollar-based LIBOR. SOFR is a measure of the cost of borrowing cash overnight, collateralized by U.S. Treasury securities, and is based on directly observable U.S. Treasury-backed repurchase transactions. Some market participants may continue to explore whether other U.S. dollar-based reference rates would be more appropriate for certain types of instruments. The ARRC has proposed a paced market transition plan to SOFR, and various organizations are currently working on industry wide and company-specific transition plans as it relates to derivatives and cash markets exposed to LIBOR. We have material contracts that are indexed to USD-LIBOR and are monitoring this activity, evaluating the related risks and our exposure, and adding alternative language to contracts, where necessary.
Summary of Results of Operations and Financial Condition
During the first quarter of 2020, we experienced unprecedented market conditions as a result of the global COVID-19 pandemic, including unusually significant spread widening in both Agency RMBS and non-Agency securities. In response, we focused our efforts on raising excess liquidity and de-risking our portfolio. On March 25, 2020, we sold substantially all of our non-Agency securities in order to eliminate the risks posed by continued margin calls and ongoing funding concerns associated with the significant spread widening on these assets. We also sold approximately one-third of our Agency RMBS portfolio in order to reduce risk and raise cash to establish a strong defensive liquidity position to weather potential ongoing economic and market instability. These actions, occurring at a time of wide spreads and low prices, resulted in large realized losses in the first quarter and a corresponding decline in book value.
The actions taken by the Fed to purchase Agency RMBS have been successful in stabilizing this market, as spreads and prices largely recovered on these assets in the second quarter. In addition, repurchase agreement financing markets for Agency RMBS continue to function well, term markets have re-developed, and we have experienced no issues in accessing this source of funding.
Certain mortgage loan forbearance programs were announced in connection with the CARES Act. As the servicer of record for the MSR assets in our portfolio, we may be responsible for continuing to advance principal, interest, taxes and insurance on mortgage loans that are in forbearance, delinquency or default. At December 31, 2020, 27,088 loans, or 3.5% of our MSR portfolio by loan count, were in forbearance, of which 14.7% had made their December payment and were current as of December 31, 2020. Therefore, approximately 2.9% of our portfolio by loan count was in forbearance and not current as of December 31, 2020. We are confident in our ability to meet our servicing advance obligations and have entered into a revolving credit facility to finance these advances.
Our GAAP net income attributable to common stockholders was $192.2 million ($0.68 per diluted weighted average share) for the three months ended December 31, 2020 and our GAAP net loss attributable to common stockholders was $1.7 billion ($(6.24) per diluted weighted average share) for the year ended December 31, 2020 , as compared to GAAP net income attributable to common stockholders of $115.8 million and $248.2 million ($0.41 and $0.93 per diluted weighted average share) for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2019.
With our accounting treatment for AFS securities, unrealized fluctuations in the market values of AFS securities, excluding Agency interest-only securities and certain securities with an allowance for credit losses, do not impact our GAAP net (loss) income or taxable income but are recognized on our consolidated balance sheets as a change in stockholders’ equity under “accumulated other comprehensive income.” For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, net unrealized losses on AFS securities recognized as other comprehensive loss, net of tax, were $78.7 million and $47.8 million, respectively. This, combined with GAAP net income attributable to common stockholders of $192.2 million and GAAP net loss attributable to common stockholders of $1.7 billion for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, respectively, resulted in comprehensive income attributable to common stockholders of $113.5 million and comprehensive loss attributable to common stockholders of $1.8 billion for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, respectively. For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2019, net unrealized losses on AFS securities recognized as other comprehensive loss, net of tax, were $59.0 million and net unrealized gains on AFS securities recognized as other comprehensive income, net of tax, were $578.6 million, respectively. This, combined with GAAP net income attributable to common stockholders of $115.8 million and $248.2 million, resulted in comprehensive income attributable to common stockholders of $56.9 million and $826.7 million for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2019, respectively.
Our book value per common share for U.S. GAAP purposes was $7.63 at December 31, 2020, a decrease from $14.54 per common share at December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized comprehensive loss attributable to common stockholders of $1.8 billion, which drove the overall decrease in book value.
Although some uncertainty remains regarding the future effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and the actions that may be taken by federal and state governmental authorities and GSEs in response, the Agency RMBS market has stabilized and there is more clarity regarding forbearance levels and deferral programs on Agency MSR. Our liquidity position is strong, with $1.4 billion in unrestricted cash as of December 31, 2020. Given our increased confidence, we expect to continue to deploy such capital to our target assets over time.
The following tables present the components of our comprehensive income (loss) for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Results of Operations
The following analysis focuses on financial results during the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The analysis of our financial results during the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 is omitted from this Form 10-K and included in Part II Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, which analysis is incorporated by reference.
Interest Income
Interest income decreased from $238.4 million and $994.7 million for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2019 to $72.5 million and $525.1 million for the same periods in 2020 due to the sale of both Agency RMBS and non-Agency securities that occurred during the first quarter of 2020, further sales of some higher coupon Agency RMBS and higher amortization recognized on Agency RMBS due to prepayments.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased from $167.3 million and $714.3 million for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2019, respectively, to $22.6 million and $281.2 million for the same periods in 2020 due to lower borrowing balances related to the sale of both Agency RMBS and non-Agency securities that occurred during the first quarter of 2020 and a lower interest rate environment.
Net Interest Income
The following tables present the components of interest income and average annualized net asset yield earned by asset type, the components of interest expense and average annualized cost of funds on borrowings incurred by liability and/or collateral type, and net interest income and average annualized net interest rate spread for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
____________________
(1)Average asset balance represents average amortized cost on AFS securities.
(2)Cost of funds does not include the accrual and settlement of interest associated with interest rate swaps and caps. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, those costs are included in (loss) gain on interest rate swap, cap and swaption agreements in the consolidated statements of comprehensive (loss) income. For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, our total average cost of funds on the assets assigned as collateral for borrowings shown in the table above, including interest spread expense associated with interest rate swaps and caps, was 0.5% and 1.7%, respectively, compared to 2.4% and 2.5% for the same periods in 2019.
(3)Yields on Agency Derivatives not shown as interest income is included in gain (loss) on other derivative instruments in the consolidated statements of comprehensive (loss) income.
(4)Includes financing for both MSR assets and related servicing advance obligations. Yields on mortgage servicing rights and advances not shown as these assets do not earn interest.
(5)Net interest spread does not include the accrual and settlement of interest associated with interest rate swaps and caps. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, those costs are included in gain (loss) on interest rate swap, cap and swaption agreements in the consolidated statements of comprehensive (loss) income. For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, our total average net interest rate spread on the assets and liabilities shown in the table above, including interest spread expense associated with interest rate swaps and caps, was 1.5% and 1.0%, respectively, compared to 0.9% and 1.1% for the same periods in 2019.
The decrease in yields on Agency AFS securities for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, was predominantly driven by sales of pools with higher yields. The decrease in cost of funds associated with the financing of Agency AFS securities for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, was the result of decreases in the borrowing rates offered by financing counterparties.
The decrease in yields on non-Agency securities for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same periods in 2019, was due to the sale of substantially all legacy non-Agencies during the first quarter of 2020. The decrease in cost of funds associated with the financing of non-Agency AFS securities for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, was also a result of the sale.
The decrease in cost of funds associated with the financing of Agency Derivatives for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, was the result of decreases in the borrowing rates offered by counterparties.
The decrease in cost of funds associated with the financing of MSR assets and related servicing advance obligations for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, was the result of better financing terms offered by counterparties. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we entered into a new revolving credit facility to finance our servicing advance obligations, which are included in other assets on our consolidated balance sheets.
Our convertible senior notes due 2022 were issued in January 2017, are unsecured and pay interest semiannually at a rate of 6.25% per annum. The cost of funds associated with our convertible senior notes due 2022 for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, was consistent.
The following tables present the components of the yield earned on our AFS securities portfolio as a percentage of our average amortized cost of securities for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
____________________
(1)Excludes Agency Derivatives. For the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the average annualized net yield on total RMBS, including Agency Derivatives, was 2.0% and 2.7%, respectively, compared to 3.3% and 3.6% for the same periods in 2019. Yields have not been adjusted for cost of delay and cost to carry purchase premiums.
Other-Than-Temporary Impairments
Prior to the adoption of Topic 326 on January 1, 2020, we reviewed each of our securities on a quarterly basis to determine if an OTTI charge was necessary. During the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2019, we recorded $3.3 million and $14.3 million in other-than-temporary credit impairments on six and eighteen non-Agency securities, respectively, where the future expected cash flows for each security were less than its amortized cost. For further information about evaluating AFS securities for OTTI prior to January 1, 2020, refer to Note 4 - Available-for-Sale Securities, at Fair Value of the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
Gain (Loss) On Investment Securities
The following tables present the components of (loss) gain on investment securities for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Due to the unprecedented market conditions experienced as a result of the global COVID-19 pandemic, we sold substantially all of our portfolio of non-Agency securities and approximately one-third of our Agency RMBS during the first quarter of 2020. We do not expect to sell assets on a frequent basis, but may sell assets to reallocate capital into new assets that we believe have higher risk-adjusted returns.
Subsequent to the adoption of Topic 326 on January 1, 2020, the Company uses a discounted cash flow method to estimate and recognize an allowance for credit losses on AFS securities. The estimated allowance for credit losses is equal to the difference between the prepayment adjusted contractual cash flows with no credit losses and the prepayment adjusted expected cash flows with credit losses, discounted at the effective interest rate on the AFS security that was in effect upon adoption of the standard. The contractual cash flows and expected cash flows are based on management’s best estimate and take into consideration current prepayment assumptions, lifetime expected losses based on past loss experience, current market conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts of future conditions. The allowance for credit losses causes an increase in the AFS security amortized cost and recognizes an allowance for credit losses in the same amount, with the provision for credit losses recognized in earnings (within (loss) gain on investment securities) and the balance of the unrealized loss recognized in either other comprehensive (loss) income, net of tax, or (loss) gain on investment securities, depending on the accounting treatment.
Servicing Income
The following table presents the components of servicing income for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The decrease in servicing income for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same periods in 2019, was the result of lower servicing fee income as a result of a lower portfolio balance due to prepayments and deferred servicing fee income for loans in forbearance as a result of COVID-19. Additionally, the decrease in float income was the result of decreased float earning rates.
Gain (Loss) on Servicing Asset
The following table presents the components of loss on servicing asset for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The increase in gain on servicing asset (decrease in loss on servicing asset) for the three months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, was driven by favorable change in valuation assumptions used in the fair market valuation of MSR, including the impact of acquiring MSR at a cost below fair value, offset by increased portfolio runoff during the three months ended December 31, 2020. The increase in loss on servicing asset for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, was driven by an increase in prepayment speed assumptions used in the fair valuation of MSR, higher expected cost-to-service due to COVID-19 related forbearances and higher portfolio runoff on a larger average MSR portfolio balance throughout the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loss on Interest Rate Swap, Cap and Swaption Agreements
The following table summarizes the net interest spread and gains and losses associated with our interest rate swap, cap and swaption positions recognized during the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Net interest spread recognized for the accrual and/or settlement of the net interest expense associated with our interest rate swaps and caps results from receiving either a floating interest rate (LIBOR or the OIS rate) or a fixed interest rate and paying either a fixed interest rate or a floating interest rate (LIBOR or the OIS rate) on positions held to economically hedge/mitigate portfolio interest rate exposure (or duration) risk. We may elect to terminate certain swaps, caps and swaptions to align with our investment portfolio, agreements may mature or options may expire resulting in full settlement of our net interest spread asset/liability and the recognition of realized gains and losses, including early termination penalties. During the second quarter of 2020, we elected to terminate certain swaps and swaptions in order to adjust the total notional and fixed interest rates on these instruments, as a result of adjustments made to our investment portfolio and changes in interest rates. The change in fair value of interest rate swaps, caps and swaptions during the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was a result of changes to floating interest rates (LIBOR or the OIS rate), the swap curve and corresponding counterparty borrowing rates. Since swaps, caps and swaptions are used for purposes of hedging our interest rate exposure, their unrealized valuation gains and losses (excluding the reversal of unrealized gains and losses to realized gains and losses upon termination, maturation or option expiration) are generally offset by unrealized losses and gains in our Agency RMBS AFS portfolio, which are recorded either directly to stockholders’ equity through other comprehensive (loss) income, net of tax, or to (loss) gain on investment securities, in the case of Agency interest-only mortgage-backed securities.
Gain (Loss) on Other Derivative Instruments
The following table provides a summary of the total net gains (losses) recognized on other derivative instruments we hold for purposes of both hedging and non-hedging activities, principally TBAs, put and call options for TBAs, Markit IOS total return swaps, short U.S. Treasuries, U.S. Treasury futures and inverse interest-only securities during the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
____________________
(1)As these derivative instruments are considered trading instruments, our financial results include both realized and unrealized gains (losses) associated with these instruments.
For further details regarding our use of derivative instruments and related activity, refer to Note 7 - Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities to the consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Expenses
The following table presents the components of expenses, other than restructuring charges, for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Prior to the termination of the Management Agreement on August 14, 2020, management fees were payable to PRCM Advisers under the agreement. The management fee was calculated based on our stockholders’ equity with certain adjustments outlined in the management agreement. In connection with the acquisition of CYS effective July 31, 2018, the Management Agreement was amended to reduce PRCM Advisers’ base management fee with respect to the additional equity under management resulting from the merger to 0.75% from the effective time through the first anniversary of the effective time. Effective July 31, 2019, the management fee reduction on the equity acquired in the CYS transaction expired.
We also incur servicing expenses generally related to the subservicing of MSR. The increase in servicing expenses during the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same periods in 2019, was a result of a higher cost to service loans in forbearance.
Prior to the termination of the Management Agreement, included in compensation and benefits and other operating expenses were direct and allocated costs incurred by PRCM Advisers on our behalf and reimbursed by us. For the year ended December 31, 2020, these direct and allocated costs totaled approximately $19.3 million, compared to $4.6 million and $27.6 million for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2019. Included in these reimbursed costs was compensation paid to employees of an affiliate of PRCM Advisers serving as our principal financial officer and general counsel of $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $0.1 million and $3.1 million for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2019, respectively. We did not reimburse PRCM Advisers for compensation paid to our principal financial officer and general counsel for the three months ended December 31, 2020. Prior to termination of the Management Agreement, the allocation of compensation paid to employees of an affiliate of PRCM Advisers serving as our principal financial officer and general counsel was based on time spent overseeing our activities in accordance with the Management Agreement; we did not reimburse PRCM Advisers for any expenses related to the compensation of our chief executive officer or chief investment officer. Additionally, included in compensation and benefits is non-cash equity compensation expense, which represents amortization of the restricted stock awarded to our independent directors, executive officers and other eligible individuals. Included in non-cash equity compensation expense for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was amortization of restricted stock awarded to our executive officers, including our chief executive officer, chief investment officer, principal financial officer and general counsel of $0.9 million and $3.9 million, compared to $1.2 million and $3.4 million for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2019, respectively.
Following the termination of the Management Agreement, we no longer pay a management fee to, or reimburse the expenses of, PRCM Advisers. Expenses for which we previously reimbursed PRCM Advisers are now paid directly by us. We are also now responsible for the cash compensation and employee benefits of our chief executive officer, chief investment officer and investment professionals, which were previously the responsibility of PRCM Advisers. Prior to the termination of the Management Agreement, we were only responsible for the equity compensation paid to such individuals.
Restructuring Charges
On April 13, 2020, we announced that we had elected to not renew the Management Agreement with PRCM Advisers on the basis of unfair compensation payable to the manager pursuant to Section 13(a)(ii) of the Management Agreement. As a result, we had expected the Management Agreement to terminate on September 19, 2020, at which time we would have been required to pay a termination fee equal to three times the sum of the average annual base management fee earned by PRCM Advisers during the 24-month period immediately preceding the date of termination, calculated as of the end of the most recently completed fiscal quarter prior to the date of termination, pursuant to the terms of the Management Agreement. The termination fee was calculated to be $139.8 million based on results as of June 30, 2020.
On July 15, 2020, we provided PRCM Advisers with a notice of termination of the Management Agreement for “cause” on the basis of certain material breaches of the Management Agreement by PRCM Advisers, its agents and/or its assignees that are incapable of being cured within the time period set forth therein and certain events of gross negligence on the part of PRCM Advisers in the performance of its duties under the Management Agreement. The Management Agreement subsequently terminated on August 14, 2020. No termination fee was payable to PRCM Advisers in connection with such termination, pursuant to Section 15(a) of the Management Agreement.
In connection with the termination of the Management Agreement, we reversed the $139.8 million accrued termination fee during the three months ended September 30, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred a total of $5.7 million in contract termination costs, which includes all estimated costs incurred for legal and advisory services provided to facilitate the termination of the Management Agreement. In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 420, Exit or Disposal Cost Obligations, all contract termination costs are included within restructuring charges on our consolidated statements of comprehensive (loss) income for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Taxes
During the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, our TRSs recognized a provision for income taxes of $3.8 million and a benefit from income taxes of $35.7 million, respectively. The provision recognized for the three months ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to gains recognized on MSR, offset by net losses recognized on derivative instruments held in the our TRSs. The benefit recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to losses recognized on MSR, offset by net gains recognized on derivative instruments held in our TRSs. During the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2019, our TRSs recognized a benefit from income taxes of $2.4 million and $13.6 million, respectively, which was primarily due to losses recognized on MSR, offset by net gains recognized on derivative instruments held in our TRSs.
Financial Condition
Available-for-Sale Securities, at Fair Value
The majority of our AFS investment securities portfolio is comprised of adjustable rate and fixed rate Agency mortgage-backed securities backed by single-family and multi-family mortgage loans. We also hold $13.0 million in tranches of mortgage-backed and asset-backed P&I and interest-only non-Agency securities. All of our P&I Agency RMBS AFS are Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac mortgage pass-through certificates or collateralized mortgage obligations that carry an implied rating of “AAA,” or Ginnie Mae mortgage pass-through certificates, which are backed by the guarantee of the U.S. government. The majority of these securities consist of whole pools in which we own all of the investment interests in the securities.
The tables below summarizes certain characteristics of our Agency RMBS AFS at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
____________________
(1)Fixed Other represents weighted-average coupon interest-only securities that are not generally used for our interest-rate risk management purposes. These securities pay variable coupon interest based on the weighted average of the fixed rates of the underlying loans of the security, less the weighted average rates of the applicable issued P&I securities.
Our three-month average constant prepayment rate, or CPR, experienced by Agency RMBS AFS owned by us as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 on an annualized basis, was 27.0% and 14.3%, respectively.
Mortgage Servicing Rights, at Fair Value
One of our wholly owned subsidiaries has approvals from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to own and manage MSR, which represent the right to control the servicing of mortgage loans. We do not directly service mortgage loans, and instead contract with appropriately licensed subservicers to handle substantially all servicing functions in the name of the subservicer for the loans underlying our MSR. As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, our MSR had a fair market value of $1.6 billion and $1.9 billion, respectively.
As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, our MSR portfolio included MSR on 781,905 and 793,470 loans with an unpaid principal balance of approximately $177.9 billion and $175.9 billion, respectively. The following tables summarize certain characteristics of the loans underlying our MSR by gross weighted average coupon rate types and ranges at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
Financing
Our borrowings consist primarily of repurchase agreements, revolving credit facilities and term notes payable. These borrowings are collateralized by our pledge of AFS securities, derivative instruments, MSR, servicing advances and certain cash balances. Substantially all of our Agency RMBS are currently pledged as collateral, and a portion of our non-Agency securities have been pledged as collateral for repurchase agreements.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we formed a trust entity, or the MSR Issuer Trust, for the purpose of financing MSR through securitization. On June 27, 2019, we, through the MSR Issuer Trust, completed an MSR securitization transaction pursuant to which, through two of our wholly owned subsidiaries, MSR is pledged to the MSR Issuer Trust and in return, the MSR Issuer Trust issued (a) an aggregate principal amount of $400.0 million in term notes to qualified institutional buyers and (b) a variable funding note, or VFN, with a maximum principal balance of $1.0 billion to one of the subsidiaries, in each case secured on a pari passu basis. The term notes bear interest at a rate equal to one-month LIBOR plus 2.80% per annum. The term notes will mature on June 25, 2024 or, if extended pursuant to the terms of the related indenture supplement, June 25, 2026 (unless earlier redeemed in accordance with their terms).
Additionally, our convertible senior notes due 2022 were issued in January 2017, are unsecured and pay interest semiannually at a rate of 6.25% per annum.
At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, borrowings under repurchase agreements, FHLB advances, revolving credit facilities, term notes payable and convertible senior notes had the following characteristics:
____________________
(1)Includes unsecured convertible senior notes paying interest semiannually at a rate of 6.25% per annum on the aggregate principal amount of $287.5 million.
As of December 31, 2020, the debt-to-equity ratio funding our AFS securities, MSR, servicing advances and Agency Derivatives, which includes unsecured borrowings under convertible senior notes, was 5.2:1.0. We believe the current degree of leverage within our portfolio helps ensure that we have access to unused borrowing capacity, thus supporting our liquidity and the strength of our balance sheet.
The following table provides a summary of our borrowings under repurchase agreements, FHLB advances, revolving credit facilities, term notes payable and convertible senior notes, our net TBA notional amounts and our debt-to-equity ratios for the three months ended December 31, 2020, and the four immediately preceding quarters:
____________________
(1)Defined as total borrowings under repurchase agreements, FHLB advances, revolving credit facilities, term notes payable and convertible senior notes, plus implied debt on net TBA notional, divided by total equity.
Equity
The tables below provide details of our changes in stockholders’ equity from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 as well as a reconciliation of comprehensive income and GAAP net income to non-GAAP measures.
____________________
(1)Core Earnings is a non-U.S. GAAP measure that we define as comprehensive (loss) income attributable to common stockholders, excluding “realized and unrealized gains and losses” (impairment losses, provision for credit losses, realized and unrealized gains and losses on the aggregate portfolio, reserve expense for representation and warranty obligations on MSR, non-cash compensation expense related to restricted common stock, other nonrecurring expenses and restructuring charges). As defined, Core Earnings includes net interest income, accrual and settlement of interest on derivatives, dollar roll income on TBAs, servicing income, net of estimated amortization on MSR, management fees and recurring cash related operating expenses. Dollar roll income is the economic equivalent to holding and financing Agency RMBS using short-term repurchase agreements. Core Earnings provides supplemental information to assist investors in analyzing the Company’s results of operations and helps facilitate comparisons to industry peers.
U.S. GAAP to Estimated Taxable Income
The following tables provide reconciliations of our GAAP net income (loss) to our estimated taxable income (loss) split between our REIT and TRSs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The permanent tax differences recorded in 2020 include a difference related to the intercompany sales of RMBS and a recurring difference in compensation expense related to restricted stock dividends and vesting. The permanent tax differences recorded in 2019 include dividends paid from the Company’s TRSs to the REIT, a difference related to the intercompany sales of RMBS and a recurring difference in compensation expense related to restricted stock dividends and vesting. Temporary differences recorded in 2020 and 2019 are principally timing differences between U.S. GAAP and tax accounting related to unrealized gains and losses from derivative instruments, realized and unrealized gains and losses from MSR and accretion, amortization from Agency RMBS and non-Agency securities and changes in reserves related to servicing advances and allowance for credit losses on certain RMBS.
Change in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
With our accounting treatment for AFS securities, unrealized fluctuations in the market values of AFS securities, excluding Agency interest-only securities, do not impact our GAAP net (loss) income or taxable income but are recognized on our consolidated balance sheets as a change in stockholders’ equity under “accumulated other comprehensive income.” As a result of this fair value accounting through stockholders’ equity, we expect our net income to have less significant fluctuations and result in less U.S. GAAP to taxable income timing differences, than if the portfolio were accounted for as trading instruments.
Dividends
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we declared cash dividends totaling $0.50 per share. As a REIT, we are required to distribute at least 90% of our taxable income to stockholders, subject to certain distribution requirements. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our board of directors elected to make cash distributions even though the REIT incurred a taxable loss for the year. This loss may be utilized in future tax years to reduce taxable income after consideration for the dividends paid deduction. As such, temporary differences between GAAP net income (loss) and taxable income can generate deterioration in book value on a permanent and temporary basis as taxable income is distributed that has not been earned for U.S. GAAP purposes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity and capital resources are managed and forecasted on a daily basis. We believe this ensures that we have sufficient liquidity to absorb market events that could negatively impact collateral valuations and result in margin calls. We also believe that it gives us the flexibility to manage our portfolio to take advantage of market opportunities.
Our principal sources of cash consist of borrowings under repurchase agreements, revolving credit facilities, term notes payable, payments of principal and interest we receive on our target assets, cash generated from our operating results, and proceeds from capital market transactions. We typically use cash to repay principal and interest on our borrowings, to purchase our target assets, to make dividend payments on our capital stock, and to fund our operations.
On March 21, 2019, we completed a public offering of 18,000,000 shares of our common stock at a price of $13.76 per share. On March 22, 2019, an additional 2,700,000 shares were sold to the underwriters of the offering pursuant to an overallotment option. The net proceeds were approximately $284.5 million, after deducting offering expenses of approximately $0.3 million. To the extent that we raise additional equity capital through capital market transactions, we anticipate using cash proceeds from such transactions to purchase our target assets and for other general corporate purposes. Such general corporate purposes may include the refinancing or repayment of debt, the repurchase or redemption of common and preferred equity securities, and other capital expenditures.
As of December 31, 2020, we held $1.4 billion in cash and cash equivalents available to support our operations; $16.3 billion of AFS securities, MSR, and derivative assets held at fair value; and $16.1 billion of outstanding debt in the form of repurchase agreements, borrowings under revolving credit facilities, term notes payable and convertible senior notes. During the three months ended December 31, 2020, the debt-to-equity ratio funding our AFS securities, MSR, servicing advances and Agency Derivatives, which includes unsecured borrowings under convertible senior notes, decreased from 5.7:1.0 to 5.2:1.0. The decrease was driven by the repositioning of financing on Agency AFS securities to TBA positions and a higher equity balance driven by our financial results for the quarter. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the debt-to-equity ratio funding our AFS securities, MSR, servicing advances and Agency Derivatives, which includes unsecured borrowings under convertible senior notes, decreased from 6.1:1.0 to 5.2:1.0. The decrease was also driven by the repositioning of financing on Agency AFS securities to TBA positions.
As of December 31, 2020, we held approximately $7.4 million of unpledged Agency securities and derivatives and $10.4 million of unpledged non-Agency securities. As a result, we had an overall estimated unused borrowing capacity on unpledged securities of approximately $13.1 million. As of December 31, 2020, we held approximately $449.4 million of unpledged MSR and $52.3 million of unpledged servicing advances. Overall, we had unused committed borrowing capacity on MSR asset and servicing advance financing facilities of $215.2 million and $191.0 million, respectively. Generally, unused borrowing capacity may be the result of our election not to utilize certain financing, as well as delays in the timing in which funding is provided, insufficient collateral or the inability to meet lenders’ eligibility requirements for specific types of asset classes. On a daily basis, we monitor and forecast our available, or excess, liquidity. Additionally, we frequently perform shock analyses against various market events to monitor the adequacy of our excess liquidity. If borrowing rates and/or collateral requirements change in the near term, we believe we are subject to less earnings volatility than a more leveraged organization.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not experience any material issues accessing our funding sources, although the balance sheet capacity of some counterparties has tightened due to compliance with the Basel III regulatory capital reform rules as well as the management of perceived risk in the current market environment due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect ongoing sources of financing to be primarily repurchase agreements, revolving credit facilities, term notes payable, convertible notes and similar financing arrangements. We plan to finance our assets with a moderate amount of leverage, the level of which may vary based upon the particular characteristics of our portfolio and market conditions.
As of December 31, 2020, we had master repurchase agreements in place with 45 counterparties (lenders), the majority of which are U.S. domiciled financial institutions, and we continue to evaluate additional counterparties to manage and optimize counterparty risk. Under our repurchase agreements, we are required to pledge additional assets as collateral to our lenders when the estimated fair value of the existing pledged collateral under such agreements declines and such lenders, through a margin call, demand additional collateral. Lenders generally make margin calls because of a perceived decline in the value of our assets collateralizing the repurchase agreements. This may occur following the monthly principal reduction of assets due to scheduled amortization and prepayments on the underlying mortgages, or may be caused by changes in market interest rates, a perceived decline in the market value of the investments and other market factors. To cover a margin call, we may pledge additional assets or cash. At maturity, any cash on deposit as collateral is generally applied against the repurchase agreement balance, thereby reducing the amount borrowed. Should the value of our assets suddenly decrease, significant margin calls on our repurchase agreements could result, causing an adverse change in our liquidity position.
The following table summarizes our repurchase agreements and counterparty geographical concentration at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
____________________
(1)Represents the net carrying value of the assets sold under agreements to repurchase, including accrued interest plus any cash or assets on deposit to secure the repurchase obligation, less the amount of the repurchase liability, including accrued interest.
(2)Exposure to European and Asian domiciled banks and their U.S. subsidiaries.
In addition to our master repurchase agreements to fund our Agency and non-Agency securities, we have one repurchase facility and two revolving credit facilities that provide short- and long-term financing for our MSR portfolio. We also have one revolving credit facility that provides long-term financing for our servicing advances. An overview of the facilities is presented in the table below:
____________________
(1)The facilities are set to mature on the stated expiration date, unless extended pursuant to their terms.
(2)Represents unused capacity amounts to which commitment fees are charged.
(3)This repurchase facility is secured by the VFN issued in connection with the MSR securitization transaction completed on June 27, 2019, which is collateralized by our MSR.
Through February 19, 2021, our wholly owned subsidiary, TH Insurance, was a member of the FHLB. As a member of the FHLB, TH Insurance had access to a variety of products and services offered by the FHLB, including secured advances. However, we did not have any outstanding secured advances or credit capacity available as of December 31, 2020.
The ability to borrow from the FHLB was subject to our continued creditworthiness, pledging of sufficient eligible collateral to secure advances, and compliance with certain agreements with the FHLB. Each advance required approval by the FHLB and was secured by collateral in accordance with the FHLB’s credit and collateral guidelines, as may be revised from time to time by the FHLB. Eligible collateral may include Agency RMBS and certain non-Agency securities with a rating of A and above.
In January 2016, the FHFA released a final rule regarding membership in the Federal Home Loan Bank system. Among other effects, the final rule excludes captive insurers from membership eligibility, including our subsidiary member, TH Insurance. Since TH Insurance was admitted as a member in 2013, it was eligible for a membership grace period that ran through February 19, 2021, during which new advances or renewals that matured beyond the grace period were prohibited; however, any existing advances that matured beyond this grace period were permitted to remain in place subject to their terms insofar as we maintained good standing with the FHLB. Any new advances or renewals occurring during this time were limited to 40% of TH Insurance’s total assets. TH Insurance’s FHLB membership expired on February 19, 2021.
We are subject to a variety of financial covenants under our lending agreements. The following represent the most restrictive financial covenants across our lending agreements as of December 31, 2020:
•Total indebtedness to tangible net worth must be less than 8.0:1.0. As of December 31, 2020, our total indebtedness to tangible net worth, as defined, was 5.3:1.0.
•Cash liquidity must be greater than $200.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, our liquidity, as defined, was $1.4 billion.
•Net worth must be greater than $1.5 billion or 50% of the highest net worth during the 24 calendar months prior, whichever is higher. As of December 31, 2020, 50% of the highest net worth during the 24 calendar months prior was $2.6 billion and our net worth, as defined, was $3.1 billion.
We are also subject to additional financial covenants in connection with various other agreements we enter into in the normal course of our business. We intend to continue to operate in a manner which complies with all of our financial covenants.
The following table summarizes assets at carrying values that were pledged or restricted as collateral for the future payment obligations of repurchase agreements, FHLB advances, revolving credit facilities, term notes payable and derivative instruments at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
Although we generally intend to hold our target assets as long-term investments, we may sell certain of our assets in order to manage our interest rate risk and liquidity needs, to meet other operating objectives and to adapt to market conditions. Our Agency RMBS are generally actively traded and thus, in most circumstances, readily liquid. However, certain of our assets, including MSR, are subject to longer trade timelines, and, as a result, market conditions could significantly and adversely affect the liquidity of our assets. Any illiquidity of our assets may make it difficult for us to sell such assets if the need or desire arises. Our ability to quickly sell certain assets, such as MSR may be limited by delays encountered while obtaining certain regulatory approvals required for such dispositions and may be further limited by delays due to the time period needed for negotiating transaction documents, conducting diligence, and complying with regulatory requirements regarding the transfer of such assets before settlement may occur. Consequently, even if we identify a buyer for our MSR, there is no assurance that we would be able to quickly sell such assets if the need or desire arises.
In addition, if we are required to liquidate all or a portion of our portfolio quickly, we may realize significantly less than the value at which we previously recorded our assets. Assets that are illiquid are more difficult to finance, and to the extent that we use leverage to finance assets that become illiquid, we may lose that leverage or have it reduced. Assets tend to become less liquid during times of financial stress, which is often the time that liquidity is most needed. As a result, our ability to sell assets or vary our portfolio in response to changes in economic and other conditions may be limited by liquidity constraints, which could adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition.
We cannot predict the timing and impact of future sales of our assets, if any. Because many of our assets are financed with repurchase agreements, revolving credit facilities and term notes payable, a significant portion of the proceeds from sales of our assets (if any), prepayments and scheduled amortization are used to repay balances under these financing sources.
The following table provides the maturities of our repurchase agreements, FHLB advances, revolving credit facilities, term notes payable and convertible senior notes as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our restricted and unrestricted cash balance increased approximately $1.0 billion to $2.6 billion at December 31, 2020. The cash movements can be summarized by the following:
•Cash flows from operating activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities increased our cash balances by approximately $0.6 billion, primarily driven by our financial results for the year.
•Cash flows from investing activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, investing activities increased our cash balances by approximately $14.9 billion, primarily driven by proceeds from sales of and principal payments on AFS securities, offset by purchases of AFS securities and MSR.
•Cash flows from financing activities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, financing activities decreased our cash balance by approximately $14.5 billion, primarily driven by decreases in repurchase agreements as a result of sales of and principal payments on AFS securities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not participated in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. Further, we have not guaranteed any obligations of unconsolidated entities or entered into any commitment or intent to provide funding to any such entities.
Aggregate Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes the effect on our liquidity and cash flows from contractual obligations for repurchase agreements, revolving credit facilities, convertible senior notes, interest expense on borrowings and our non-cancelable office leases, net of contractual subleases:
____________________
(1)Interest expense on borrowings calculated based on rates at December 31, 2020.
We are party to contracts that contain a variety of indemnification obligations, principally with brokers, underwriters, counterparties to lending agreements and investors in the RMBS we issued in connection with our previous residential mortgage loan securitization transactions, the term notes we issued in connection with our MSR securitization and the loans underlying our MSR. The maximum potential future payment amount we could be required to pay under these indemnification obligations may be unlimited.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Refer to Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Inflation
Substantially all of our assets and liabilities are financial in nature. As a result, changes in interest rates and other factors impact our performance far more than does inflation, although inflation rates can often have a meaningful influence over the direction of interest rates. Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and dividends are based upon net ordinary income and capital gains as calculated for tax purposes; in each case, our results of operations and reported assets, liabilities and equity are measured with reference to historical cost or fair value without considering inflation.
Other Matters
We intend to conduct our business so as to maintain our exempt status under, and not to become regulated as, an investment company for purposes of the 1940 Act. If we failed to maintain our exempt status under the 1940 Act and became regulated as an investment company, our ability to, among other things, use leverage would be substantially reduced and, as a result, we would be unable to conduct our business as described in Item 1, “Business - Other Business - Regulation” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Accordingly, we monitor our compliance with both the 55% Test and the 80% Tests of the 1940 Act in order to maintain our exempt status. As of December 31, 2020, we determined that we maintained compliance with both the 55% Test and the 80% Test requirements.
We calculate that at least 75% of our assets were qualified REIT assets, as defined in the Code for the year ended December 31, 2020. We also calculate that our revenue qualified for the 75% source of income test and for the 95% source of income test rules for the year ended December 31, 2020. Consequently, we met the REIT income and asset tests. We also met all REIT requirements regarding the ownership of our common stock and the distribution of our net income. Therefore, for the year ended December 31, 2020, we believe that we qualified as a REIT under the Code.