Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Item 1A “Risk Factors” in this report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
This section of this Form 10-K does not address certain items regarding the year ended December 31, 2018. For a discussion of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources for the year ended December 31, 2018, including a year-over-year comparison between the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, refer to “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Overview
We are a leading digital transformation partner for nonprofit colleges and universities. We build, deliver, and support more than 500 digital and in-person educational offerings, including graduate degrees, undergraduate degrees, professional certificates, boot camps, and short courses. Together with our university clients, we have positively transformed the lives of more than 300,000 students.
Our comprehensive platform of tightly integrated technology and services provides the digital infrastructure that universities rely on to attract, enroll, educate and support students at scale throughout their lives. We believe ongoing learning is critical to career success today. Our broad array of offerings allow our university clients to meet student needs throughout their lives - whether they are earning a full degree, reskilling to learn something new or embarking on a new career path. We refer to the spectrum of educational offerings that a learner may benefit from during their lives and careers as the “Career Curriculum Continuum.” Our platform empowers university clients to play a central role at each stage of a student’s learning journey.
We have two reportable segments: the Degree Program Segment and the Alternative Credential Segment.
In our Degree Program Segment, we provide the technology and services to nonprofit colleges and universities to enable the online delivery of degree programs. Students enrolled in these programs are generally seeking an undergraduate or graduate degree of the same quality they would receive on campus. In the first quarter of 2021, we changed the name of this segment from Graduate Program Segment to Degree Program Segment because this segment now includes undergraduate degree programs.
In our Alternative Credential Segment, we provide premium online short courses and technical, skills-based boot camps through relationships with nonprofit colleges and universities. Students enrolled in these offerings are generally seeking to reskill or upskill through shorter duration, lower-priced offerings that are relevant to the needs of industry and society.
COVID-19 Update
In March 2020, the World Health Organization characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic and, as of the date of this report, COVID-19 continues to spread around the world. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have taken several steps to ensure the continuity of our business, to provide unique solutions to our university clients, and to ensure the health and safety of our employees in the current environment. For example, we have:
•shifted the majority of our global workforce to work-from-home arrangements, other than essential personnel;
•shifted boot camp offerings and other campus-based experiences from physical classrooms to online;
•modified our course production capability into a “Studio-in-a-Box” approach, which allows faculty to record asynchronous content directly in their home or office with virtual assistance from our course designers;
•provided training to our university clients’ campus-based faculty on best practices for successful online teaching through No Back Row® PRO; and
•offered new solutions for existing and new clients, including 2UOS Essential and 2UOS Plus, which provide continuity and support for university clients to conduct classes online and a virtual field placement program, which
allows students in certain clinical graduate programs to fulfill the field placement component of their programs remotely.
Following the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced increasing demand from prospective and current university clients as universities initially moved classes online in Spring 2020 and later as they planned for the Fall 2020 academic term and beyond, which we expect to have an increasing impact on our results of operations moving forward.
We have also experienced increasing demand for our offerings from prospective students since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Given the lag between enrollment and revenue in much of our portfolio, we expect this higher demand to have an increasing impact on our results of operations beginning in 2021.
While we have observed increasing demand from new and existing university clients and from prospective students due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we cannot estimate the impact of COVID-19 on these demand trends, our business or economic conditions generally and there is no assurance that we will continue to experience current demand levels as the COVID-19 pandemic tapers, particularly as vaccinations become widely available. For a discussion of additional risks related to COVID-19, see Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors.”
Certain Trends and Uncertainties
The following represents a summary of certain trends and uncertainties, which could have a significant impact on our financial condition and results of operations. This summary is not intended to be a complete list of potential trends and uncertainties and should be considered along with the factors identified in the section titled “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and elsewhere in this report.
•The risk of a data security breach or service disruption has increased as the frequency, intensity and sophistication of attempted attacks and intrusions from around the world have increased. While we make significant efforts to maintain the security and integrity of our services and computer systems, our cybersecurity measures and the cybersecurity measures taken by our third-party software and service providers may be unable to anticipate, detect or prevent all attempts to compromise our systems. In particular, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the risk of cyber-attacks or other privacy or data security incidents may be heightened as a result of our employees and third-party service providers working remotely from networks that may be less secure.
•We and our university clients are subject to certain education laws and regulations that are frequently revised, repealed or expanded. Any administration may change certain DOE rules or policies in accordance with its policy priorities. The outcome of the process to re-authorize the HEA, any DOE rulemakings, or other law and policy changes may alter the regulatory landscape of the higher education industry, and thereby impact the manner in which we conduct business and serve our university clients.
•Following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced increased demand for our technology and services from university clients and increased demand for our offerings from students. Although we believe that the COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated the trend towards adoption of online education that was already in process prior to the pandemic, we do not know if the university client and student demand levels we have experienced during the pandemic will continue as the COVID-19 pandemic tapers.
•Our university clients have regular turnover in leadership positions. These changes can have a positive or negative impact on our business. If new leaders do not support online delivery of educational offerings, we may not be able to add additional offerings with the university client or the university client may not renew their relationship with us. New leaders may also make changes in university policies, which could result in changes to admissions standards or application of admissions standards and negatively impact student enrollment in a university client’s 2U-powered degree programs.
Our Business Model and Components of Operating Results
The key elements of our business model and components of our operating results are described below.
Revenue Drivers
In our Degree Program Segment, we derive substantially all of our revenue from revenue-share arrangements with our university clients under which we receive a contractually specified percentage of the amounts students pay them to enroll in degree programs. In our Alternative Credential Segment, we derive substantially all of our revenue from tuition and fees from students taking our short courses and boot camps. Revenue in each segment is primarily driven by the number of student enrollments in our offerings.
Operating Expense
Marketing and Sales
Our most significant expense relates to marketing and sales activities to attract students to our offerings across both of our segments. This includes the cost of Search Engine Optimization, Search Engine Marketing and Social Media Optimization, as well as personnel and personnel-related expense for our marketing and recruiting teams.
In our Degree Program Segment, our marketing and sales expense in any period generates student enrollments eight months later, on average. We then generate revenue as students progress through their programs, which generally occurs over a two-year period following initial enrollment. Accordingly, our marketing and sales expense in any period is an investment to generate revenue in future periods. Therefore, we do not believe it is meaningful to directly compare current period revenue to current period marketing and sales expense. Further, in this segment we believe that our marketing and sales expense in future periods will generally decline as a percentage of the revenue reported in those same periods as our revenue base from returning students in existing programs increases.
In our Alternative Credential Segment, our marketing and sales expense in any period generates student enrollments as much as 24 weeks later, on average. We then generate revenue as students progress through their courses, which typically occurs over a two- to six-month period following initial enrollment.
Curriculum and Teaching
Curriculum and teaching expense consists primarily of amounts due to universities for licenses to use their brand names and other trademarks in connection with our short course and boot camp offerings. The payments are based on contractually specified percentages of the tuition and fees we receive from students in those offerings. Curriculum and teaching expense also includes personnel and personnel-related expense for our short course and boot camp instructional staff.
Servicing and Support
Servicing and support expense consists primarily of personnel and personnel-related expense associated with the management and operations of our educational offerings, as well as supporting students and faculty members. Servicing and support expense also includes costs to support our platform, facilitate in-program field placements and student immersions, and assist with compliance requirements.
Technology and Content Development
Technology and content development expense consists primarily of personnel and personnel-related expense associated with the ongoing improvement and maintenance of our platform, as well as hosting and licensing costs. Technology and content expense also includes the amortization of capitalized technology and content.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense consists primarily of personnel and personnel-related expense for our centralized functions, including executive management, legal, finance, human resources, and other departments that do not provide direct operational services. General and administrative expense also includes professional fees and other corporate expense.
Impairment Charge
Impairment charge consists of amounts recorded to write down the carrying value of assets to fair value.
Net Interest Income (Expense)
Net interest income (expense) consists primarily of interest expense from our long-term debt and interest income from our cash and cash equivalents. Interest expense also includes the amortization of debt issuance costs.
Loss on Debt Extinguishment
Loss on debt extinguishment consists of amounts recorded related to the retirement of our debt obligations.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of foreign currency gains and losses.
Income Taxes
Our income tax provisions for all periods consist of U.S. federal, state and foreign income taxes. Our effective tax rate for the period is based on a mix of higher-taxed and lower-taxed jurisdictions.
Results of Operations
Consolidated Operating Results
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table presents selected consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss data for each of the periods indicated.
* Not meaningful for comparative purposes.
Revenue. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $199.8 million, or 34.8%, to $774.5 million as compared to $574.7 million in 2019. This increase was driven by an 82.8% increase in Alternative Credential Segment revenue and a 16.7% increase in Degree Program Segment revenue. The increase in revenue from the Alternative Credential Segment includes incremental revenue of $95.6 million from Trilogy, which we acquired in May 2019.
Revenue from our Degree Program Segment increased $69.5 million, or 16.7%, primarily due to growth in FCE enrollments of 36,837, or 22.8%.
Revenue from our Alternative Credential Segment increased $130.3 million, or 82.8%, primarily due to growth in FCE enrollments of 29,675, or 58.0%. This growth in FCE enrollments was primarily due to the addition of 8,202 incremental FCE enrollments from Trilogy.
Curriculum and Teaching. Curriculum and teaching expense increased $44.7 million, or 70.6%, to $108.0 million as compared to $63.3 million in 2019. This increase was primarily due to a $31.4 million addition of curriculum and teaching expense from Trilogy. The remaining increase was primarily due to a $13.3 million increase in university and instructional staff compensation expense from short courses.
Servicing and Support. Servicing and support expense increased $27.0 million, or 27.3%, to $125.9 million as compared to $98.9 million in 2019. This increase was primarily due to a $17.4 million increase in personnel and personnel-related expense to serve a greater number of students and faculty. The remaining increase was primarily due to an $11.1 million
addition of servicing and support expense from Trilogy. These increases were partially offset by a $2.9 million decrease in travel and related expense due to cost efficiencies and the impact of COVID-19.
Technology and Content Development. Technology and content development expense increased $40.5 million, or 35.1%, to $155.9 million as compared to $115.5 million in 2019. This increase was primarily due to a $19.8 million addition of technology and content development expense from Trilogy. The remaining increase was primarily due to a $12.3 million increase in personnel and personnel-related expense and a $9.4 million increase in amortization expense. These increases were partially offset by a $2.1 million decrease in travel and related expense due to cost efficiencies and the impact of COVID-19.
Marketing and Sales. Marketing and sales expense increased $47.8 million, or 14.0%, to $390.2 million as compared to $342.4 million in 2019. This increase was primarily due to a $40.4 million addition of marketing and sales expense from Trilogy. The remaining increase was primarily due to an $8.6 million increase in marketing costs to attract prospective students. These increases were partially offset by a $4.1 million decrease in travel and related expense due to cost efficiencies and the impact of COVID-19, and a $1.0 million decrease in personnel and personnel-related expense.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expense increased $42.5 million, or 32.4%, to $173.5 million as compared to $131.0 million in 2019. This increase was primarily due to a $30.6 million increase in personnel and personnel-related expense, a $14.8 million addition of general and administrative expense from Trilogy, and a $6.4 million increase in stockholder activism and litigation-related expense. These increases were partially offset by a $9.7 million decrease in transaction, integration and restructuring-related expense, and a $3.8 million decrease in travel and related expense due to cost efficiencies and the impact of COVID-19.
Impairment charge. In the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded an impairment charge of $70.4 million.
Net Interest Income (Expense). Net interest expense was $26.0 million and $7.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The net interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to our Notes and our Term Loan, partially offset by interest earned on our cash balances. The net interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to our Term Loan, partially offset by interest earned on our cash balances.
Loss on Debt Extinguishment. Loss on debt extinguishment was $11.7 million and zero for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This increase was due to the write-off of deferred financing costs and fees paid in connection with the extinguishment of our Term Loan in April 2020.
Other Expense, Net. Other expense, net was $1.4 million and $0.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This increase was primarily due to the remeasurement of foreign currency transactions impacting our operations in the Alternative Credential Segment.
Income Tax Benefit. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized an income tax benefit of $1.5 million, and our effective tax rate was approximately 1%. This income tax benefit was primarily due to net operating losses and the reversal of taxable temporary differences of the acquired intangibles in our Alternative Credential Segment. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized an income tax benefit of $19.9 million, and our effective tax rate was approximately 8%. This income tax benefit primarily related to the reversal of our tax valuation allowance that was no longer needed as a result of recognizing an additional net deferred tax liability due to the acquisition of Trilogy. We expect to continue to recognize an income tax benefit for our Alternative Credential Segment to the extent that this segment continues to generate pre-tax losses while carrying a net deferred tax liability. To date, we have not been required to pay U.S. federal income taxes because of our current and accumulated net operating losses.
Business Segment Operating Results
We define segment profitability as net income or net loss, as applicable, before net interest income (expense), foreign currency gains or losses, taxes, depreciation and amortization expense, deferred revenue fair value adjustments, transaction costs, integration costs, restructuring-related costs, stockholder activism costs, certain litigation-related costs, consisting of fees for certain non-ordinary course litigation and other proceedings, impairment charges, losses on debt extinguishment, and stock-based compensation expense. Some of these items may not be applicable in any given reporting period and they may vary from period to period. Total segment profitability is a non-GAAP measure when presented outside of the financial statement footnotes. Total segment profitability is a key measure used by our management and board of directors to understand and evaluate our operating performance and trends, to develop short- and long-term operational plans and to compare our performance against that of other peer companies using similar measures. In particular, the exclusion of certain expenses in calculating total segment profitability can provide a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our business. Accordingly, we believe that total segment profitability provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and board of directors.
The following table presents a reconciliation of total segment profitability to net loss for each of the periods indicated. This year we consolidated various adjustments into a single line item in our reconciliation table below for the purposes of streamlining our presentation.
* Includes (i) transaction and integration costs of $2.3 million and $8.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, (ii) restructuring-related costs of $6.8 million and $10.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, (iii) stockholder activism and litigation-related costs of $7.4 million and $1.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and (iv) deferred revenue fair value adjustments of $11.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue by segment and segment profitability for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
* Immaterial amounts of intersegment revenue have been excluded from the above results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
** Not meaningful for comparative purposes.
Degree Program Segment profitability increased $43.8 million to $49.6 million as compared to $5.8 million in 2019. This increase was primarily due to revenue growth of $69.5 million, a reduced launch schedule, operational and marketing efficiency initiatives and reduced travel and related expense.
Alternative Credential Segment profitability decreased $3.8 million, or 13%, to $(33.5) million as compared to $(29.7) million in 2019. This decrease was primarily due to the addition of Trilogy’s results of operations since the acquisition date.
Segment profitability for the year ended December 31, 2019 included Trilogy’s results of operations from May 22, 2019, the date of acquisition.
Key Business and Financial Performance Metrics
We use a number of key metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections and make strategic decisions. In addition to adjusted EBITDA (loss), which we discuss below, and revenue and the components of loss from operations in the section above entitled “Our Business Model and Components of Operating Results,” we utilize FCE enrollments as a key metric to evaluate the success of our business.
Full Course Equivalent Enrollments
We measure FCE enrollments for each of the courses offered during a particular period by taking the number of students enrolled in that course and multiplying it by the percentage of the course completed during that period. We add the FCE enrollments for each course within each segment to calculate the total FCE enrollments per segment. This metric allows us to consistently view period-over-period changes in enrollments by accounting for the fact that many courses we enable straddle multiple fiscal quarters. For example, if a course had 25 enrolled students and 40% of the course was completed during a particular period, we would count the course as having 10 FCE enrollments for that period. Any individual student may be enrolled in more than one course during a period.
Average revenue per FCE enrollment represents our weighted-average revenue per course across the mix of courses being offered during a period in each of our operating segments. This number is derived by dividing the total revenue for a period for each of our operating segments by the number of FCE enrollments within the applicable segment during that same period. This amount may vary from period to period depending on the academic calendars of our university clients, the relative growth rates of our degree programs, short courses, and boot camps, as applicable, and varying tuition levels, among other factors.
The following table presents the FCE enrollments and average revenue per FCE enrollment in our Degree Program Segment and Alternative Credential Segment for each of the periods indicated.
* Trilogy’s results of operations are included in our results of operations since the acquisition date.
** The calculation of the Alternative Credential Segment’s average revenue per FCE enrollment includes $11.2 million of revenue that was excluded from the results of operations in the year ended December 31, 2019, due to a deferred revenue fair value purchase accounting adjustment recorded in connection with the acquisition of Trilogy.
Of the increase in FCE enrollments in our Degree Program Segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, 10,243 or 27.8%, and 4,354 or 12.9%, respectively, were attributable to offerings launched during the preceding 12 months.
Of the increase in FCE enrollments in our Alternative Credential Segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, 12,864 or 43.3% and 7,106 or 37.5%, respectively, were attributable to offerings launched during the preceding 12 months.
Adjusted EBITDA (Loss)
We define adjusted EBITDA (loss) as net income or net loss, as applicable, before net interest income (expense), foreign currency gains or losses, taxes, depreciation and amortization expense, deferred revenue fair value adjustments, transaction costs, integration costs, restructuring-related costs, stockholder activism costs, certain litigation-related costs, consisting of fees for certain non-ordinary course litigation and other proceedings, impairment charges, losses on debt extinguishment, and stock-based compensation expense. Some of these items may not be applicable in any given reporting period and they may vary from period to period.
Adjusted EBITDA (loss) is a key measure used by our management and board of directors to understand and evaluate our operating performance and trends, to develop short- and long-term operational plans and to compare our performance against that of other peer companies using similar measures. In particular, the exclusion of certain expenses that are not reflective of our ongoing operating results in calculating adjusted EBITDA (loss) can provide a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our business. Accordingly, we believe that adjusted EBITDA (loss) provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and board of directors.
Adjusted EBITDA (loss) is not a measure calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP, and should not be considered as an alternative to any measure of financial performance calculated and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Our use of adjusted EBITDA (loss) has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our financial results as reported under U.S. GAAP. Some of the limitations are:
•although depreciation and amortization expense are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and adjusted EBITDA (loss) does not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
•adjusted EBITDA (loss) does not reflect (i) changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs; (ii) the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates; (iii) acquisition related gains or losses such as, but not limited to, post-acquisition changes in the value of contingent consideration reflected in operations; (iv) transaction and integration costs; (v) restructuring-related costs; (vi) impairment charges; (vii) stockholder activism costs; (viii) certain litigation-related costs; (ix) losses on debt extinguishment; (x) the impact of deferred revenue fair value adjustments; (xi) interest or tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash; or (xii) the non-cash expense or the potentially dilutive impact of equity-based compensation, which has been, and we expect will continue to be, an important part of our compensation plan; and
•other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate adjusted EBITDA (loss) differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these and other limitations, you should consider adjusted EBITDA (loss) alongside other U.S. GAAP-based financial performance measures, including various cash flow metrics, net income (loss) and our other U.S. GAAP results. The following table presents a reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA (loss) to net loss for each of the periods indicated. This year we consolidated various adjustments into a single line item in our reconciliation table below for the purposes of streamlining our presentation.
* Includes (i) transaction and integration costs of $2.3 million and $8.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, (ii) restructuring-related costs of $6.8 million and $10.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, (iii) stockholder activism and litigation-related costs of $7.4 million and $1.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and (iv) deferred revenue fair value adjustments of $11.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents totaling $500.6 million, which were held for working capital and general corporate purposes, and the ability to borrow under our revolving credit facility as discussed below.
In April 2020, we issued the Notes in an aggregate principal amount of $380 million, including the exercise by the initial purchasers of an option to purchase additional Notes, in a private placement to qualified institutional buyers under Rule 144A of the Securities Act. The Notes are governed by an indenture (the “Indenture”) between the Company and Wilmington Trust, National Association, as trustee. The Notes bear interest at a rate of 2.25% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on May 1 and November 1 of each year, beginning on November 1, 2020. The Notes mature on May 1, 2025, unless repurchased, redeemed or converted in accordance with their terms prior to such date. Prior to November 1, 2024, the Notes are convertible only upon satisfaction of certain conditions, and thereafter at any time until the close of business on the second scheduled trading date immediately before the maturity date. In connection with the Notes, we entered into privately negotiated capped call transactions with a premium cost of approximately $50.5 million. The capped call transactions are generally expected to reduce the potential dilution to our common stock upon any conversion of the Notes and/or to offset any cash payments we are required to make in excess of the principal amount of the converted Notes, with such reduction and/or offset subject to the cap. The net proceeds from the issuance of the Notes were $319.0 million after deducting the initial purchasers’ discount, offering expenses and the cost of the capped call transactions. Refer to Note 9 in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding our Notes.
On April 23, 2020, we repaid our $250 million Term Loan in full (including interest and prepayment premium) and terminated our credit agreement with Owl Rock Capital Corporation. In connection with the extinguishment of the Term Loan, we recognized a charge of approximately $11.7 million in the second quarter of 2020.
On June 25, 2020, we entered into a $50 million credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with Morgan Stanley Senior Funding, Inc., as administrative agent and collateral agent, and certain other lenders party thereto that provides for $50 million in revolving loans. The Credit Agreement allows for incremental borrowings from time to time in an aggregate amount for all such incremental amounts not to exceed (i) the lesser of (x) $50 million and (y) an amount such that the aggregate principal amount of the lenders’ commitments under the revolving credit facility does not exceed $100 million, plus (ii) certain specified prepayments of indebtedness, plus (iii) an unlimited amount subject to satisfaction of a leverage ratio based compliance test. As of December 31, 2020, no amounts were outstanding under the Credit Agreement.
On August 6, 2020, we sold 6,800,000 shares of our common stock to the public. We received net proceeds of $299.8 million, which we intend to use for working capital and other general corporate purposes, including capital expenditures, potential acquisitions, growth opportunities and strategic transactions.
We have financed our operations primarily through payments from university clients and students for our technology and services, public and private equity financings, and the Notes. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, together with cash generated from operations and available borrowing capacity under the Credit Agreement, will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for the next 12 months.
Our operations require us to make capital expenditures for content development, capitalized technology, and property and equipment. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our capital asset additions were $72.6 million and $81.4 million.
We or our affiliates may, at any time and from time to time, seek to retire or purchase our outstanding debt through cash purchases and/or exchanges for equity or debt, in open-market purchases, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Such repurchases or exchanges, if any, will be upon such terms and at such prices as we may determine, and will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. The amounts involved may be material.
Operating Activities
Cash flows from operating activities have typically been generated from our net income (loss) and by changes in our operating assets and liabilities, particularly from accounts receivable, adjusted for non-cash expense items such as depreciation and amortization expense and stock-based compensation expense.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $29.6 million, consisting primarily of adjustments for non-cash items including $96.5 million of depreciation and amortization expense, $82.0 million of
stock-based compensation expense, $16.3 million of non-cash interest expense, $15.2 million of reductions in the carrying amounts of our right-of-use assets, and an $11.7 million loss on debt extinguishment. The net change in operating assets and liabilities of $19.8 million was favorable to cash flows from operations primarily due to a $30.6 million increase in accrued compensation and related benefits, a $26.1 million increase in deferred revenue, and an $11.3 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses. Items offsetting cash provided by operating activities included our net loss of $216.5 million, an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $28.3 million, and an increase in accounts receivable of $17.9 million.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $52.0 million, consisting primarily of our net loss of $235.2 million, adjusted for non-cash items including a $70.4 million impairment charge, $69.8 million of depreciation and amortization expense, $51.5 million of stock-based compensation expense, and $11.7 million of reductions in the carrying amounts of our right-of-use assets. The net change in operating assets and liabilities of $22.8 million was unfavorable to cash flows from operations primarily due to a $29.7 million decrease in other liabilities, a $21.7 million increase in payments to university clients, and a $6.8 million increase in prepaid expenses and other assets, partially offset by favorable changes in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $17.1 million, an $11.9 million increase in accounts receivable, and deferred revenue of $10.0 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $69.3 million, consisting primarily of $62.8 million of additions of amortizable intangible assets and $6.5 million of purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $451.4 million, consisting primarily of a $388.0 million outflow related to our acquisition of Trilogy, net of cash acquired, additions of amortizable intangible assets of $64.9 million, purchases of property and equipment of $13.4 million and a $10.0 million investment purchase. These outflows were partially offset by a $25.0 million inflow from the maturity of a certificate of deposit investment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $367.5 million, consisting primarily of $319.0 million of proceeds from the issuance of the Notes (net of payments related to the initial purchasers’ discount, offering expenses and the cost of the capped call transactions) and $299.8 million in proceeds received from our public offering of common stock in August 2020. These increases were partially offset by the repayment of $253.0 million of principal, interest and prepayment premium primarily associated with the extinguishment of our Term Loan and $2.5 million of payments of debt issuance costs.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $244.5 million, consisting primarily of $242.7 million of proceeds, net of issuance costs, from our Term Loan.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our obligations under the Notes, deferred government grant obligations, non-cancelable operating leases, commitments to certain of our university clients in exchange for contract extensions and various marketing and other rights, and purchase obligations as of December 31, 2020. Future events could cause actual payments to differ from these amounts.
* Amounts represent principal and fixed-rate interest cash payments over the life of the convertible senior notes, including anticipated interest payments that are not recorded on our consolidated balance sheets. Any future settlement of convertible senior notes would impact our cash payments.
** Other purchase orders made in the ordinary course of business are excluded from the table above. Any amounts for which we are liable under purchase orders are reflected on our consolidated balance sheets as accounts payable and accrued liabilities.
Contingent Payments
We have entered into agreements with certain of our university clients in our Degree Program Segment that require us to make future minimum payments in the event that certain program metrics are not achieved on an annual basis. We recognize any estimated contingent payments under these agreements as contra revenue over the period to which they relate, and record a liability in other current liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets.
As of December 31, 2020, we have entered into an agreement to make an additional investment in an education technology company of up to $5.0 million, upon demand by the investee.
See Note 7 in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” included in Part II, Item 8 and “Legal Proceedings” contained in Part I, Item 3 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding contingencies.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K, such as the use of unconsolidated subsidiaries, structured finance, special purpose entities or variable interest entities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reported period. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates if conditions differ from our assumptions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition, Accounts Receivable and Provision for Credit Losses
We generate substantially all of our revenue from contractual arrangements, with either our university clients or students, to provide a comprehensive platform of tightly integrated technology and technology-enabled services that support our offerings.
Performance Obligations
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer. A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. The transaction price is determined based on the consideration to which we will be entitled in exchange for transferring services to the customer. To the extent the transaction price includes variable consideration, we estimate the amount of variable consideration that should be included in the transaction price utilizing the expected value method. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price if, in our judgment, it is probable that a significant future reversal of cumulative revenue under the contract will not occur. Any estimates, including the effect of the constraint on variable consideration, are evaluated at each reporting period, and if necessary, we adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Revenue is then recognized over the remaining estimated period of performance using the cumulative catch-up method.
Our Degree Program Segment derives revenue primarily from contractually specified percentages of the amounts our university clients receive from their students in 2U-enabled degree programs for tuition and fees, less credit card fees and other specified charges we have agreed to exclude in certain university contracts. Our contracts with university clients in this segment typically have terms of 10 to 15 years and have a single performance obligation, as the promises to provide a platform of tightly integrated technology and services that university clients need to attract, enroll, educate and support students are not distinct within the context of the contracts. The single performance obligation is delivered as the university clients receive and consume
benefits, which occurs ratably over a series of academic terms. The amounts received from university clients over the term of the arrangement are variable in nature in that they are dependent upon the number of students that are enrolled in the program within each academic term. These amounts are allocated to and are recognized ratably over the related academic term, defined as the period beginning on the first day of classes through the last. Revenue is recognized net of an allowance, which is established for our expected obligation to refund tuition and fees to university clients.
Our Alternative Credential Segment derives revenue primarily from contracts with students for the tuition and fees paid to enroll in, and progress through, our short courses and boot camps. Our short courses run between six and 16 weeks, while our boot camps run between 12 and 24 weeks. In this segment, our contracts with students include the delivery of the educational and related student support services and are treated as either a single performance obligation or multiple performance obligations, depending upon the offering being delivered. All performance obligations are satisfied ratably over the same presentation period, which is defined as the period beginning on the first day of the course through the last. We recognize the proceeds received, net of any applicable pricing concessions, from the students enrolled and share contractually specified amounts received from students with the associated university client, in exchange for licenses to use the university brand name and other university trademarks. These amounts are recognized as curriculum and teaching costs on our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. Our contracts with university clients in this segment are typically shorter and less restrictive than our contracts with university clients in our Degree Program Segment.
We do not disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations for our Degree Program Segment because the variable consideration is allocated entirely to a wholly unsatisfied promise to transfer a service that forms part of a single performance obligation. We do not disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations for our Alternative Credential Segment because the performance obligations are part of contracts that have original durations of less than one year.
Contract Acquisition Costs
We pay commissions to certain of our employees to obtain contracts with university clients in our Degree Program Segment. These costs are capitalized and recorded on a contract-by-contract basis and amortized using the straight-line method over the expected life, which is generally the length of the contract.
With respect to contract acquisition costs in our Alternative Credential Segment, we have elected to apply the practical expedient in ASC Topic 606 to expense these costs as incurred, as the terms of contracts with students in this segment are less than one year.
Payments to University Clients
Pursuant to certain of our contracts in the Degree Program Segment, we have made, or are obligated to make, payments to university clients at either the execution of a contract or at the extension of a contract in exchange for various marketing and other rights. Generally, these amounts are capitalized as other assets on our consolidated balance sheets, and amortized as contra revenue over the life of the contract, commencing on the later of when payment is due or when contract revenue recognition begins.
Receivables, Contract Assets and Liabilities
Balance sheet items related to contracts consist of accounts receivable, net and deferred revenue on our consolidated balance sheets. Accounts receivable, net includes trade accounts receivable, which are comprised of billed and unbilled revenue. Our trade accounts receivable balances have terms of less than one year. Accounts receivable, net is stated at amortized cost net of provision for credit losses. Our methodology to measure the provision for credit losses requires an estimation of loss rates based upon historical loss experience adjusted for factors that are relevant to determining the expected collectability of accounts receivable. Some of these factors include current market conditions, delinquency trends, aging behavior of receivables and credit and liquidity quality indicators for industry groups, customer classes or individual customers. Our estimates are reviewed and revised periodically based on the ongoing evaluation of credit quality indicators. Historically, actual write-offs for uncollectible accounts have not significantly differed from prior estimates.
Interest-free financing and tuition payment plans are made available to students enrolling in select boot camps within our Alternative Credential Segment. The financing plans, which are managed and serviced by third-party providers, are designed to assist students who are unable to completely cover tuition costs and are available only after all other student financial assistance and scholarships have been applied. The associated financing receivables generally have payment terms that exceed one year and are recorded on our consolidated balance sheets net of any implied pricing concessions, based on our collections history and market data, and significant financing components. The amount of financing receivables recorded within other assets on our consolidated balance sheets was $25.4 million and $3.9 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We recognize unbilled revenue when revenue recognition occurs in advance of billings. Unbilled revenue is recognized in our Degree Program Segment because billings to university clients do not occur until after the academic term has commenced and final enrollment information is available. Our unbilled revenue represents contract assets. Unbilled accounts receivable is recognized in our Alternative Credential Segment once the presentation period commences for amounts to be invoiced to students under installment plans that are paid over the same presentation period.
Deferred revenue represents the excess of amounts billed or received as compared to amounts recognized in revenue on our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss as of the end of the reporting period, and such amounts are reflected as a current liability on our consolidated balance sheets. Our deferred revenue represents contract liabilities. We generally receive payments from Degree Program Segment university clients early in each academic term and from Alternative Credential Segment students, either in full upon registration for the course or in full before the end of the course based on a payment plan, prior to completion of the service period. These payments are recorded as deferred revenue until the services are delivered or until our obligations are otherwise met, at which time revenue is recognized.
Long-Lived Assets
Amortizable Intangible Assets
Acquired Intangible Assets. We capitalize purchased intangible assets, such as software, websites and domains, and amortize them on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful life. Historically, we have assessed the useful lives of these acquired intangible assets to be between three and 10 years.
Capitalized Technology. Capitalized technology includes certain purchased software and technology licenses, direct third-party costs, and internal payroll and payroll-related costs used in the creation of our internal-use software. Software development projects generally include three stages: the preliminary project stage (all costs are expensed as incurred), the application development stage (certain costs are capitalized and certain costs are expensed as incurred) and the post-implementation/operation stage (all costs are expensed as incurred). Costs capitalized in the application development stage include costs of designing the application, coding, integrating our and the university’s networks and systems, and the testing of the software. Capitalization of costs requires judgment in determining when a project has reached the application development stage and the period over which we expect to benefit from the use of that software. Once the software is placed in service, these costs are amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated useful life of the software, which is generally three to five years.
Capitalized Content Development. We develop content for each offering on a course-by-course basis in collaboration with university client faculty and industry experts. Depending upon the offering, we may use materials provided by university clients and their faculty, including curricula, case studies, presentations and other reading materials. We are responsible for the creation of materials suitable for delivery through our online learning platform, including all expenses associated with this effort. With respect to the Degree Program Segment, the development of content is part of our single performance obligation and is considered a contract fulfillment cost.
The content development costs that qualify for capitalization are third-party direct costs, such as videography, editing and other services associated with creating digital content. Additionally, we capitalize internal payroll and payroll-related costs incurred to create and produce videos and other digital content utilized in the university clients’ offerings for delivery via our online learning platform. Capitalization ends when content has been fully developed by both us and the university client, at which time amortization of the capitalized content development costs begins. The capitalized costs for each offering are recorded on a course-by-course basis and included in capitalized content costs in amortizable intangible assets, net on our consolidated balance sheets. These costs are amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated useful life of the respective course, which is generally four to five years. The estimated useful life corresponds with the planned curriculum refresh rate. This refresh rate is consistent with expected curriculum refresh rates as cited by faculty members for similar on-campus offerings.
Evaluation of Long-Lived Assets
We review long-lived assets, which consist of property and equipment, capitalized technology costs, capitalized content development costs and acquired finite-lived intangible assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. In order to assess the recoverability of the capitalized technology and content development costs, the costs are grouped by the lowest level of independent cash flows. Recoverability of a long-lived asset is measured by a comparison of the carrying value of an asset or asset group to the future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by that asset or asset group. If such assets are not recoverable, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying value of an asset exceeds the estimated fair value (discounted cash flow) of the asset or asset group. Our impairment analysis is based upon cumulative results and forecasted performance.
Goodwill
Goodwill is the excess of purchase price over the fair value of identified net assets of businesses acquired. Our goodwill balance relates to the acquisitions of GetSmarter in July 2017 and Trilogy in May 2019. We review goodwill annually, as of October 1. Between annual tests, goodwill is reviewed for possible impairment if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value. We test our goodwill at the reporting unit level, which is an operating segment or one level below an operating segment. We initially assess qualitative factors to determine if it is necessary to perform a quantitative goodwill impairment review. We review goodwill for impairment using a quantitative approach if we decide to bypass the qualitative assessment or determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value based on a qualitative assessment. Upon completion of a quantitative assessment, we may be required to recognize an impairment based on the difference between the carrying value and the fair value of the reporting unit.
We determine the fair value of a reporting unit by utilizing a weighted combination of the income-based and market-based approaches.
The income-based approach requires us to make significant assumptions and estimates. These assumptions and estimates primarily include, but are not limited to, the selection of appropriate peer group companies, discount rates, terminal growth rates, and forecasts of revenue, operating income, depreciation and amortization expense, capital expenditures and future working capital requirements. When determining these assumptions and preparing these estimates, we consider each reporting unit’s historical results and current operating trends, revenue, profitability, cash flow results and forecasts, and industry trends. These estimates can be affected by a number of factors including, but not limited to, general economic and regulatory conditions, market capitalization, the continued efforts of competitors to gain market share and prospective student enrollment patterns.
In addition, the value of a reporting unit using the market-based approach is estimated by comparing the reporting unit to other publicly-traded companies and/or to publicly-disclosed business mergers and acquisitions in similar lines of business. The value of a reporting unit is based on pricing multiples of certain financial parameters observed in the comparable companies. We also make estimates and assumptions for market values to determine a reporting unit’s estimated fair value.
Based on our quantitative assessment performed during 2019 and our qualitative assessment performed as of October 1, 2020, the date of our annual goodwill impairment assessment, we concluded that the estimated fair values of our reporting units exceeded their carrying values by no less than 10%. It is possible that future changes in our circumstances, including potential impacts from COVID-19, or in the variables associated with the judgments, assumptions and estimates used in assessing the fair value of our reporting units, could require us to record additional impairment charges in the future.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of FASB’s recent accounting pronouncements and their effect on us.