ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion highlights the principal factors that have affected our financial condition and results of operations as well as our liquidity and capital resources for the periods described. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements. Please see the explanatory note concerning “Forward-Looking Statements” in Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and Item 1A. Risk Factors for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these forward-looking statements. The operating results for the periods presented were not significantly affected by inflation.
Company Overview
AgEagle™ Aerial Systems Inc. (“AgEagle,” “the Company,” “us,” “we,” “our”) produces, supports and operates technologically advanced drone systems and solutions for the fast-emerging unmanned aerial vehicle (“UAV”) industry. We are engaged in delivering the metrics, tools and strategies necessary to invent and implement drone-enabled solutions that solve important problems for our valued customers. With our founding premise rooted in high performance, next-level thinking, and technological innovation, AgEagle is intent on ensuring that new standards for quality U.S. manufacturing and the provision of precision-crafted, purpose-built drone systems and solutions are delivered to empower our customers to thrive and prosper in The Drone Age. ™
Founded in 2010, AgEagle was originally formed to pioneer proprietary, professional-grade, fixed-wing drones and aerial imagery-based data collection and analytics solutions for the agriculture industry. In addition to selling our innovative drones to the precision and sustainable farming markets, AgEagle’s innovative data collection and analytics solutions have processed more than two million acres of crops, analyzing data from over 50 countries and 53 difference crop types, and creating more than 11,000 crop reports for its users. AgEagle remains intent on earning distinction as a trusted partner to clients seeking to adopt and support productive agricultural approaches to improve farming practices which currently limit the impact on our natural resources, reduce reliance on inputs and materially increase crop yields and profits.
In the first half of 2019, the Company introduced HempOverview, a scalable, responsive and cost-effective SaaS web- and map-based technology platform to support the operations of domestic industrial hemp programs for state and tribal nation departments of agriculture - a solution that provides users with what the Company believes is the gold standard for regulatory oversight, operational assistance and reporting capabilities for the fast emerging industrial hemp industry.
Over the past decade, the broader drone market has continued to evolve and expand. As a result, economic and productivity benefits made possible by drones is fueling global demand for high quality, safe and reliable drone systems and solutions for commercial applications well beyond agriculture. In response, AgEagle is now leveraging our technological expertise and drone engineering and manufacturing experience to penetrate new, high growth market sectors; namely, drone package delivery, public safety/security, large venue decontamination and infrastructure/ inspection, among other high growth market opportunities.
AgEagle’s key growth objectives are centered on three primary areas of focus:
1) Ag Solutions: Leveraging our reputation as one of the leading technology solutions providers to the agriculture industry to increase market share through delivery of best-in-class drones, sensors and data analytics for hemp and other commercial crops;
2) Drone Manufacturing: Establishing AgEagle as the dominant commercial drone design, engineering, manufacturing, assembly and testing company in the United States; and
3) Drone Solutions: Establishing the Company as one of the industry’s leading American-made trusted source for turnkey, end-to-end, tailored drone solutions to the world.
We intend to grow our business by preserving a leadership position in our core Ag Solutions business; providing quality contract manufacturing, assembly and testing services; and innovating new customer-focused drone systems and solutions to capture significant share of the broader commercial drone market. In addition, we expect to accelerate our growth and expansion through strategic acquisitions of drone-related companies offering distinct technological and competitive advantages and have defensible IP protection in place, if applicable.
Key Growth Strategies
We intend to grow our business by achieving greater market penetration of the growing precision agriculture marketplace; by promoting our new service targeting the sustainable agriculture marketplace for the 2021 growing season; and by creating new, easier to use and higher value products that position AgEagle as a leading innovator and trusted solutions provider in high growth markets where advanced aerial imaging and data capture and analytics technologies can be used to achieve specific business and sustainability objectives. Currently, our management is actively exploring new vertical expansion opportunities in other industries outside of agriculture and its related areas, including drone-enabled package delivery. In addition to drone package deliveries, we believe that our solutions and services may also be well suited for use in decontamination, mapping and surveying, mining/resource exploration, insurance inspection and infrastructure/asset inspection, among other industrial applications.
Key components of our growth strategy include the following:
● Achieving greater market penetration of the U.S. industrial hemp industry by working to establish HempOverview and other related products and services as the gold industry standard for hemp cultivation oversight, compliance, enforcement and commerce. AgEagle is - and intends to remain - at the leading edge of leveraging best-in-class technology to provide turnkey solutions for state and tribal regulatory departments of agriculture, industrial hemp and hemp-derived CBD growers and processors. At this time, AgEagle believes that it is the only company in the nation with extensive experience in agriculture that is effectively addressing the emerging needs and challenges of the domestic hemp cultivation industry through the application of advanced technology - a key competitive differential that the Company hopes to continue capitalizing on in the coming year.
● Deliver new and innovative solutions. AgEagle’s research and development efforts are the foundation of the Company, and we intend to continue investing in our own innovations, pioneering new and enhanced products and solutions that enable us to satisfy the Company’s customers - both in response to and in anticipation of their needs. AgEagle believes that by investing in research and development, the Company can be a leader in delivering innovative drone systems and solutions that address market needs within our current target markets, enabling us to create new opportunities for growth.
● Continue to expand the AgEagle platform of drone systems and solutions into other industries beyond agriculture and commercial package delivery. The Company is actively pursuing opportunities outside of agriculture as we continue to expand and grow the AgEagle platform. We are confident in the UAV systems, services and solutions we offer today and believe that these systems, services and solutions could provide other drone industry sectors the same kind of optimization we are currently providing the agriculture industry. Expansion initiatives include the provision of quality contract manufacturing, design and engineering, assembly and testing of advanced drones and drone-related equipment, as well as turnkey drone solutions for the broader drone market.
● Growth through acquisition. Through successful execution of our growth-through-acquisition strategies, we intend to acquire technologically-advanced drone-related companies and intellectual property that complement and strengthen our value proposition to the market. We believe that by investing in complementary acquisitions, we can accelerate our revenue growth and deliver a broader array of innovative drone systems and solutions that address specialized market needs within our current target markets and in emerging drone industry sectors.
Competitive Strengths
AgEagle believes the following attributes and capabilities provide us with long-term competitive advantages:
● Proprietary technologies, in-house capabilities and industry experience - We believe our decade of experience in commercial drone design and engineering; in-house manufacturing, assembly and testing capabilities; and advanced technology development skillset serve to differentiate AgEagle in the marketplace. As of today, we develop and manufacture all the drone systems and solutions we produce in the United States, which allows us to avoid many of the potential difficulties that could arise if our engineering and manufacturing operations were otherwise located outside of the country. In addition, AgEagle is committed to meeting and exceeding quality and safety standards for manufacturing, assembly, design and engineering and testing of drones, drone subcomponents and related drone equipment in our Wichita-based manufacturing operations.
● Advanced technology solutions allow users to remove the guesswork in effectively managing hemp cultivation oversight, compliance, enforcement, reporting and commerce - To our knowledge, there is no other SaaS solution available on the market today - particularly one that has been developed by a proven Agtech company with the level of experience and expertise of AgEagle - that provides the multi-faceted level of support and services that HempOverview offers to all stakeholders in the industry.
● Increased margins for farmers - We believe our drones and drone solutions directly enhance margins for commercial farmers by reducing the amount of nutrients and chemicals needed to manage their farms. The software equipped on our UAVs deliver a high-quality aerial map upon completion of the flight, allowing the user to accurately identify the specific areas that are malnourished. This software is compatible with precision applicator tractors, which assist users in applying a precise amount of nutrients in only the areas it is needed. In addition, Our UAVs are specially designed to provide users with a portable and easy to operate device, which can be controlled with a hand-held unit or tablet. Through our FarmLens platform, users are able to plan and track an efficient flight path for their UAV. The UAVs are equipped with a camera and NIR filter whose images provide a holistic aerial view of the fields, along with meaningful data that is uploaded and delivered to the user within a very short time frame. As a result, this platform allows users to quickly detect any issues in their crops, which enables them to address such issues in a timely manner before any damage, or further damage, may affect their crops.
● Expertise in drone delivery - Since 2019, AgEagle has been actively engaged in the custom manufacturing and assembly of drones and drone equipment used for the testing and refining of a world leading ecommerce company’s commercial drone small package delivery vehicles, systems and operations. As a result, we are uniquely positioned to collaborate with other organizations seeking to activate and accelerate adoption of end-to-end drone delivery solutions to drive new and differentiated value creation in their business-to-business or business-to-consumer operations.
● Leading-edge research and delivery - In order to propel functional commercial applications of drone solutions in real world, real-time environments, and to best aid in the determination and ultimate adoption of a regulatory framework to guide and direct mainstream commercial use of drones beyond visual line of sight, AgEagle is a lead participant in the FAA’s BEYOND program in Kansas and is actively engaged in partnering with other leading drone solutions companies on pilot projects with long-term commercial potential.
Impact of COVID-19 On Our Business Operations
The outbreak of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) has evolved into a global pandemic. The coronavirus has spread to many regions of the world, including the United States. The extent to which COVID-19 impacts our business and operating results will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19 and the actions to contain the coronavirus or treat its impact, among others.
Should the coronavirus continue to spread, our business operations could be delayed or interrupted. For instance, we currently utilize third parties to, among other things, manufacture components and parts for the proprietary and contracted drones we produce, and to perform quality testing. We also manufacture and assemble products and perform various services at our manufacturing facility. If either we or any third-parties in the supply chain for materials used in our manufacturing and assembly processes are adversely impacted by restrictions resulting from the coronavirus pandemic, our supply chain may be disrupted, limiting our ability to manufacture and assemble products.
The spread of the coronavirus, which has caused a broad impact globally, including restrictions on travel and quarantine policies put into place by businesses and governments, may have a material economic effect on our business. While the potential economic impact brought on by and the duration of the pandemic may be difficult to assess or predict, it has already caused, and is likely to result in further, significant disruptions of global financial markets, which may reduce our future ability to access capital either at all or on favorable terms. In addition, a recession, depression or other sustained adverse market event resulting from the spread of the coronavirus could materially and adversely affect our business and the value of our Common Stock.
The ultimate impact of the current pandemic, or any other health epidemic, is highly uncertain and subject to change. We do not yet know the full extent of potential delays or impacts on our business or the global economy as a whole. However, these effects could have a material impact on our operations in the future. We will continue to monitor the situation closely.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, in addition to complying with ’shelter at home’ mandates in those states affecting our employees, most of whom worked virtually from their homes, our supply chain was adversely impacted by the pandemic, causing material delays in the delivery of critical supply orders associated with timely fulfilling our obligations to our large ecommerce client. As a consequence, revenues originally expected to be reported in the second quarter 2020 were reported in the third quarter 2020 results.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Our most critical estimates include those related to revenue recognition, inventories and reserves for excess and obsolescence, accounting for stock-based awards, and income taxes. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following critical accounting estimates affect the more significant judgments and estimates used in preparing our consolidated financial statements. Please see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements, which are included in Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report, for our Summary of Significant Accounting Policies. There have been no material changes made to the critical accounting estimates during the periods presented in the consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
The majority of our revenue is generated pursuant to written contractual arrangements to develop, manufacture and/or modify complex drone related products, and to provide associated engineering, technical and other services according to customer specifications. These contracts are a fixed price and we account for all revenue contracts in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Under fixed-price contracts, we agree to perform the specified work for a pre-determined price. To the extent our actual costs vary from the estimates upon which the price was negotiated, we will generate more or less profit or could incur a loss. We account for a contract after it has been approved by all parties to the arrangement, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are identified, the contract has commercial substance and collectability of consideration is probable.
Topic 606 requires revenue to be recognized when promised goods or services are transferred to customers in amounts that reflect the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services and recognize revenue under the new standard as costs are incurred. Under previous U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), revenue was generally recognized when deliveries were made, performance milestones were attained, or as costs were incurred. The new standard accelerates the timing of when the revenue is recognized, however, it does not change the total amount of revenue recognized on our UAVS contracts. The new standard does not affect revenue recognition for purposes of our UAVS or software subscription sales as each of the Company’s revenue transactions represent a single performance obligation that is satisfied at a point in time or monthly subscription fees which are recognized ratably over the subscription period, as defined in the new ASU. Accordingly, the Company recognizes revenue for small UAS product contracts with customers at the point in time when the transfer of control passes to the customer, which is generally upon delivery.
Inventories and Reserve for Obsolescence
Our policy for valuation of inventory, including the determination of obsolete inventory, requires us to perform a detailed assessment of inventory at each balance sheet date, which includes a review of, among other factors, an estimate of future demand for products within specific time horizons, valuation of existing inventory, as well as product lifecycle and product development plans. Inventory reserves are also provided to cover risks arising from slow-moving items. We write down our inventory for estimated obsolescence or unmarketable inventory equal to the difference between the cost of inventory and the estimated net realizable value based on assumptions about future demand and market conditions. We may be required to record additional inventory write-downs if actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected by our management.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
The assets and liabilities of acquired businesses are recorded under the acquisition method of accounting at their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. Goodwill represents costs in excess of fair values assigned to the underlying identifiable net assets of acquired businesses. Intangible assets from acquired businesses are recognized at fair value on the acquisition date and consist of customer programs, trademarks, customer relationships, technology and other intangible assets. Customer programs include values assigned to major programs of acquired businesses and represent the aggregate value associated with the customer relationships, contracts, technology and trademarks underlying the associated program and are amortized on a straight-line basis over a period of expected cash flows used to measure fair value, which ranges from four to five years.
Our goodwill balance was $3.1 million at December 31, 2020 and $3.1 million at December 31, 2019. We perform an annual impairment test of our goodwill at least annually in the fourth quarter or more frequently whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may be impaired. Such events or changes in circumstances may include a significant deterioration in overall economic conditions, changes in the business climate of our industry, a decline in our market capitalization, operating performance indicators, competition, reorganizations of our business. Our goodwill has been allocated to and is tested for impairment at a level referred to as the business segment. The level at which we test goodwill for impairment requires us to determine whether the operations below the business segment constitute a self-sustaining business for which discrete financial information is available and segment management regularly reviews the operating results.
We use a quantitative approach when testing goodwill. To perform the quantitative impairment test, we compare the fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying value, including goodwill. If the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, goodwill of the reporting unit is not impaired. If the carrying value of the reporting unit, including goodwill, exceeds its fair value, a goodwill impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. We generally estimate the fair value of each reporting unit using a combination of a discounted cash flow (DCF) analysis and market-based valuation methodologies such as comparable public company trading values and values observed in recent business acquisitions. Determining fair value requires the exercise of significant judgments, including the amount and timing of expected future cash flows, long-term growth rates, discount rates and relevant comparable public company earnings multiples and relevant transaction multiples. The cash flows employed in the DCF analysis are based on our best estimate of future sales, earnings and cash flows after considering factors such as general market conditions, existing firm orders, expected future orders, changes in working capital, long term business plans and recent operating performance.
Finite-lived intangibles are amortized to expense over the applicable useful lives, ranging from four to five years, based on the nature of the asset and the underlying pattern of economic benefit as reflected by future net cash inflows. We perform an impairment test of finite-lived intangibles whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate their carrying value may be impaired. If events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of a finite-lived intangible may be impaired, the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset group would be compared to the asset group’s carrying value. If the asset group’s carrying amount exceed the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows, we would determine the fair value of the asset group and record an impairment loss in net earnings.
As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, we performed our annual goodwill and finite-lived intangible assets impairment tests for our SaaS reporting unit. The results of that test indicated that for our SaaS reporting unit no impairment charges existed for the recorded goodwill of $3.1M or the related finite-intangibles assets of approximately $521K as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2019, the results of the impairment test indicated that for our SaaS reporting unit an impairment existed for the recorded goodwill of $3.3M but not for related finite-intangibles assets of approximately $521K, resulting in a partial impairment charge on our goodwill of approximately $163,000.
Share-Based Compensation Awards
The value we assign to the options that we issue is based on the fair market value as calculated by the Black-Scholes pricing model. To perform a calculation of the value of our options, we determine an estimate of the volatility of our stock. We need to estimate volatility because there has not been enough trading of our stock to determine an appropriate measure of volatility. We believe our estimate of volatility is reasonable, and we review the assumptions used to determine this whenever we issue new equity instruments. If we have a material error in our estimate of the volatility of our stock, our expenses could be understated or overstated. All share-based awards are expensed on a straight-line basis over the vesting period of the options.
Income Taxes
We are required to estimate our income taxes, which includes estimating our current income taxes as well as measuring the temporary differences resulting from different treatment of items for tax and accounting purposes. We currently have significant deferred assets, which are subject to periodic recoverability assessments. Realizing our deferred tax assets principally depends on our achieving projected future taxable income. We may change our judgments regarding future profitability due to future market conditions and other factors, which may result in recording a valuation allowance against those deferred tax assets.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 as Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded revenues of $1,285,383 compared to revenues of $296,677 for the same period in 2019, a 333% increase. The increase was mainly due to new revenues derived from purchase orders to manufacture and assemble drones and related delivery products designed to meet specific criteria for package delivery in urban and suburban area. Revenue growth was also positively impacted by the continued focus on expansion of our platform, providing aerial imaging and analytics solutions which serve new and emerging markets including registration, oversight, and compliance of hemp fields by state departments of agriculture.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cost of sales totaled $711,650, a $509,601, or 252%, increase when compared to $202,049 in the year ended December 31, 2019. We had a gross profit of $573,733, or 45% gross profit margin, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $94,628, or 32% gross profit margin, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The primary factors contributing to the increase in our cost of sales and gross profit margin was due to the continued shift in mix of products and services we now offer customers in the new markets we serve that have resulted in higher margin for our sales.
We recorded total operating expenses of $5,505,040 during 2020, a 110% increase as compared to operating expenses of $2,616,821 in the same period of 2019. Our operating expenses are comprised of general and administrative expenses, professional fees, and selling expenses. General and administrative expenses totaled $2,732,274 in 2020 compared to $1,850,225 in 2019, an increase of 48%. The increase was primarily due to recruiting fees associated with the search for new CEO, costs for public relations services, payments to directors as compensation fees, additional payroll and bonus payments associated with new hires and existing employees, stock compensation expenses, and added annual shareholder meeting costs. Professional fees also increased 308% as we had $2,703,371 of expenses for the current period versus $662,633 in the comparable prior period. The increase was mainly due to additional consulting service fees related to additional operational and business development consultants required to expand our growth opportunities, fractional CTO services, along with incremental legal expenses mainly associated with our capital raising activities and an estimated contingent liability accrual associated with a consultant agreement. Also included in operating expenses was selling costs that decreased 38% to $40,003 versus $65,015 in the prior year’s comparable period due to less travel and conference expenses for the purposes of new business development as a result of COVID-19. Lastly, we recorded $29,392 and $38,498 related to research and development expenses during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Other income (expenses) for the year ended December 31, 2020 was ($594) as we recorded a loss on disposal of fixed assets due to our moving to Wichita. There was no other income (expenses) recorded for the comparable period during 2019.
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $549 related to the Paycheck Protection Plan (PPP) loan as compared to $501 in the prior year related to a promissory note that was repaid in March 2019.
Our net loss was $4,932,450 in 2020. This represents a $2,409,756 increase over our net loss of $2,522,694 in 2019. Overall, the increase in net loss is due to greater operating costs which includes additional general and administrative costs along with added professional expenses as a result of the shift in our sales and long-term growth strategies that required increase business development resources, offset by approximately $163,000 charge of a goodwill impairment that occurred in 2019. We are in the process of continuing to address these shifts by developing new platforms, products and services that support prevailing growth opportunities in domestic industrial hemp and sustainable agriculture and growing our drone-enabled package delivery business.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our net loss available to Common Stockholders was $14,043,777 and $2,684,916, respectively an increase of $11,358,861. The increase is due to non-cash charges stemming from required deemed dividend accounting for modifications to certain preferred stock, redemption of preferred stock and the trigger of Down Round provisions on certain preferred stock and warrants.
Cash Flows
December 31, 2020 As Compared to December 31, 2019
Cash on hand was $23,940,333 on December 31, 2020, an increase of $23,222,336 compared to the $717,997 on hand at December 31, 2019. Cash used in operations for 2020 was $2,256,571 compared to $1,818,290 of cash used by operations for 2019. The increase in cash used in operating activities was driven largely decrease in deferred revenue offset by an increase mainly in accounts payables and accrued expenses related to purchases of inventories and payments for professional services and other costs associated the growth of the business.
Cash used by investing activities during 2020 was $779,023compared to $24,445 in 2019. The increase in cash used in our investing activities resulted from the addition of note receivable agreements executed for the purposes of a strategic partnership and a letter of intent associated with an acquisition. In addition, we made purchases of property and equipment and building improvements related to the new leased warehouse and corporate offices along with recording capitalized costs associated with the development of the HempOverview platform.
Cash provided in financing activities during the 12 months ended December 31, 2020 was $26,257,930 compared to cash used in financing activities of $40,998 as of December 31, 2019. The increase in cash provided by our financing activities was due to sales of our Preferred Stock, Common Stock, warrants, and promissory note proceeds as part of Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act’s Paycheck Protection Plan (PPP).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had working capital of $22,615,624 and a loss from operations of $4,932,450 for the period then ended. While there can be no guarantees, we believe cash on hand, in connection with cash generated from revenue, will be sufficient to fund the next year of operations. In addition, we intend to pursue other opportunities of raising capital with outside investors.
On April 7, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with, an existing an institutional investor and shareholder of the Company (the “Investor”), pursuant to which the Board of Directors of the Company authorized 1,050 shares of a newly designated series of preferred stock, the Series E Convertible Preferred Stock. The Preferred Stock was convertible at $0.25 per share into an aggregate of 4,200,000 shares of the Common Stock, par value $0.001 per share. The purchase price for the Preferred Stock was $1,050,000 of which we received net proceeds of $1,010,000.
On May 11, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with an Investor pursuant to which we agreed to sell to the Investor (in a registered direct offering) 2,400,000 shares of Common Stock, par value $0.001, and pre-funded warrants (the “Pre-Funded Warrants”) to purchase up to 3,260,377 shares of Common Stock, for gross proceeds of approximately $6 million and net proceeds of $5,950,010 after issuance costs. The purchase price for each share of Common Stock was $1.06 and the purchase price for each Pre-Funded Warrant was $1.05999. The exercise price for each Warrant was $0.001. Net proceeds from the sale were used to repurchase 262 shares of our Series E Preferred Stock, convertible into 1,048,000 shares of Common Stock currently held by the Investor at a repurchase price of $1.06 per share of Common Stock.
On June 24, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with an Investor pursuant to which we agreed to sell to the Investor in a registered direct offering 4,407,400 shares of Common Stock, par value $0.001, pre-funded warrants to purchase up to 1,956,236 shares of Common Stock, and warrants to purchase up to 2,455,476 shares of Common Stock at an exercise price of $1.35 per share (the “Warrants”), for gross proceeds of $7 million (which included subsequent payment of the exercise price of the Pre-Funded Warrants in the amount of $1,956.24. Upon exercise of the Warrants in full by the Investor, we received additional gross proceeds of $3,314,892. The shares of Common Stock underlying the Pre-Funded Warrants and the Warrants are referred to as “Warrant Shares.” The purchase price for each share of Common Stock is $1.10 and the purchase price for each Pre-Funded Warrant is $1.099. The exercise price for each Pre-Funded Warrant is $0.001. As of December 31, 2020, all the Warrant Shares were fully exercised.
On August 4, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with an Investor, pursuant to which we agreed to sell to the Investor in a registered direct offering 3,335,705 shares of Common Stock, par value $0.001, and warrants to purchase up to 2,516,778 shares of Common Stock at an exercise price of $3.30 per share, for gross proceeds of approximately $10 million. Upon exercise of the Warrants in full by the Investor, we would receive additional gross proceeds of approximately $8,305,367. The purchase price for each share of Common Stock was $2.98. Common Stock
On December 31, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with an Investor, pursuant to which the Company agreed to sell to the Investor in a registered direct offering Pre-Funded Warrants to purchase up to 1,057,214 shares of Common Stock, par value $0.001 (“Common Stock”), for gross proceeds of approximately $6.375 million (which includes subsequent payment of the exercise price of the Pre-Funded Warrants in the amount of $1,057.21). The shares of Common Stock underlying the Pre-Funded Warrants are referred to as the “Warrant Shares.” The purchase price for each Pre-Funded Warrant is $6.029. The exercise price for each Pre-Funded Warrant is $0.001.
The Company has continued to realize losses from operations. However, as a result of our capital raise efforts, we believe we will have sufficient cash to meet our anticipated operating costs and capital expenditure requirements through December 2022. Our primary need for liquidity is to fund working capital requirements of our business, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service, and for general corporate purposes. Our primary source of liquidity is funds generated by financing activities and from private placements. Our ability to fund our operations, to make planned capital expenditures, to make planned acquisitions, to make scheduled debt payments, and to repay or refinance indebtedness depends on our future operating performance and cash flows, which are subject to prevailing economic conditions and financial, business and other factors, some of which are beyond our control.
If the Company is unable to generate significant sales growth in the near term and raise additional capital, there is a risk that the Company could default on additional obligations; and could be required to discontinue or significantly reduce the scope of its operations if no other means of financing operations are available. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amount and classification of liabilities or any other adjustment that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
On December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenue or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. Since our inception, except for standard operating leases, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, including the use of structured finance, special purpose entities or variable interest entities. We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to stockholders.
Contractual Obligations
Operating Leases
The Company leases office space located at 8863 E. 34th Street North, Wichita, Kansas 67226. The Company leases a building located at 8863 E. 34th Street North, Wichita, Kansas 67226, which serves as our corporate headquarters and manufacturing facility. The commencement date of the lease was November 1, 2020 and will expire on October 31, 2023, unless sooner terminated or extended. The aggregate estimated rent payments due over the initial three-year term is $297,000. The landlord may grant the Company the option to extend the term for an additional thirty-six months. The aggregate estimated rent payments due over the option term would be $314,640 and the right of use asset is $257,363 as of December 31, 2020.
GreenBlock Capital LLC Consulting Agreement
On May 3, 2019, we entered into a consulting agreement with GreenBlock Capital LLC (“Consultant”) to serve as strategic advisor and consultant with respect to the development of new business opportunities and the implementation of business strategies related to expansion into the emerging domestic hemp cultivation market. The extent of the services will be set forth in separate scopes of work, from time to time, to be prepared and mutually agreed to by the parties. As compensation for the services under the terms of the agreement, the Consultant can receive (i) $25,000 per month during the term of the agreement, (ii) 500,000 shares of restricted Common Stock upon execution of the agreement and up to (iii) up to 2,500,000 shares of restricted Common Stock upon the achievement of predetermined milestones.
On October 31, 2019, the consulting agreement was terminated as a result of the Company no longer needing these services to be provided by an outside consultant. There are no early termination penalties incurred as a result of the termination of the consulting agreement. The Consultant may still be entitled to receive up to 2,500,000 shares of restricted Common Stock after termination of the Agreement, if the achievement of milestones that commenced during the term of the Agreement are completed after termination.
On November 12, 2019, we announced that the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services (FDACS) had chosen our HempOverview software-as-a-solution (SaaS) platform to manage the online application submission and registration process for hemp growers and their farms and hemp fields for the 2020, 2021 and 2022 planting seasons (the “Florida Contract”). Prior to the termination of the Agreement with the Consultant, as part of the Consultant’s services, Consultant introduced us to the FDACS, which introduction resulted in us signing the Florida Contract. Since the Consultant was instrumental in identifying and introducing us to FDACS prior to termination of the Agreement, the execution of the Florida Contract is a milestone achieved by the Consultant under the terms of the Agreement. Upon the receipt of our executed purchase from FDACS, the Company will issue 250,000 of the shares of Common Stock to the Consultant. The Consultant may be entitled to receive up to another 750,000 shares of Common Stock, which will be contingent upon further milestones to be achieved under the Florida Contract.
On June 30, 2020, the Company issued an additional 250,000 shares of its Common Stock to the Consultant as part of its compensation for services. The Company recognized a total of $297,500 of expense at a fair value of $1.19 per share within professional fees related to these issuances.
Inflation
Our opinion is that inflation has not had, and is not expected to have, a material effect on our operations.
Climate Change
Our opinion is that neither climate change, nor governmental regulations related to climate change, have had, or are expected to have, any material effect on our operations.
New Accounting Pronouncements
There were various updates recently issued, most of which represented technical corrections to the accounting literature or application to specific industries and are not expected to a have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows.