Item 7 Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Refer to Pages 10-22, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis” of the 2020 Annual Report To Shareholders filed herewith as Exhibit 13, which section is incorporated herein by reference.
Critical Accounting Policy
The consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America and follow general practices within the financial services industry. The application of these principles requires management to make certain estimates, assumptions and judgements that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and footnotes. These estimates, assumptions and judgements are based on information available as of the date of the financial statements, and as this information changes, the financial statements could reflect different estimates, assumptions, and judgements.
The procedures for assessing the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses reflect our evaluations of credit risk after careful consideration of all information available to management. In developing this assessment, management must rely on estimates and exercise judgement regarding matters where the ultimate outcome is unknown such as economic factors, development affecting companies in specific industries and issues with respect to single borrowers. Depending on changes in circumstances, future assessments of credit risk may yield materially different results, which may require an increase or a decrease in the allowance for loan losses.
The allowance is regularly reviewed by management to determine whether the amount is considered adequate to absorb probable losses. This evaluation includes specific loss estimates on certain individually reviewed loans, statistical losses, estimates for loan pools that are based on historical loss experience, and general loss estimates that are based on the size, quality and concentration characteristics of the various loan portfolios, adverse situations that may affect a borrower’s ability to repay, and current economic and industry conditions. Also considered as part of that judgement is a review of the Bank’s trends in delinquencies and loan losses, and economic factors.
The allowance for loan losses is maintained at a level believed adequate by management to absorb probable losses inherent in the loan portfolio. Management’s evaluation of the adequacy of the allowance is an estimate based on management’s current judgement about the credit quality of the loan portfolio. While the Company strives to reflect all known risk factors in its evaluation, judgement errors may occur.