Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the section entitled “Selected Financial Data” and our audited financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. This discussion and other parts of this report contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations, intentions and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this report.
Overview
We are a biotechnology company engaged in researching and developing therapeutics to slow, halt or reverse diseases of aging. Our initial focus is on creating senolytic medicines to selectively eliminate senescent cells and thereby treat diseases of aging, such as ophthalmologic and neurologic diseases.
In July 2020, we filed an Investigational New Drug application, or IND, to commence a Phase 1 study of UBX1325 in patients with diabetic macular edema, or DME, and age-related macular degeneration, or AMD. UBX1325 is a potent small molecule inhibitor of the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family member, Bcl-xL. We initiated a Phase 1 clinical study of UBX1325 and dosed the first patient in October 2020 and expect to obtain initial safety and tolerability results from this study in the first half of 2021. The overall clinical program is directed at multiple age-related diseases of the eye, including diabetic retinopathy and age-related macular degeneration, as well as DME. However, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the timing of study enrollment, visit adherence and completions is hard to assess due to the rapidly evolving nature of the situation and it is possible that the study enrollment, visit adherence and completion may be delayed.
In August 2020, we announced the 12-week results from our Phase 2 study of UBX0101 in patients with moderate-to-severe painful osteoarthritis, or OA of the knee. There was no statistically significant difference between any arm of UBX0101 and placebo at the 12-week primary endpoint of the study. Given these results, we are not progressing UBX0101 into pivotal studies and will narrow our near-term focus to our ongoing ophthalmologic and neurologic disease programs.
In September 2020, we implemented a corporate restructuring to align our resources on cellular senescence programs in ophthalmology and neurology while further extending operating capital. The restructuring resulted in an elimination of approximately 33 positions, or approximately 32% of our workforce, as of September 30, 2020. We incurred a one-time employee benefits and severance charge of approximately $1.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. We expect these steps will extend our cash runway into the second half of 2022, and we project current cash and cash equivalents will fund key clinical data readouts for UBX1325.
Since the commencement of our operations, we have invested a significant portion of our efforts and financial resources in research and development activities, and we have incurred net losses each year since inception. Our net losses were $93.8 million and $82.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We do not have any products approved for sale, and we have never generated any revenue from contracts with customers. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $339.3 million, and we do not expect positive cash flows from operations in the foreseeable future. We expect to continue to incur net operating losses for at least the next several years as we continue our research and development efforts, advance our drug candidates through preclinical and clinical development, seek regulatory approval, prepare for and, if approved,
proceed to commercialization.
In August 2020 we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement, or the Loan Agreement, with Hercules Capital, Inc. and $25.0 million dollars was advanced to us upon execution of the Loan Agreement. The milestones for the remaining tranches have not yet been reached and, as of December 31, 2020 will not be reached as they were dependent, in whole or in part, upon the continued advancement in the clinical development of UBX0101 in patients with osteoarthritis of the knee. Starting in July 2021, we will be subject to a liquidity covenant requiring us to maintain a cash reserve of at least $15.0 million. We will make interest only payments through September 1, 2022,
or extended to March 1, 2023 upon satisfaction of certain milestones, and will then repay the principal balance and interest in equal monthly installments through August 1, 2024.
Prior to entering the Loan Agreement, we have historically funded our operations primarily from the issuance and sale of convertible preferred stock and convertible promissory notes, as well as public equity issuances. On June 3, 2019, we entered into a sales agreement or, the June 2019 Sales Agreement, with Cowen and Company, LLC, or Cowen, to sell shares of our common stock, from time to time, with aggregate gross sales proceeds of up
to $75.0 million through an at-the-market equity offering program under which Cowen acts as sales agent, or the ATM Offering Program. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued and sold 5,002,257 shares of our common stock through our ATM Offering Program and received net proceeds of approximately $37.3 million, after deducting commissions and other offering expenses of $1.3 million. On July 31, 2020, we entered into a
second sales agreement, or the July 2020 Sales Agreement, with Cowen to sell an additional $50.0 million of our shares of common stock through an additional at-the-market equity offering program, or the Additional ATM Offering Program in which Cowen will act as sales agent. As of December 31, 2020, there had been no shares sold under the Additional ATM Offering Program.
We do not expect to generate revenue from any drug candidates that we develop until we obtain regulatory approval for one or more of such drug candidates and commercialize our products or enter into collaborative agreements with third parties. Substantially all of our net losses have resulted from costs incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations.
As a result, we will need to raise additional capital. Adequate funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all, particularly in light of the current COVID-19 pandemic and associated economic uncertainty and potential for local and/or global economic recession. If sufficient funds on acceptable terms are not available when needed, we could be required to significantly reduce our operating expenses and delay, reduce the scope of, or eliminate one or more of our development programs.
We rely on third parties in the conduct of our preclinical studies and clinical trials and for manufacturing and supply of our drug candidates. We have no internal manufacturing capabilities, and we will continue to rely on third parties, many of whom are single-source suppliers, for our preclinical and clinical trial materials, as well as the commercial supply of our products. In addition, we do not yet have a marketing or sales organization or commercial
infrastructure. Accordingly, we will incur significant expenses to develop a marketing and sales organization and commercial infrastructure in advance of generating any product sales.
COVID-19 Update
The COVID-19 pandemic has placed strains on the providers of healthcare services, including the healthcare institutions, clinical research organizations, or CROs, and Institutional Review Boards under whose auspices we conduct our clinical trials. These strains have resulted in limits on the initiation of new clinical trials, slowing or halting enrollment in existing trials and restrictions placed upon on-site monitoring activities of clinical
trials. Prior to the completion of our Phase 2 and Phase 1b UBX0101 clinical studies, we amended the clinical study protocols to enable remote data collection for clinical sites that were limited in their ability to conduct study visits in person, for either site or patient safety reasons. We also instituted remote data source verification procedures to limit the extent that on-site monitoring was required.
Although one of the manufacturers in our supply chain for UBX0101 experienced a two-week shutdown in April 2020 due to a COVID-19 related incident and there have been some delays in shipments due to a reduction in overall flights, neither of these factors impacted our supply of UBX0101 prior to our shutting down development of such program. There have been no other disruptions in our supply chain of drug manufacturers necessary to conduct our clinical trials and we believe we have sufficient supply of drug inventories to complete our Phase 1 study of UBX1325 in ophthalmologic disease.
Several of the CROs that provide preclinical services to us are based in China and India and experienced temporary shutdowns in February and March due to government mandates. In each case we were able to reassign the balance of activities to other CROs and the shutdowns did not impact our preclinical timelines. CROs based in the United States that provide preclinical services are experiencing heavy demand which may impact their ability to
start new studies and could lead to delays in the commencement of our preclinical studies. Several of our U.S.-based academic research partners have also experienced shutdowns which has slowed progress on several early stage projects, none of which impacted preclinical timelines.
In late February 2020, we created an internal, cross-functional COVID-19 Response Team to closely monitor the evolving situation and manage our response. In alignment with public health guidance designed to slow the spread of COVID-19, beginning in mid-March 2020, we implemented a reduced onsite staffing model and transitioned to a remote work plan for all employees other than those providing essential services. For our onsite
employees, we have implemented heightened health and safety measures designed to comply with applicable federal, state and local guidelines in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We are further supporting all of our employees by leveraging virtual meeting technology and encouraging employees to follow local health authority guidance. We may need to undertake additional actions that could impact our operations if required by applicable laws or regulations or if we determine to be in the best interests of our employees.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the development of our drug candidates, which include:
•
personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, severance and stock-based compensation for personnel contributing to research and development activities;
•
laboratory expenses including supplies and services;
•
clinical trial expenses;
•
expenses incurred under agreements with third-party contract manufacturing organizations, contract research organizations, research and development service providers, academic research institutions, and consultants;
•
expenses related to license and sponsored research agreements; and
•
facilities and other allocated expenses, including expenses for rent and facilities maintenance, and depreciation and amortization.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase as we advance our drug candidates into and through preclinical and clinical trials and pursue regulatory approval of our drug candidates. The process of conducting the clinical trials required to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming. Clinical trials generally become larger and more costly to conduct as they advance into later stages and we are required to make estimates for expense accruals related to clinical trial expenses. The actual probability of success for our drug candidates may be affected by a variety of factors including: the safety and efficacy of our drug candidates, early clinical data, investment in our clinical program, the ability of collaborators, if any, to successfully develop any drug candidates we license to them, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our drug candidates. Program costs that are direct external expenses are tracked on a program-by-program basis once they enter clinical studies. As a result of the uncertainties discussed above, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our drug candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, allocated facilities costs and other expenses for outside professional services, including legal, audit and accounting services, and depreciation and amortization expense related to property and equipment. Personnel costs consist of salaries, benefits, severance and stock-based compensation. We expect to continue to incur additional expenses associated with operating as a public
company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and standards applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services.
Change Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
Certain of our license agreements include contingent consideration in the form of additional issuances of our common stock based on the achievement of certain milestones. For asset acquisitions, we assess whether such contingent consideration obligation meets the definition of a derivative and/or can be equity classified, until such time that the contingency or equity classification criteria is met or expires. We have recorded a liability related to contingent consideration as the net settlement criteria of the definition of a derivative had been met and equity classification criteria had not been met. The derivative related to this contingent consideration was measured at fair value as of each balance sheet date with the related change in fair value being reflected in operating results. Gains or losses on contingent consideration expense is driven by changes in the estimated fair value of the liability, which is determined using a probability-weighted valuation approach model that reflects the probability and timing of future issuances of our common shares.
Interest Income
Interest income is primarily related to interest earned on our marketable securities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Interest Expense
Interest expense relates to interest on the Loan Agreement entered into during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income (Expense), Net
We held an equity investment in an entity called Ascentage Pharma Group International, or Ascentage International, an affiliate of a Hong Kong-based clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company called Ascentage Pharma Group Corp. Limited. In October 2019, Ascentage International completed an initial public offering of shares of its common stock on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. Following the initial public offering, the underlying nature of our investment in Ascentage International changed and met the definition of an investment in an equity security with a readily determinable fair value to be measured at fair value on a recurring basis, based on quoted stock prices available on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold our entire equity investment in Ascentage International. Other income (expense), net, includes the recognized gains and losses resulting from the sale of the investment in this equity security and the previous changes in fair value.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table sets forth the significant components of our results of operations (in thousands):
Research and Development
Research and development expenses decreased by $3.6 million, to $67.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $71.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease of $5.3 million in direct research and development expenses mainly due to lower pre-clinical research and development activities and contract manufacturing costs, partially offset by higher costs from clinical programs started in late 2019. Laboratory supplies decreased by $1.9 million and facilities-related costs increased by $2.2 million. Personnel-related expenses increased by $1.4 million, of which $1.6 million was related to non-cash stock compensation expense partially offset by a decrease in payroll due to the corporate restructuring and other costs such as travel, due to employees working from home.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $4.0 million, to $24.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $20.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to increases of $2.0 million in personnel-related expenses, of which $1.4 million was related to non-cash stock compensation expense, $0.8 million in professional fees, $0.7 million in facilities-related costs and $0.5 million in insurance-related expense.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration
Change in fair value of contingent consideration reflects a decrease in the contingent consideration liability of $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We issued shares in 2020 as a result of meeting a contractual milestone. The change in the fair value of contingent consideration was primarily due to changes in assumptions, including probabilities, and our stock price used to calculate the fair value of the liability. Additionally, during the third quarter of 2020, we made changes to the related contracts, which resulted in there being no contingent consideration liability at December 31, 2020.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Impairment charges consisted of impairment of long-lived assets. We evaluated the right-of-use asset and related leasehold improvements upon exit of our former headquarters located in Brisbane, California, and recorded an impairment charge of $2.6 million during the year.
Interest Income
Our interest income was $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily attributable to lower market yields and cash balances on the Company’s cash equivalents and marketable securities.
Interest Expense
Our interest expense of $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 is related to the Loan Agreement.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income was $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a change in the fair value of our investment in the common stock of Ascentage International.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
The following table sets forth the significant components of our results of operations (in thousands):
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $12.1 million, to $71.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from $58.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to increases of $2.3 million for personnel-related expenses, which was partially offset by a decrease of $1.1 million related to non-cash stock compensation expense, $6.7 million for outside research and development activities and $3.1 million in lab and facilities-related costs.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $4.0 million, to $20.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from $16.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to increases of $3.4 million for personnel-related expenses, of which $2.5 million was related to non-cash stock compensation expense, and $0.6 million in insurance-related expense partially offset by $0.5 million decrease in professional fees.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration
Change in fair value of contingent consideration reflects a decrease in the contingent consideration liability of $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in the fair value of contingent consideration was primarily due to changes in our stock price.
Interest Income
Our interest income was $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income of $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to a change in the fair value of our investment in the common stock of Ascentage International. In October 2019, Ascentage International completed an initial public offering of shares of its common stock on the Hong Kong stock exchange which caused a change in our underlying investment resulting in it meeting the definition of an equity security with a readily determinable fair value. The increase in the fair value of our investment in Ascentage International was due to changes in the quoted stock price following the initial public offering.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Capital Requirements
Sources of Liquidity
We have incurred net losses each year since inception. We do not have any products approved for sale and have never generated any revenue from product sales. Historically, we have incurred operating losses as a result of ongoing efforts to develop our drug candidates, including conducting ongoing research and development, preclinical studies and providing general and administrative support for these operations. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $339.3 million, and we do not expect positive cash flows from operations in the foreseeable future. We expect our operating losses and net cash used in operating activities will increase over at least the next several years as we continue our research and development activities, advance our drug candidates through preclinical and clinical testing and move into later and more costly stages of drug development, hire personnel and prepare for regulatory submissions and the commercialization of our drug candidates.
We have historically financed our operations primarily through private placements of preferred stock and promissory notes, as well as public equity issuances, such as our initial public offering or IPO and more recently through proceeds from our new Loan Agreement and the ATM Offering Program, and will continue to be dependent upon equity and/or debt financing until we are able to generate positive cash flows from our operations.
In August 2020, we entered into the Loan Agreement with Hercules Capital, Inc. pursuant to a term loan, subject to certain terms and conditions. $25.0 million dollars was advanced to us on the date of execution of the Loan Agreement. The milestones for the remaining tranches have not yet been reached and, as of December 31, 2020 will not be reached as they were dependent, in whole or in part, upon on the continued advancement in the clinical development of UBX0101 in patients with osteoarthritis of the knee. We will make interest only payments through September 1, 2022, or extended to March 1, 2023 upon satisfaction of certain milestones, and will then repay the principal balance and interest in equal monthly installments through August 1, 2024.
In June 2019, we filed a Registration Statement on Form S-3, or the Shelf Registration Statement, covering the offering of up to $250.0 million of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants and units. The Shelf Registration Statement included an initial prospectus covering the offering, issuance and sale of up to $75.0 million of our common stock from time to time through the ATM Offering Program. The SEC declared the Shelf Registration Statement effective in June 2019. In June 2019, we also entered into a sales agreement with Cowen or the June 2019 Sales Agreement, pursuant to which we may sell from time to time, at our option, up to $75.0 million
of our common stock through the ATM Offering Program under which Cowen acts as sales agent. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued and sold 5,002,257 shares of our common stock through our ATM Offering Program and received net proceeds of approximately $37.3 million, after deducting commissions and other offering expenses of $1.3 million. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $9.0 million of ATM Offering Program proceeds remained available to be sold under our ATM Offering Program.
In July 2020, we filed an additional prospectus supplement to the Shelf Registration Statement, covering the offering, issuance and sale of up to an additional $50.0 million of the Company’s common stock from time to time through an additional at-the-market offering under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Additional ATM Offering Program. In July 2020, we entered into a second sales agreement with Cowen, or the July 2020 Sales Agreement, to sell an additional $50.0 million of our shares of common stock through the Additional ATM Offering Program in which Cowen acts as sales agent. As of December 31, 2020, there have been no shares sold under the Additional ATM Offering Program.
Future Funding Requirements
To date we have not generated any revenue from contracts with customers. We expect to continue to incur significant losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect the losses to increase as we continue the development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, our drug candidates, and begin to commercialize any approved products. We are subject to all of the risks typically related to the development of new drug candidates, and we may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays and other unknown factors that may adversely affect our business. Moreover, following the completion of our IPO, we began to incur additional ongoing costs associated with operating as a public company. We anticipate that we will need substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations.
Until we can generate a sufficient amount of revenue from the commercialization of our drug candidates or from collaborative agreements with third parties, if ever, we expect to finance our future cash needs through various means. Additional capital may be raised through the sale of our equity securities, incurring debt, entering into licensing or collaboration agreements with partners, receiving research contributions, grants or other sources of financing to fund our operations. There can be no assurance that sufficient funds will be available to us on attractive terms or at all. If we are unable to obtain additional funding from these or other sources, it may be necessary to significantly reduce our rate of spending through reductions in staff and delaying, scaling back, or stopping certain research and development programs. Insufficient liquidity may also require us to relinquish rights to drug candidates at an earlier stage of development or on less favorable terms than we would otherwise choose.
Since our inception, we have incurred significant losses and negative cash flows from operations. We have an accumulated deficit of $339.3 million through December 31, 2020. We expect to incur substantial additional losses in the future as we conduct and expand our research and development activities. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to enable us to fund our projected operations through at least the next 12 months from the date of the issuance of our financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Based on our current operating plans, we expect our existing capital resources will fund our planned operating expenses into the second half of 2022, which is expected to fund key clinical data readouts for UBX1325. We have based our projections of operating capital requirements on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect and we may use all our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of biotechnology products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our operating capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•
the scope, progress, results and costs of researching and developing our drug candidates, and conducting preclinical studies and clinical studies, including our ongoing Phase 1 safety and tolerability study of UBX1325, which we recently initiated, and our additional planned clinical studies in our ophthalmology program;
•
the timing of, and the costs involved in, obtaining regulatory approvals for our lead drug candidates or any future drug candidates;
•
potential delays in or cost increases associated with our ongoing or planned preclinical studies or clinical trials as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•
the number and characteristics of any additional drug candidates we develop or acquire;
•
the timing and amount of any milestone payments we are required to make pursuant to our license agreements;
•
the cost of manufacturing our lead drug candidates or any future drug candidates and any products we successfully commercialize;
•
the cost of building a sales force in anticipation of product commercialization;
•
the cost of commercialization activities if our lead drug candidates or any future drug candidates are approved for sale, including marketing, sales and distribution costs;
•
our ability to establish and maintain strategic collaborations, licensing or other arrangements and the financial terms of any such agreements, including the timing and amount of any future milestone, royalty or other payments due under any such agreement;
•
any product liability or other lawsuits related to our products;
•
the expenses needed to attract, hire and retain skilled personnel;
•
the costs associated with being a public company;
•
the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing our intellectual property portfolio; and
•
the timing, receipt and amount of sales of any future approved or cleared products, if any.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of the primary sources and uses of cash and restricted cash for each of the periods presented below (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities of $78.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of a net loss of $93.8 million adjusted for net non-cash charges of $20.1 million and net changes to our operating assets and liabilities of $4.6 million. Our non-cash charges consisted primarily of $13.8 million in stock-based compensation, $3.4 million in depreciation and amortization, $2.6 million in impairment charges pertaining to leasehold improvements and right of use assets in the Company’s former offices, $1.2 million in common stock
granted to a third party, $0.3 million in amortization of debt issuance costs and $0.3 million in net accretion and amortization of premium and discounts on marketable securities, partially offset by a $1.1 million in non-cash rent expense and $0.5 million change in fair value of strategic investment. The net change in our operating assets and liabilities consisted of decreases of $2.6 million in accounts payable, $0.9 million in accrued liabilities and other current liabilities, $0.5 million in accrued compensation and increase of $1.2 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets, partially offset by a decrease of $0.6 million in other long-term assets.
Cash used in operating activities of $72.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of a net loss of $82.2 million adjusted for net non-cash charges of $6.2 million and net changes to our operating assets and liabilities of $3.6 million. Our non-cash charges consisted primarily of $10.9 million in stock-based compensation, $2.7 million in depreciation and amortization and $1.0 million in common stock granted to a third party, partially offset by a $1.4 million change in fair value of contingent consideration, $1.3 million in accretion of our tenant improvement allowance and $1.2 million in net accretion and amortization of premium and discounts on marketable securities. The net change in our operating assets and liabilities consisted of increases of $2.5 million in deferred rent, net of current portion, and $2.1 million in accrued compensation, partially offset by a decreases of $0.6 million in accrued liabilities and other current liabilities, $0.2 million in accounts payable and a $0.2 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets.
Cash used in operating activities of $56.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 consisted primarily of a net loss of $76.4 million adjusted for net non-cash charges of $14.6 million and net changes to our operating assets and liabilities of $5.1 million. Our non-cash charges consisted primarily of $9.4 million in stock-based compensation, $4.5 million change in fair value of contingent consideration and $2.2 million in depreciation and amortization, partially offset by a $1.0 million in amortization of premium and discounts on marketable securities and $0.6 million in accretion of our tenant improvement allowance. The net change in our operating assets and liabilities consisted of a decrease of $1.4 million in contribution receivable, and increases of $2.2 million in accounts payable, $1.6 million in accrued compensation and $1.4 million in accrued liabilities and other current liabilities, partially offset by an increase of $0.6 million in other long-term assets and $0.8 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities of $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to purchases of marketable securities of $138.5 million and purchases of property and equipment of $0.6 million, which were offset by maturities of marketable securities of $127.9 million and the sale of our strategic investment of $6.0 million.
Cash provided by investing activities of $68.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was related to maturities of marketable securities of $188.8 million which were offset by purchases of marketable securities of $119.3 million and purchases of property and equipment of $1.6 million.
Cash used in investing activities of $72.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 was related to purchases of marketable securities of $204.1 million, purchases of property and equipment of $1.3 million and the purchase of an investment in stock of $0.5 million, which were offset by maturities of marketable securities of $133.6 million.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities of $63.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to $37.3 million in proceeds from the sale of common stock through our ATM Offering Program, net of issuance costs, $24.2 million in proceeds from long-term debt, net of issuance costs, $1.5 million in proceeds from issuance of common stock upon exercise of stock options, net of repurchases, $0.6 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock under the 2018 Employee Stock Purchase Plan, and $0.4 million in proceeds from the repayment of promissory notes from an employee.
Cash provided by financing activities of $27.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was related to $26.1 million in proceeds from the sale of common stock through our ATM Offering Program, net of issuance costs, $0.8 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock under the 2018 Employee Stock Purchase Plan and proceeds from issuance of common stock upon exercise of stock options, net of repurchases, of $0.6 million.
Cash provided by financing activities of $136.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 was primarily related to net proceeds from our sale of common stock in our IPO of $75.9 million, net proceeds from issuance of Series C convertible preferred stock of $59.9 million, proceeds from repayment of recourse notes of $0.9 million, and proceeds from issuance of common stock upon exercise of stock options, net of repurchases of $0.4 million.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments
Our contractual obligations and commitments relate primarily to our Loan Agreement, operating leases and non-cancelable purchase obligations under agreements with various research and development organizations and suppliers in the ordinary course of business. In February 2019, we entered into a lease agreement for new office and laboratory space in South San Francisco, California. See Note 7, “Commitments and Contingencies” and Note 8, “Term Loan Facility,” to our financial statements for further information.
We are party to various license agreements pursuant to which we have in-licensed rights to various technologies, including patents, research “know-how” and proprietary research tools, for the discovery, research, development and commercialization of drug candidates to treat age-related diseases. The license agreements obligate us to make certain milestone payments related to specified clinical development and sales milestone events, as well as tiered royalties in the low-single digits based on sales of licensed products. See Note 5 to our financial statements “License Agreements” for additional information.
Indemnification
In the normal course of business, we enter into contracts and agreements that contain a variety of representations and warranties and provide for general indemnifications. Our exposure under these agreements is unknown because it involves claims that may be made against us in the future but have not yet been made. To date, we have not paid any claims or been required to defend any action related to our indemnification obligations. However, we may record charges in the future as a result of these indemnification obligations.
In accordance with our certificate of incorporation and bylaws, we have potential indemnification obligations to our officers and directors for specified events or occurrences, subject to some limits, while they are serving at our request in such capacities. There have been no claims to date, and we have director and officer insurance that may enable us to recover a portion of any amounts paid for future potential claims.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. These items are monitored and analyzed by us for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results for the period in which they become known. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our financial statements included elsewhere in this prospectus, we believe that the following accounting policies are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Research and Development Expenses and Accruals
Costs related to research and development of drug candidates are charged to research and development expense as incurred. Research and development costs include, but are not limited to, payroll and personnel expenses for personnel contributing to research and development activities, laboratory supplies, outside services, licenses acquired to be used in research and development, manufacturing of clinical material, pre-clinical testing and consultants and allocated overhead, including rent, equipment, depreciation and utilities. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred unless there is an alternative future use in other research and development projects. Payments made prior to the receipt of goods or services to be used in research and development are deferred and recognized as expense in the period in which the related goods are received or services are rendered. Such payments are evaluated for current or long-term classification based on when they will be realized.
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate expenses resulting from our obligations under contracts with vendors and consultants and clinical site agreements in connection with conducting clinical trials. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiations which vary from contract to contract and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided under such contracts. Our objective is to reflect the appropriate expenses in our financial statements by matching those expenses with the period in which services and efforts are expended. We account for these expenses according to the progress of the production of clinical trial materials or based on progression of the clinical trial, as measured by patient progression and the timing of various aspects of the trial. We determine accrual estimates by taking into account discussion with applicable personnel and outside service providers as to the progress or state of consummation of goods and services, or the services completed. During the course of a clinical trial, we adjust the rate of expense recognition if actual results differ from our estimates. We make estimates of accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on the facts and circumstances known at that time. Our clinical trial accrual is dependent in part upon the timely and accurate reporting of contract research organizations, contract manufacturers and other third-party vendors. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in our reporting changes in estimates in any particular period. Adjustments to prior period estimates have not been material for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
We have and may continue to enter into license agreements to access and utilize certain technology. We evaluate if the license agreement is an acquisition of an asset or a business. To date none of our license agreements have been considered to be an acquisition of a business. For asset acquisitions, the upfront payments to acquire such licenses, as well as any future milestone payments made before product approval, are immediately recognized as research and development expense when due, provided there is no alternative future use of the rights in other research and development projects. These license agreements may also include contingent consideration in the form of cash and additional issuances of our common stock.
Contingent Consideration Liability
We have entered into license agreements to access and utilize certain intellectual property and technology and may enter into additional license agreements in the future. In each case, we evaluate if the license agreement results in the acquisition of an asset or a business. To date, none of our license agreements have been considered an acquisition of a business. If a license agreement is deemed to constitute an asset acquisition, the upfront payments to acquire such licenses, as well as any future milestone payments made before product approval, are immediately recognized as research and development expense when due, provided there is no alternative future use of the rights in other research and development projects. Several of our license agreements also include contingent consideration in the form of an obligation to issue additional shares of our common stock if we achieve certain milestones. For contingent consideration related to our asset acquisitions, we assess on a continuous basis whether the contingent consideration meets the definition of a derivative and/or whether it can be classified within stockholders’ equity, until such time that equity classification criteria are met or the milestones expire. The derivative related to the
contingent consideration arising from our license agreements is measured at fair value as of each balance sheet date with the related change in fair value being reflected in operating expenses. Upon a reassessment event that results in the contingent consideration no longer meeting the definition of a derivative and/or meeting equity classification criteria, the final change in fair value of the instrument is recorded within operating expenses and the liability is reclassified into stockholders’ equity.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize compensation costs related to stock-based awards granted based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant, and we recognize forfeitures as they occur. For awards that vest solely based on service conditions or a combination of service and performance conditions, we estimate the grant date fair value, and the resulting stock-based compensation expense, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The grant date fair value of the awards is generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is typically their vesting period. We recognize forfeitures as they occur.
Prior to our IPO, the fair value of our shares of common stock underlying the stock options was the responsibility of and determined by our Board. Because there was no public market for our common stock, the Board determined the fair value of common stock at the time of grant of the option by considering a number of objective and subjective factors, including, among others: the prices at which we sold shares of our convertible preferred stock to outside investors in arms-length transactions; the rights, preferences and privileges of our convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock; our results of operations, financial position and capital resources; current business conditions and projections; the lack of marketability of our common stock; the hiring of key personnel and the experience of management; progress of our research and development activities; our stage of development and material risks related to its business; the fact that the stock option grants involve illiquid securities in a private company; and the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or sale, in light of prevailing market conditions.
Following the IPO, the market traded price of the shares of common stock underlying the stock-based awards is the fair value of our stock as reported on The Nasdaq Global Select Market on the grant date.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of highly subjective assumptions to determine the fair value of stock-based awards. These assumptions include:
•
Expected term-The expected term represents the period that the stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. We use, due to insufficient historical data, the simplified method to determine the expected term, which is based on the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the options.
•
Expected volatility-Due to our limited trading history for our common stock, the expected volatility is estimated based on the average historical volatilities of common stock of comparable publicly traded entities over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies are chosen based on their size, stage in the product development cycle or area of specialty. We will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available.
•
Risk-free interest rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield in effect at the time of grant for zero-coupon U.S. Treasury notes with maturities approximately equal to the expected term of the awards.
•
Expected dividend-We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
We have also granted stock options to certain key employees that vest in conjunction with certain performance and market conditions. We estimate the fair value of these awards using a lattice model, taking into consideration the market conditions. No expense will be recorded related to these awards until the achievement of the performance condition becomes probable. Once the achievement of the performance condition becomes probable, expense related to these awards is recognized using the accelerated attribution method with a cumulative
catch-up adjustment over the derived service period relating to the market conditions, if the market conditions have not been met. As these awards vest in their entirety upon achievement of the market conditions, any unrecognized expense would be accelerated if the market conditions are achieved prior to the completion of the derived service period. The Company has also used the Monte-Carlo option-pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock option awards that contain only market conditions. The Monte-Carlo option pricing model uses similar input assumptions as the Black-Scholes model; however, it further incorporates into the fair-value determination the possibility that the market condition may not be satisfied.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $25.1 million of unrecognized compensation expense related to unvested stock options and restricted stock units, which is expected to be recognized over an estimated weighted-average period of 3.25 years. For stock-based awards subject to ratable vesting, we recognize compensation cost on a straight-line basis over the service period for the entire award. In future periods, our stock-based compensation expense is expected to increase as a result of recognizing our existing unrecognized stock-based compensation for awards that will vest and as we issue additional stock-based awards to attract and retain our employees.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected to avail ourselves of this exemption from new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, will not be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies. We also rely on other exemptions provided by the JOBS Act, including, without limitation, providing an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier of (1) the last day of the year following the fifth anniversary of the consummation of our IPO, (2) the last day of the year in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, (3) the last day of the year in which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, which would occur if the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates exceeded $700.0 million as of the last business day of the second fiscal quarter of such year or (4) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period. Even after we no longer qualify as an emerging growth company, we may still qualify as a “smaller reporting company” which may allow us to take advantage of many of the same exemptions from disclosure requirements including not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our Financial Statements “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” for information.