ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. The discussion of the components of our results of operations focuses on financial trends and events occurring between 2019 and 2020.
For additional information related to financial trends between 2019 and 2018 please see the information under the caption “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 27, 2020, which information under that caption is incorporated herein by this reference. Historical results of operations are not necessarily predictive of future results.
GAAP Reconciliation and Explanation
This Report contains financial information determined by methods other than in accordance with GAAP. Such non-GAAP financial information includes the following measures: “tangible book value per common share” and “tangible common equity to tangible assets.” In addition, management presents non-GAAP operating performance measures, which exclude merger-related and other items that are not part of our core business operations. Operating performance measures include “expenses - operating,” “net income - operating,” “diluted net income per common share - operating,” “return on common equity - operating,” “return on tangible common equity - operating,” “return on assets - operating,” “dividend payout ratio - operating” and “efficiency ratio - operating.” Management has developed internal processes and procedures to accurately capture and account for merger-related and other charges and those charges are reviewed with the audit committee of our Board each quarter. Management uses these non-GAAP measures because it believes they may provide useful supplemental information for evaluating our operations and performance over periods of time, as well as in managing and evaluating our business and in discussions about our operations and performance. Management believes these non-GAAP measures may also provide users of our financial information with a meaningful measure for assessing our financial results and credit trends, as well as a comparison to financial results for prior periods. These non-GAAP measures should be viewed in addition to, and not as an alternative to or substitute for, measures determined in accordance with GAAP and are not necessarily comparable to other similarly titled measures used by other companies. To the extent applicable, reconciliations of these non-GAAP measures to the most directly comparable measures as reported in accordance with GAAP are included in Table 1 of MD&A.
Overview
We offer a wide array of commercial and consumer banking services and investment advisory services through a 160 branch network throughout Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina, Tennessee and Florida. We have grown organically as well as through strategic acquisitions. At December 31, 2020, we had consolidated total assets of $17.8 billion and 2,399 full-time equivalent employees.
Recent Developments
Mergers and Acquisitions
In the past two years, we have continued to expand through acquisitions as follows:
•On July 1, 2020, we acquired Three Shores including its wholly-owned banking subsidiary, Seaside, headquartered in Orlando, Florida. Seaside was a premier commercial lender with a strong wealth management platform and operated a 14-branch network located in key Florida metropolitan markets. We acquired $2.13 billion of assets and assumed $1.99 billion of liabilities in the acquisition.
•On May 1, 2019, we acquired FMBT, which operated four branches in the Athens-Clarke County, Georgia MSA. We acquired $245 million of assets and assumed $213 million of liabilities in the acquisition.
The acquired entities’ results are included in our consolidated results beginning on the respective acquisition dates. We will continue to evaluate potential transactions as opportunities arise.
COVID-19
During 2020, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting preventative and protective government issued mandates materially restricted the level of economic activity in our markets. These mandates included restrictions on travel and business operations, stay-at-home advisories and requirements and temporary closures of businesses deemed to be non-essential. In turn,
unemployment dramatically increased in the United States and negatively impacted many businesses, and thereby threatened the repayment ability of some of our borrowers.
To address the economic impact in the United States, the CARES Act was enacted in March of 2020. The CARES Act and related banking interagency guidance included a number of provisions that affected us, including accounting relief for TDRs and regulatory capital relief for the effect of CECL implementation. The CARES Act also established the PPP through the SBA, which allowed us to lend money to small businesses to maintain employee payrolls and pay other qualified expenses during the crisis with guarantees from the SBA. Under this program, loan amounts may be forgiven if the proceeds are used in accordance with the requirements of the program. The Federal Reserve also took additional steps to bolster the economy by, among other things, reducing the federal funds rate and the discount-window borrowing rate to near zero.
In response to the pandemic, we implemented protocols and processes to help protect our employees, customers and communities. These measures included temporarily operating our branches under a drive-through model, appointment-only lobby service, taking measures to disperse critical operations teams to separate locations and, when possible, having employees work from home. We offered assistance to our customers affected by the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including payment deferrals, waiving certain fees, suspending property foreclosures and participating in the CARES Act and PPP.
In an effort to ensure our capital and liquidity resources remain strong throughout the rapidly changing economic conditions, we issued $100 million of non-cumulative perpetual preferred stock, issued $100 million of senior debentures and temporarily suspended common stock repurchases. Given the unprecedented uncertainty and rapidly evolving economic effects and social impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, the future direct and indirect impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition are highly uncertain. Should current economic conditions persist or continue to deteriorate, we expect that this macroeconomic environment will have a continued adverse effect on our business and results of operations, which could include, but not be limited to: decreased demand for our products and services, protracted periods of lower interest rates, increased noninterest expenses, operational losses and increased credit losses due to deterioration in the financial condition of our consumer and commercial borrowers, including declining asset and collateral values, which may continue to increase our provision for credit losses and net charge-offs.
See Part I, Item 1. “Business” of this Report for more information related to the impact of COVID-19.
LIBOR and Other Benchmark Rates
As previously disclosed, to facilitate an orderly transition from Interbank Offered Rates (“IBORs”) and other benchmark rates to alternative reference rates (“ARRs”), we have established an enterprise-wide program to identify, assess and monitor risks associated with the expected discontinuation or unavailability of benchmarks, including LIBOR. As part of this program, we continue to identify, assess and monitor risks associated with the expected discontinuation or unavailability of LIBOR and other benchmarks, and evaluate and address documentation and contractual mechanics of outstanding IBOR-based products and contracts that mature after 2021 and new and potential future ARR-based products and contracts to achieve operational readiness. This program includes active involvement of senior management and regular reports to the Enterprise Risk Committee. The program is structured to address the industry and regulatory engagement, client and financial contract changes, internal and external communications, technology and operations modifications, introduction of new products, migration of existing clients, and program strategy and governance. As the markets for ARRs continue to grow, we continue to monitor the development and usage of ARRs, including SOFR. Additionally, any prolonged economic and market disruptions resulting from COVID-19 may have an adverse impact on the market and industry transition to ARRs, including the readiness of other market participants and third-party vendors, and our engagement with impacted clients and their operational readiness to transition to ARRs. For more information on the expected replacement of LIBOR and other benchmark rates, see Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors - Market Risks of this Report.
Results of Operations
We reported net income of $164 million, or $1.91 per diluted share, in 2020, down from $186 million, or $2.31 per diluted share, in 2019. The decrease reflects the combined impact of a number of factors including the global COVID-19 pandemic and our implementation of CECL, both of which resulted in a higher provision for credit losses, and the impact of falling interest rates on our net interest margin.
We reported net income - operating (non-GAAP) of $170 million during 2020 compared to $191 million in 2019. For 2020, net income - operating (non-GAAP) excludes merger-related and branch closure charges, which net of tax, totaled $5.68 million. For 2019, net income - operating (non-GAAP) excludes merger-related, pension termination of the Funded Plan, executive retirement charges and branch closure charges, which net of tax, totaled $5.66 million.
Net interest revenue increased to $502 million for 2020, compared to $469 million for 2019, while the net interest margin decreased 52 basis points to 3.55% in 2020 from 4.07% in 2019. The increase in net interest revenue was primarily attributable to organic loan growth, loans acquired from Three Shores and PPP loans originated during the year. The net interest margin decreased primarily as a result of the impact of historically low interest rates on our asset sensitive balance sheet and a change in the composition of interest-earning assets due to an increase in on-balance sheet liquidity with limited opportunity to invest at reasonable rates.
The provision for credit losses was $80.4 million for 2020 under CECL, compared to $13.2 million for 2019 under the Incurred Loss method. Net charge-offs for 2020 were $18.3 million, compared to $12.2 million for 2019.
Noninterest income, which was up $51.4 million, or 49%, from 2019, was primarily driven by an increase in mortgage loan gains and related fees. The low rate environment spurred an increase in both purchase and refinance volume and combined with widening gain on sale margins to drive the increase in fees. Income from customer derivatives for 2020 also increased compared to 2019 due to increased demand for fixed rates during the current low rate environment. We also saw an increase in wealth management fees, which was driven by the addition of Three Shores’ wealth management business.
Noninterest expenses for 2020 of $368 million were up $45.7 million, or 14%, from 2019. Salaries and employee benefits expense was the largest contributor to the increase, up $27.6 million in 2020, due to several factors including increased mortgage commissions and the addition of Three Shores employees for the second half of 2020. During 2020, we formed a private foundation, United Community Bank Foundation (“Foundation”), to which we contributed $10.0 million. The Foundation was established to facilitate a more strategic approach to our charitable giving that will enhance how we give back to the communities in our footprint.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our accounting and reporting policies are in accordance with GAAP and conform to general practices within the banking industry. Application of these principles requires management to make estimates, assumptions or judgments that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and the accompanying notes. These estimates are based on information available as of the date of the financial statements; accordingly, as this information changes, the financial statements could reflect different estimates or judgments.
Estimates, assumptions or judgments are necessary when assets and liabilities are required to be recorded at fair value, when a decline in the value of an asset not carried on the financial statements at fair value warrants an impairment write-down or valuation reserve to be established, or when an asset or liability needs to be recorded contingent upon future events. Carrying assets and liabilities at fair value results in more financial statement volatility. The fair values and the information used to record the valuation adjustments for certain assets and liabilities are based either on quoted market prices or are provided by other third-party sources, when available. When third-party information is not available, valuation adjustments are estimated in good faith by management primarily through the use of internal cash flow modeling techniques.
Certain policies inherently have a greater reliance on the use of estimates, assumptions or judgments and as such, have a greater possibility of producing results that could be materially different than originally reported. We have identified the determination of our ACL and fair value measurements to be the accounting areas that require the most subjective or complex judgments, estimates and assumptions, and where changes in those judgments, estimates and assumptions (based on new or additional information, changes in the economic climate and/or market interest rates, etc.) could have a significant effect on our financial statements. Therefore, we consider these policies, discussed below, to be critical accounting policies and discuss them directly with the Audit Committee of our Board.
Our most significant accounting policies are presented in Note 1 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements. These policies, along with the disclosures presented in the other notes to the consolidated financial statements and in this MD&A, provide information on how significant assets and liabilities are valued in the financial statements and how those values are determined.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Since the implementation of CECL on January 1, 2020, the ACL represents management’s current estimate of credit losses for the remaining estimated life of financial instruments, with particular applicability on our balance sheet to loans and unfunded loan commitments. Estimating the amount of the ACL requires significant judgment and the use of estimates related to historical experience, current conditions, reasonable and supportable forecasts, and the value of collateral on collateral-dependent loans. The loan portfolio also represents the largest asset type on our consolidated balance sheet. Loan losses are charged against the allowance, while recoveries of amounts previously charged off are credited to the allowance. A provision for credit losses is charged to operations based on management’s periodic evaluation of the factors previously mentioned, as well as other pertinent factors.
There are many factors affecting the ACL; some are quantitative while others require qualitative judgment. Although management believes its process for determining the allowance adequately considers all the potential factors that could potentially result in credit losses, the process includes subjective elements and is susceptible to significant change. To the extent actual outcomes differ from management estimates, additional provision for credit losses could be required that could adversely affect our earnings or financial position in future periods.
Additional information on the loan portfolio and ACL can be found in the sections of MD&A titled “Asset Quality and Risk Elements” and “Nonperforming Assets.” Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements includes additional information on accounting policies related to the ACL.
Fair Value Measurements
At December 31, 2020, the percentage of our total assets measured at fair value on a recurring basis was 19%. See Note 14 “Fair Value Measurements” in the consolidated financial statements herein for additional disclosures regarding the fair value of our assets and liabilities, including a description of the fair value hierarchy.
Fair value is defined by GAAP “as the price that would be received to sell an asset in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.” GAAP further defines an “orderly transaction” as “a transaction that assumes exposure to the market for a period prior to the measurement date to allow for marketing activities that are usual and customary for transactions involving such assets. It is not a forced transaction (for example, a forced liquidation or distress sale).”
The fair values for available-for-sale and held-to-maturity securities are generally based upon quoted market prices or observable market prices for similar instruments. Management utilizes a third-party pricing service to assist with determining the fair value of our securities portfolio. The pricing service uses observable inputs when available including benchmark yields, reported trades, broker-dealer quotes, issuer spreads, benchmark securities, bids and offers. These values take into account recent market activity as well as other market observable data such as interest rate, spread and prepayment information. When market observable data is not available, which generally occurs due to the lack of liquidity for certain securities, the valuation of the security is subjective and may involve substantial judgment by management.
We have elected the fair value option for our portfolio of mortgage loans held for sale in order to reduce certain timing differences and better match changes in fair values of the loans with changes in the value of derivative instruments used to economically hedge them. The fair value of mortgage loans held for sale is determined using quoted prices for a similar asset, adjusted for specific attributes of that loan, and as such is categorized as level 2.
We use derivatives primarily to manage our interest rate risk or to help our customers manage their interest rate risk. The fair values of derivative financial instruments are determined based on quoted market prices, dealer quotes and internal pricing models that are primarily sensitive to market observable data. However, we do evaluate the level of these observable inputs and there are some instances where we have determined that the inputs are not directly observable.
We recognize a servicing rights asset upon the sale of residential mortgage loans and SBA/USDA loans sold with servicing retained. Servicing right assets are carried at fair value. Given the nature of these SBA/USDA and residential mortgage servicing assets, the key valuation inputs are unobservable and we disclose them as a level 3 item.
As of December 31, 2020, we had level 3 assets, those valued using unobservable inputs, of $35.2 million. The total level 3 assets consisted of $16.2 million in residential mortgage servicing rights, $10.8 million in derivative assets, $6.46 million in servicing rights for SBA/USDA loans and $1.75 million of available-for-sale debt securities. We also had level 3 derivative liabilities totaling $2.41 million.
From time to time, we may record assets at fair value on a nonrecurring basis, usually as a result of the write-downs of individual assets due to impairment. In particular, nonaccrual loans may be carried at the fair value of collateral if repayment is expected solely from the collateral. Although management believes its processes for determining the fair value of collateral-dependent loans are appropriate, the processes require management judgment and assumptions and the value of such assets at the time they are revalued or divested may be significantly different from management’s determination of fair value.
UNITED COMMUNITY BANKS, INC.
Table 1 - Non-GAAP Performance Measures Reconciliation - Annual
Selected Financial Information
UNITED COMMUNITY BANKS, INC.
Table 1 (Continued) - Non-GAAP Performance Measures Reconciliation - Quarterly
Selected Financial Information
Net Interest Revenue
Net interest revenue, which is the difference between the interest earned on assets and the interest paid on deposits and borrowed funds, is the single largest component of revenue. Management seeks to optimize this revenue while balancing interest rate, credit, and liquidity risks.
The banking industry uses two key ratios to measure relative profitability of net interest revenue, which are the net interest spread and the net interest margin. The net interest spread measures the difference between the average yield on interest-earning assets and the average rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities. The net interest spread eliminates the effect of noninterest-earning assets as well as noninterest-bearing deposits and other noninterest-bearing funding sources and gives a direct perspective on the effect of market interest rate movements. The net interest margin is an indication of the profitability of a company’s balance sheet and is defined as net interest revenue as a percentage of total average interest-earning assets, which includes the positive effect of funding a portion of interest-earning assets with noninterest-bearing deposits and shareholders’ equity.
Net interest revenue for 2020 was $502 million, compared to $469 million for 2019. As set forth in the following table, FTE net interest revenue totaled $505 million in 2020, an increase of $33.2 million, or 7%, from 2019. The net interest spread was 3.31% and 3.68% for 2020 and 2019, respectively, while the net interest margin was 3.55% and 4.07%, respectively. The following table also indicates the relationship between interest revenue and expense and the average amounts of assets and liabilities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Average interest-earning assets for 2020 increased $2.62 billion, or 23%, from 2019, which was primarily driven by the increase in loans and interest-bearing deposits in banks. Average loans increased $1.76 billion, or 20%, from 2019, due to the addition of Three Shores’ loan portfolio totaling $1.44 billion at acquisition, PPP loans originated during the year, and organic growth. During 2020, we originated $1.12 billion of PPP loans and had $646 million of these loans outstanding at December 31, 2020. The reduction in the amount outstanding reflects repayment and loan forgiveness, most of which occurred during the fourth quarter of 2020. These increases were partially offset by the sale of the indirect auto loan portfolio on December 31, 2019. PPP loans also contributed to the increase in our interest-bearing deposits in banks as a result of a significant amount of PPP loan proceeds remaining in customer deposit accounts through the end of the year. In addition, average securities increased 4% from 2019, which reflects securities acquired from Three Shores and our decision to purchase additional securities in order to deploy excess liquidity.
Average interest-bearing liabilities increased $1.23 billion, or 16%, in 2020 from the prior year, which reflects an increase in interest-bearing customer deposits, partially offset by a reduction in wholesale borrowings. The increase in interest-bearing customer deposits was mostly attributable to deposits assumed in the acquisition of Three Shores, PPP loan proceeds remaining in customer deposit accounts, and organic growth of our customer deposit base. As we did in 2019, during 2020 we continued to reduce our use of FHLB advances, short-term borrowings, and brokered deposits, which drove the decrease in average wholesale borrowings. These decreases were offset by an increase in long-term debt resulting from our issuance of $100 million of senior debentures and our assumption of $15.0 million of subordinated debentures from Three Shores.
The increase in net interest revenue for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to the loan growth discussed above, but was partially offset by the impact of falling interest rates. The forgiveness of PPP loans also provided for accelerated accretion of deferred origination fees and costs, which contributed $29.1 million to net interest revenue during 2020. In addition, interest expense related to average interest-bearing liabilities decreased $27.1 million compared to 2019 due to the low rate environment, a more favorable deposit mix and the reduction of average wholesale borrowings. In response to falling interest rates in early 2020, management began to lower discretionary deposit rates to offset the impact of declining loan yields.
The decreases in net interest spread and net interest margin are mostly a result of the impact of historically low interest rates on our asset sensitive balance sheet. During 2020, loan yields decreased at a rate faster than we could lower deposit rates. Since December 31, 2019, the FOMC lowered interest rates 150 basis points, which occurred during the first quarter of 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. PPP loans increased the balance of interest-earning assets; however, the low yield on these loans exerted negative pressure on the net interest rate margin, partially offsetting the positive impact of the accelerated accretion of PPP fees as these loans were forgiven and repaid. Mitigating the decrease in net interest margin, our average noninterest-bearing deposits increased $1.21 billion from 2019 to 2020, which more than provided for our 2020 funding needs, resulting in a surplus liquidity position with limited investment opportunities to deploy the funds.
The following table shows the relationship between interest revenue and interest expense and the average balances of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities.
Table 2 - Average Consolidated Balance Sheets and Net Interest Margin Analysis
For the Years Ended December 31,
(in thousands, FTE)
(1)Interest revenue on tax-exempt securities and loans has been increased to reflect comparable interest on taxable securities and loans. The rate used for each year was 26% reflecting the statutory federal rate and the federal tax adjusted state tax rate.
(2)Included in the average balance of loans outstanding are loans where the accrual of interest has been discontinued.
(3)Securities available for sale are shown at amortized cost. Pretax unrealized gains of $67.3 million and $12.8 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, and pretax unrealized losses of $45.2 million in 2018, are included in other assets for purposes of this presentation.
(4)Net interest margin is taxable equivalent net interest revenue divided by average interest-earning assets.
The following table shows the relative effect on net interest revenue resulting from changes in the average outstanding balances (volume) of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and the rates we earned and paid on such assets and liabilities.
Table 3 - Change in Interest Revenue and Interest Expense
(in thousands, FTE)
Any variance attributable jointly to volume and rate changes is allocated to the volume and rate variance in proportion to the relationship of the absolute dollar amount of the change in each.
Provision for Credit Losses
Prior to the implementation of CECL on January 1, 2020, the provision for credit losses was based on the then-applicable Incurred Loss model and represented an estimate of probable incurred losses in the loan portfolio and unfunded commitments at the end of each reporting period. Since the implementation of CECL, the provision for credit losses represents management’s current estimate of life of loan credit losses in the loan portfolio and unfunded loan commitments. The allowance for unfunded commitments, which is included in other liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets, represents expected losses on unfunded loan commitments that are expected to result in outstanding loan balances. Management’s estimate of credit losses under CECL is determined using a complex model that relies on reasonable and supportable forecasts and historical loss information to determine the balance of the ACL and resulting provision for credit losses.
The provision for credit losses was $80.4 million in 2020 under the CECL method, compared to $13.2 million in 2019 under the Incurred Loss method. The amount of provision recorded in each period was the amount required such that the total ACL reflected the appropriate balance as determined under the applicable accounting standards in effect at each balance sheet date. The elevated provision expense in 2020 was primarily a result of our implementation of CECL, combined with higher expected credit losses resulting from macroeconomic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, which were incorporated into the forecast used in our CECL calculation. In addition, we recorded provision expense for the initial ACL recorded on Three Shores’ non-PCD loans and unfunded commitments of $9.78 million and $913,000, respectively. Loan growth also contributed to the higher provision for credit losses, but this impact on the provision was partially mitigated by the fact that PPP loans originated in 2020 are 100% government guaranteed, requiring no ACL. As of December 31, 2020, there were $646 million in PPP loans outstanding.
Additional discussion on credit quality and the ACL is included in the “Asset Quality and Risk Elements” and “Critical Accounting Polices” sections of this report, as well as Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements.
Noninterest Income
The following table presents the components of noninterest income for the periods indicated.
Noninterest income increased $51.4 million from 2019, primarily due to increases in mortgage loan gains and related fees, wealth management fees, and customer derivatives income. These increases were partially offset by decreases in overdraft fees and net gains from other loan sales.
The decrease in overdraft fees was driven by lower customer transaction volume. The economic shutdown during the majority of 2020, combined with government stimulus payments during the second and third quarters of 2020, increased the balances of customer deposit accounts, which in turn reduced the number of overdraft transactions.
Mortgage loan gains and related fees for 2020 reflected an increase in mortgage loan sales and a wider margin on the sales, as well as fees on mortgage rate locks and closings compared to last year. The increase was driven by both higher demand due to a historically low interest rate environment and the organic growth of our mortgage business in existing and new markets. The low rate environment was primarily attributable to the 150 basis point decrease in the national federal funds rate during the first quarter of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in mortgage loan gains and fees during 2020 was partially offset by negative fair value adjustments on the mortgage servicing rights asset due to the decrease in mortgage interest rates that resulted in an acceleration of prepayments.
The following table summarizes mortgage loan sales and closings for the periods indicated.
Our SBA/USDA lending strategy includes selling a portion of the loan production each quarter. The amount of loans sold depends on several variables including the current lending environment and balance sheet management activities. During the first quarter of 2020, less-favorable pricing for these loans driven by COVID-19 related market disruption led to our decision to hold more of our production in portfolio, rather than sell to the secondary market, until market conditions improved. The following table presents loans sold and corresponding gains or loss recognized on SBA/USDA loans and other loans sold for the periods indicated.
Income from customer derivatives for 2020 increased $3.52 million compared to 2019 due to increased demand for fixed rates during the current low rate environment. The increase in customer derivative income included the negative impact of an increase to the credit valuation adjustment on certain customer derivative positions.
During 2020 and 2019, we recognized death benefits resulting in elevated BOLI income for these periods.
Wealth management fees for 2020 increased 50% compared to 2019, which was primarily driven by the addition of Three Shores’ wealth management business in the third quarter of 2020.
Noninterest Expenses
The following table presents the components of noninterest expenses for the periods indicated.
Noninterest expenses for 2020 totaled $368 million, up 14% from 2019. The addition of Three Shores’ operating expenses for the second half of 2020 contributed to the increase, particularly in salaries and benefits and occupancy costs.
Salaries and employee benefits for 2020 increased $27.6 million compared to 2019. In addition to the growth in our employee base resulting from the Three Shores acquisition, the increase was also attributable to increased mortgage commissions resulting from strong mortgage production, bonuses and overtime wages paid to employees who assisted with PPP processing, a one-time $1.78 million accrual for paid time off hours allowed to be carried over into 2021 as result of the pandemic, and merit increases awarded during the second quarter of 2020. These increases were partially offset by higher deferred loan origination costs resulting from
increased loan production, including PPP loans. Full time equivalent headcount totaled 2,399 at December 31, 2020, up from 2,308 at December 31, 2019.
Communications and equipment expense increased primarily due to additional software maintenance costs and new software contracts. FDIC assessments and other regulatory charges increased compared to 2019 due to the receipt of a $1.38 million assessment credit from the FDIC during 2019, reducing expense for the year. Lending and loan servicing expense increased mostly due to the increase in mortgage origination volume. Advertising and public relations expense increased from 2019 due to contributions made to our newly formed Foundation, which totaled $10.0 million for 2020.
Merger-related and other charges for 2020 primarily consisted of merger costs related to the acquisition of Three Shores, severance, and branch closure costs. Merger-related and other charges for 2019 included a $2.94 million charge for the termination and settlement of the Funded Plan, as well as FMBT acquisition-related costs, branch closure costs, executive retirement charges, and gains and losses on the sale of surplus properties.
Fourth Quarter 2020 Discussion
Net interest revenue for the fourth quarter of 2020 increased $28.8 million, or 25%, to $145 million from the same period a year ago, which was primarily attributable to the increase in the loan portfolio from both organic loan growth and the acquisition of Three Shores. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the forgiveness and repayment of $633 million of PPP loans resulted in accelerated accretion of PPP net deferred fees and costs of $19.4 million, which largely contributed to the increase in net interest revenue compared to the same period of 2019. The net interest margin for the fourth quarter of 2020 decreased to 3.55% from 3.93% in the fourth quarter of 2019, reflecting the impact of historically low interest rates on our asset sensitive balance sheet as loan yields fell at a rate faster than we could lower deposit rates. During the first quarter of 2020, the FOMC lowered interest rates 150 basis points as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, while PPP loans increased the balance of interest-earning assets, the low yield on these loans exerted negative pressure on the net interest margin, which offset the positive impact of the accelerated accretion of PPP fees on the margin.
We recorded a provision for credit losses in the fourth quarter of 2020 of $2.91 million, compared to $3.50 million for the fourth quarter of 2019. The provision expense for the fourth quarter of 2020 was determined using our CECL model, rather than the Incurred Loss method used prior to 2020. Our provision for the fourth quarter of 2020 reflected an improved economic outlook relative to prior quarters of 2020, which were significantly impacted by an increase in unemployment driven by policy decisions made in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The following table presents the components of noninterest income for the periods indicated.
Table 8 - Quarterly Noninterest Income
(in thousands)
Noninterest income for the fourth quarter of 2020 increased $11.2 million from the fourth quarter of 2019. Increases in mortgage loan gains and related fees, wealth management fees, and customer derivative income offset by lower overdraft fees were driven by the same factors impacting the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as previously discussed.
During the fourth quarter of 2019, we recognized BOLI death benefits of $1.65 million, which provided additional BOLI income for the period compared to the same period of 2020. Gains from other loan sales, net, for the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the same period of 2019 decreased primarily due to fewer equipment financing receivable sales, which comprised $1.27 million of the gains for the fourth quarter of 2019, compared to nominal gains for the same period of 2020. We recognized losses on securities during the fourth quarter of 2019 as part of a plan to increase the securities portfolio yield by selling some lower-yielding securities. Increases in other income for the fourth quarter of 2020 were attributable to several factors including higher gains on other investments and increases in fees on equipment financing loans driven by production.
The following table presents noninterest expenses for the periods indicated.
Table 9 - Quarterly Noninterest Expenses
(in thousands)
Noninterest expenses for the fourth quarter of 2020 increased $25.1 million compared to the fourth quarter of 2019. As previously mentioned in the year-to-date noninterest expense discussion, the increase for the fourth quarter of 2020 reflects the inclusion of the operating costs associated with the additional employees and locations acquired from Three Shores, an $8.50 million charitable contribution to the Foundation, increased commission expense and lending and loan servicing expense resulting from strong mortgage production, and a $1.78 million expense accrual for paid time off carried over to 2021 due to the pandemic.
Merger-related and other charges for the fourth quarter of 2020 included Three Shores merger costs and branch closure costs. Merger-related and other charges for the fourth quarter of 2019 included merger costs primarily attributable to FMBT offset by net gains recognized on the sale of surplus properties.
Balance Sheet Review
Total assets at December 31, 2020 were $17.8 billion, an increase of $4.88 billion, or 38%, from December 31, 2019. On a daily average basis, total assets increased $2.78 billion, or 22%, from 2019. Average interest-earning assets for 2020 and 2019 were $14.2 billion and $11.6 billion, respectively. Total liabilities at December 31, 2020 were $15.8 billion, an increase of $4.51 billion, or 40% from December 31, 2019. The acquisition of Three Shores added $2.13 billion of assets and $1.99 billion of liabilities to our balance sheet as of the acquisition date. Our participation in PPP contributed $1.17 billion in loan growth during the year, $646 million of which remained outstanding at December 31, 2020. The proceeds from PPP originations resulted in significant incremental deposit growth, and the resulting liquidity drove growth in the investment portfolio and cash balances. In addition, organic growth of loans and deposits added to the totals as well.
Shareholders’ equity totaled $2.01 billion and $1.64 billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase was a result of net income of $164 million, the issuance of $96.4 million of preferred stock, and the issuance of $164 million of common stock in
connection with the Three Shores acquisition. These increases were partially offset by dividends on common and preferred stock of $63.8 million, common stock repurchases of $20.8 million, and a $3.53 million adjustment to retained earnings resulting from the adoption of ASC 326 on January 1, 2020. At December 31, 2020, the regulatory capital ratios of United and the Bank were significantly above “well-capitalized” levels.
Loans
Our loan portfolio is our largest category of interest-earning assets. Total loans averaged $10.5 billion in 2020, compared with $8.71 billion in 2019, an increase of 20%. At December 31, 2020, total loans were $11.4 billion, an increase of 29%, from December 31, 2019. In addition to organic growth, the increase in loans is largely attributable to the $1.44 billion in loans acquired in the Three Shores transaction and $646 million in outstanding PPP loans originated during 2020. Approximately 69% of all loans were secured by real estate at year-end 2020.
The following table presents the composition of our loan portfolio for the last five years.
Table 10 - Loans Outstanding
As of December 31,
(in thousands)
(1) Commercial and industrial loans as of December 31, 2020 included $646 million of PPP loans.
As of December 31, 2020, our 25 largest credit relationships consisted of loans and loan commitments ranging from $22.9 million to $54.5 million, with an aggregate total credit exposure of $715 million. Total credit exposure included $116 million in unfunded commitments and $599 million in balances outstanding, excluding participations sold.
The following table sets forth the maturity distribution of commercial and construction loans, including the interest rate sensitivity for loans maturing after one year.
Table 11 - Loan Portfolio Maturity
As of December 31, 2020
(in thousands)
Asset Quality and Risk Elements
We manage asset quality and control credit risk through review and oversight of the loan portfolio as well as adherence to policies designed to promote sound underwriting and loan monitoring practices. Our credit administration function is responsible for monitoring asset quality and Board approved portfolio concentration limits, establishing credit policies and procedures and enforcing the consistent application of these policies and procedures. Additional information on our credit administration function is included in Part I, Item 1 of this Report under the heading “Lending Activities.”
We classify loans as “substandard” when there is a well-defined weakness or weaknesses that jeopardize the repayment by the borrower and there is a distinct possibility that we could sustain some loss if the deficiency is not corrected. Performing substandard loans, which are substandard loans that are still accruing interest, totaled $165 million and $125 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which represented an increase of 32%. The increase coincided with the overall increase in classified loans from December 31, 2019.
We conduct reviews of classified performing and non-performing loans, TDRs, past due loans and portfolio concentrations on a regular basis to identify risk migration and potential charges to the ACL. These items are discussed in a series of meetings attended by Credit Risk Management leadership and leadership from various lending groups. In addition to the reviews mentioned above, an independent loan review team reviews the portfolio to ensure consistent application of risk rating policies and procedures.
Since the implementation of CECL on January 1, 2020, the ACL reflects management’s assessment of the life of loan expected credit losses in the loan portfolio and unfunded loan commitments. Prior to the implementation of CECL, the ACL reflected management’s assessment of the probable incurred losses in the loan portfolio and unfunded loan commitments. Management’s assessment involves uncertainty and judgment and is subject to change in future periods. The amount of any changes could be significant if the assessment of loan quality or collateral values changes substantially with respect to one or more loan relationships or portfolios or if there is a significant change in the reasonable and supportable forecast used to model our expected credit losses. The allocation of the ACL is based on reasonable and supportable forecasts, historical data, subjective judgment and estimates and therefore, may not be predictive of the specific amounts or loan categories in which charge-offs may ultimately occur. In addition, bank regulatory authorities, as part of their periodic examination of the Bank, may require adjustments to the provision for credit losses in future periods if, in their opinion, the results of their review warrant such additions. See the Critical Accounting Policies section for additional information on the ACL.
The ACL, which includes a portion related to unfunded commitments, totaled $148 million at December 31, 2020 compared with $65.5 million at December 31, 2019. At December 31, 2020, the ACL for loans was $137 million, or 1.20% of total loans, compared with $62.1 million, or 0.70%, of loans at December 31, 2019. The implementation of CECL added $6.88 million to the ACL for loans and $1.87 million to the reserve for unfunded commitments resulting in a total ACL of $74.3 million at the time of adoption. The increase since adoption primarily reflects the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, $11.2 million of allowance established for Three Shores PCD loans at acquisition with no impact to earnings, as well as the impact of loan growth during 2020 including the non-PCD loans received through the Three Shores acquisition. The impact of loan growth on the ACL was partially mitigated by the fact that PPP loans are considered low risk assets due to the 100% guarantee by the SBA.
The following table summarizes the allocation of the ACL for each of the past five years.
Table 12 - Allocation of ACL
As of December 31,
(in thousands)
* Loan balance in each category, expressed as a percentage of total loans.
The following table presents a summary of changes in the ACL for each of the past five years.
Nonperforming Assets
NPAs, which include nonaccrual loans and foreclosed properties, totaled $62.2 million at December 31, 2020, compared with $35.8 million at December 31, 2019.
The increase in NPAs since December 31, 2019 was primarily a result of an increase in nonaccrual loans. The inclusion of Three Shores nonaccrual loans and foreclosed properties in the NPA balances and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our loan portfolio contributed to the increase from December 31, 2019. In addition, when we adopted ASC 326 on January 1, 2020, we elected to disaggregate the former PCI pools and no longer consider the loan pool to be the unit of account. Reporting these contractually delinquent PCD loans as nonaccrual loans using the same criteria as other loans contributed $3.53 million to the increase in nonaccrual loans since December 31, 2019. The table below summarizes NPAs at year-end for the last five years.
Table 14 - NPAs
As of December 31,
(in thousands)
The following table summarizes nonaccrual loans by category.
Table 15 - Nonaccrual Loans by Category
As of December 31,
(in thousands)
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $61.6 million and $54.2 million, respectively, in loans with terms that have been modified in a TDR. Included therein were $20.6 million and $8.25 million, respectively, of TDRs that were nonaccrual loans. The remaining TDRs with aggregate balances of $41.0 million and $46.0 million, respectively, were performing according to their modified terms and were therefore not considered to be NPAs.
Under the CARES Act, COVID-19 related modifications to loans that were current as of December 31, 2019 are exempt from TDR classification under GAAP. In addition, the bank regulatory agencies issued interagency guidance stating that COVID-19 related short-term modifications (i.e., payment deferrals) granted to loans that were current as of the loan modification program implementation date are not new TDRs. During 2020 we granted a significant number of payment deferral requests to our borrowers related to the economic disruption created by COVID-19, most of which were exempt from TDR classification in the short term. By year-end, most of the loans with deferral periods had resumed normal payments. The following table presents remaining COVID-19 related short-term deferrals that, to the extent they qualified for exemption, were not considered TDRs as of December 31, 2020.
Table 16 - COVID-19 Deferrals
As of December 31, 2020
(in thousands)
Investment Securities
The composition of our investment securities portfolio reflects our investment strategy of maintaining an appropriate level of liquidity while providing a relatively stable source of revenue. The investment securities portfolio also provides a balance to interest rate risk in other categories of the balance sheet, while providing a vehicle for the investment of available funds, furnishing liquidity, and supplying securities to pledge as required collateral for certain deposits and borrowings. Total investment securities at December 31, 2020 increased $1.09 billion from December 31, 2019. The increased balances reflected securities acquired from Three Shores as well as our decision to deploy excess liquidity by purchasing securities.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had debt securities held-to-maturity with a carrying value of $420 million and $284 million, respectively, and debt securities available-for-sale totaling $3.22 billion and $2.27 billion, respectively. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the securities portfolio represented approximately 20% of total assets. At December 31, 2020, the effective duration of the investment portfolio was 3.68 years, compared with 2.81 years at December 31, 2019.
The investment securities portfolio primarily consists of Treasury securities, U.S. government securities, U.S. government sponsored agency mortgage-backed securities, non-agency mortgage-backed securities, corporate securities, municipal securities and asset-backed securities. Mortgage-backed securities, which include both U.S. government sponsored agency and non-agency securities, rely on the underlying pools of mortgage loans to provide a cash flow of principal and interest. The actual maturities of these securities will differ from the contractual maturities because the loans underlying the security can prepay. Decreases in interest rates will generally cause an acceleration of prepayment levels. In a declining or prolonged low interest rate environment, we may not be able to reinvest the proceeds from these prepayments in assets that have comparable yields. In a rising rate environment, the opposite may occur. Prepayments tend to slow and the weighted average life extends. This is referred to as extension risk, which can lead to lower levels of liquidity due to the delay of cash receipts, and can result in the holding of a below market yielding asset for a longer period of time.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had 62% and 71%, respectively, of our total investment securities portfolio invested in mortgage-backed securities. We have continued to purchase mortgage-backed securities in order to obtain a favorable yield with low risk. We did not have debt obligations of any issuer in excess of 10% of equity at year-end 2020 or 2019, excluding U.S. government sponsored entities. As of December 31, 2020, no securities were rated below “Baa” and 85% of securities were rated “Aaa”. See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion of the investment portfolio and related fair value and maturity information.
Since our implementation of CECL, our held-to-maturity securities portfolio is evaluated quarterly to assess whether an ACL is required. We measure expected credit losses on held-to-maturity debt securities on a collective basis by major security type. The estimate of expected credit losses considers historical credit loss information that is adjusted for current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts. At adoption on January 1, 2020 and at December 31, 2020, calculated credit losses and, thus, the related ACL on held-to-maturity debt securities were not material. As a result, we did not record an ACL for held-to-maturity securities at adoption or at December 31, 2020.
For available-for-sale debt securities in an unrealized loss position, if we intend to sell, or if it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, the security's amortized cost basis is written down to fair value through income. Absent an intent or more than likely requirement to sell, we evaluate whether the decline in fair value has resulted from credit losses or other factors. The evaluation considers factors such as the extent to which fair value is less than amortized cost,
changes to the security’s rating, and adverse conditions specific to the security. Since the adoption of ASC 326, if the evaluation indicates a credit loss exists, an ACL may be recorded, with such allowance limited to the amount by which fair value is below amortized cost. Any impairment unrelated to credit factors is recognized in other comprehensive income. Based on the assessment performed at December 31, 2020, there was no ACL required related to the available-for-sale portfolio. Losses on fixed income securities at December 31, 2020 primarily reflected the effect of changes in interest rates.
Prior to the implementation of CECL, management evaluated our securities portfolio each quarter to determine if any security was other than temporarily impaired. In making this evaluation, management considered our ability and intent to hold securities to recover current market losses. We did not recognize any other than temporary impairment losses on our investment securities in 2019 or 2018.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the premium paid for acquired companies above the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, including separately identifiable intangible assets. Goodwill is not amortized, but is assessed for impairment on an annual basis, or more often if events or circumstances indicate there may be impairment, referred to as a triggering event. Upon the occurrence of a triggering event, accounting guidance allows for an assessment of qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not, or a greater than 50% likelihood, that the fair value of the entity is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill. When it is more likely than not that impairment has occurred, management is required to perform a quantitative analysis and, if necessary, adjust the carrying amount of goodwill by recording a goodwill impairment loss.
Due to market concerns about the potential impact of COVID-19, our common stock price declined such that it traded below book value for much of 2020. We generally perform our annual goodwill impairment assessment during the fourth quarter of each year, using data as of the end of the third quarter; however as a result of this triggering event, we qualitatively assessed goodwill at the end of each interim quarter of 2020. Each assessment resulted in the conclusion that there was not a greater than 50% likelihood that United’s fair value was less than its carrying amount, given the anticipated short duration of the change in macroeconomic conditions. During the fourth quarter of 2020, our stock returned to trading above book value. Based on the excess value and other qualitative factors, the latest annual assessment performed during the fourth quarter resulted in the conclusion that there was not a greater than 50% likelihood that United’s fair value was less than its carrying amount as of December 31, 2020.
Core deposit intangibles, representing the value of the acquired deposit base, are amortizing intangible assets that are required to be tested for impairment only when events or circumstances indicate that impairment may exist. There were no events or circumstances that led us to believe that any impairment exists in our core deposit intangibles.
In connection with the acquisition of Three Shores on July 1, 2020, we recorded goodwill and a core deposit intangible of $40.4 million and $3.36 million, respectively.
Deposits
Customer deposits are the primary source of funds for the continued growth of our earning assets. Our high level of service, as evidenced by our strong customer satisfaction scores, has been instrumental in attracting and retaining customer deposit accounts. Customer deposits as of December 31, 2020 were up $4.21 billion, or 39%, compared to December 31, 2019. In addition to organic growth, the increase in customer deposits was also attributable to deposits acquired from Three Shores ($1.79 billion at the July 1, 2020 acquisition date) and PPP-related deposits. The following table sets forth the deposit composition for the periods indicated.
Table 17 - Deposits
As of December 31,
(in thousands)
The following table sets forth the scheduled maturities of time deposits of $250,000 and greater.
Table 18 - Maturities of Customer Time Deposits of $250,000 and Greater
As of December 31,
(in thousands)
Borrowing Activities
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had long-term debt outstanding of $327 million and $213 million, respectively, which included senior debentures, subordinated debentures, and trust preferred securities. During the second quarter of 2020, we issued $100 million of 5% fixed-to-floating rate senior debentures with a maturity date of June 15, 2030. The proceeds generated from the issuance of these debentures will be used for general business purposes. During the third quarter of 2020, we assumed $15.0 million of subordinated debt from Three Shores. Additional information regarding these debt instruments is provided in Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements.
Liquidity Management
Liquidity is defined as the ability to convert assets into cash or cash equivalents without significant loss and to raise additional funds by increasing liabilities. Liquidity management involves maintaining the ability to meet the daily cash flow requirements of customers, both depositors and borrowers. The primary objective is to ensure that sufficient funding is available, at a reasonable cost, to meet ongoing operational cash needs and to take advantage of revenue producing opportunities as they arise. While the desired level of liquidity will vary depending upon a variety of factors, our primary goal is to maintain a sufficient level of liquidity in all expected economic environments. To assist in determining the adequacy of our liquidity, we perform a variety of liquidity stress tests. We maintain an unencumbered liquid asset reserve to help ensure our ability to meet our obligations under normal conditions for at least a 12-month period and under severely adverse liquidity conditions for a minimum of 30 days.
An important part of the Bank’s liquidity resides in the asset portion of the balance sheet, which provides liquidity primarily through loan interest and principal repayments and the maturities and sales of securities, as well as the ability to use these assets as collateral for borrowings on a secured basis.
The Bank’s main source of liquidity is customer interest-bearing and noninterest-bearing deposit accounts. Liquidity is also available from wholesale funding sources consisting primarily of Federal funds purchased, FHLB advances, and brokered deposits. These sources of liquidity are generally short-term in nature and are used as necessary to fund asset growth and meet other short-term liquidity needs.
In addition, because the Holding Company is a separate entity and apart from the Bank, it must provide for its own liquidity. The Holding Company is responsible for the payment of dividends declared for its common and preferred shareholders, and interest and principal on any outstanding debt or trust preferred securities. The Holding Company currently has internal capital resources to meet these obligations. While the Holding Company has access to the capital markets and maintains a line of credit as a contingent funding source, the ultimate sources of its liquidity are subsidiary service fees and dividends from the Bank, which are limited by applicable law and regulations. In 2020, the Bank paid dividends of $150 million to the Holding Company. In 2019, the Bank paid no dividends to the Holding Company. Holding Company liquidity is managed to a minimum of 15-months of positive cash flow after considering all of its liquidity needs over this period.
The table below presents a summary of short-term borrowings over the last three years.
Table 19 - Short-Term Borrowings
As of and for the year ended December 31,
(in thousands)
At December 31, 2020, we had sufficient qualifying collateral to increase FHLB advances by $1.40 billion and Federal Reserve discount window capacity of $1.38 billion, as well as unpledged investment securities of $2.53 billion that could be used as collateral for additional borrowings. Management also has the ability to raise substantial funds through brokered deposits. In addition to these wholesale sources, we have the ability to attract retail deposits at any time by competing more aggressively on pricing.
As disclosed in the consolidated statements of cash flows, net cash provided by operating activities was $159 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net income of $164 million for the year included non-cash income and expense of the following: deferred income tax expense of $2.67 million, net depreciation, amortization and accretion income of $8.59 million, provision expense of $80.4 million, and stock-based compensation expense of $7.89 million. Uses of cash from operating activities included an increase in other assets and accrued interest receivable of $20.1 million, a decrease in accrued expenses and other liabilities of $14.8 million, and an increase in loans held for sale of $46.7 million.
Net cash used in investing activities of $1.58 billion consisted primarily of a net increase in loans of $1.07 billion, $1.46 billion of purchases of debt securities available-for-sale and equity securities, $157 million of purchases of debt securities held-to-maturity, and purchases of premises and equipment of $18.5 million. These uses of cash were partially offset by net cash received in the acquisition of Three Shores of $196 million, proceeds from maturities and calls of debt securities available-for-sale of $835 million, sales of debt securities available-for-sale and equity securities of $40.6 million, and maturities and calls of securities held-to-maturity of $58.0 million.
The $2.52 billion provided by financing activities consisted primarily of a net increase in deposits of $2.53 billion, net proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt of $98.6 million, and net proceeds from the issuance of preferred stock of $96.4 million. Partially offsetting these sources of cash were the net repayment of $129 million in FHLB advances, $62.4 million in common and preferred stock dividends, and repurchases of common stock of $20.8 million. In the opinion of management, our liquidity position at December 31, 2020 was sufficient to meet our expected cash requirements.
The following table presents the contractual maturity of investment securities by date and average yields. The composition and maturity / repricing distribution of the securities portfolio is subject to change depending on rate sensitivity, capital and liquidity needs.
Table 20 - Contractual Maturity of Available-for-Sale and Held-to-Maturity Debt Securities
As of December 31, 2020
(in thousands)
(1) Based on carrying value.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are a party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business to meet the financing needs of customers. These financial instruments, which included commitments to extend credit and letters of credit, totaled $3.08 billion at December 31, 2020.
A commitment to extend credit is an agreement to lend to a customer as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Letters of credit and financial guarantees are conditional commitments issued to guarantee a customer’s performance to a third party and have essentially the same credit risk as extending loan facilities to customers. Those commitments are primarily issued to local businesses.
The exposure to credit loss in the event of nonperformance by the other party to the commitments to extend credit, letters of credit and financial guarantees is represented by the contractual amount of these instruments. We use the same credit underwriting procedures for making commitments, letters of credit and financial guarantees as we use for underwriting on-balance sheet instruments. Management evaluates each customer’s creditworthiness on a case-by-case basis and the amount of the collateral, if deemed necessary, is based on the credit evaluation. Collateral held varies, but may include unimproved and improved real estate, certificates of deposit, personal property or other acceptable collateral.
All of these instruments involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit risk in excess of the amount recognized in the balance sheet. The total amount of these instruments does not necessarily represent future cash requirements because a significant portion of these instruments expire without being used. We believe that we have adequate sources of liquidity to fund commitments that are drawn upon by the borrowers. We are not involved in off-balance sheet contractual relationships, other than those disclosed in this Report, that could result in liquidity needs or other commitments, or that could significantly affect earnings. See Note 22 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on off-balance sheet arrangements.
The following table shows United’s contractual obligations and other commitments.
Table 21 - Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments
As of December 31, 2020
(in thousands)
Subsequent to year-end, we redeemed two long-term debt instruments totaling $15.6 million, which are included in the table above. See Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements for further detail.
Capital Resources and Dividends
The maintenance and management of capital levels is one of management’s significant priorities. Shareholders’ equity at December 31, 2020 was $2.01 billion, an increase of $372 million from December 31, 2019 primarily due to earnings, the issuance of preferred stock, common stock issued in the Three Shores transaction, and other comprehensive income partially offset by dividends declared and shares repurchased.
Under the risk-based capital guidelines of Basel III, assets and credit equivalent amounts of derivatives and off-balance sheet items are assigned to one of several broad risk categories according to the obligor, or, if relevant, the guarantor or the nature of the collateral. The aggregate dollar amount in each risk category is then multiplied by the risk weight associated with the category. The resulting weighted values from each of the risk categories are added together, and generally this sum is our total RWAs. RWAs for purposes of our capital ratios are calculated under these guidelines.
CET1 capital consists of common shareholders’ equity, excluding AOCI, intangible assets (goodwill, deposit-based intangibles and certain other intangibles, including certain servicing assets), net of associated deferred tax liabilities, and disallowed deferred tax
assets. Tier 1 capital consists of CET1, plus perpetual preferred stock and other qualifying capital securities. Tier 2 capital components include supplemental capital such as the qualifying portion of the ACL and qualifying subordinated debt. Tier 1 capital plus Tier 2 capital is referred to as Total risk-based capital.
We have outstanding junior subordinated debentures related to trust preferred securities totaling $25.0 million at December 31, 2020. Beginning in the third quarter of 2020, the related trust preferred securities of $24.3 million (excluding common securities) qualified as Tier 2 capital for United under risk-based capital guidelines, subject to certain limitations. Prior to that date, trust preferred securities qualified as Tier 1 capital. Further information on trust preferred securities is provided in Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements.
The following table outlines the minimum ratios required for capital adequacy purposes, as well as the thresholds for a categorization of “well-capitalized”.
Table 22 - Capital Ratios
As of December 31,
Additional information related to capital ratios, as calculated under regulatory guidelines, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, is provided in Note 21 to the consolidated financial statements. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, both United and the Bank were characterized as “well-capitalized”.
Effect of Inflation and Changing Prices
A bank’s asset and liability structure is substantially different from that of an industrial firm, because primarily all assets and liabilities of a bank are monetary in nature, with relatively little investment in fixed assets or inventories. Inflation has an important effect on the growth of total assets and the resulting need to increase equity capital at higher than nominal rates in order to maintain an appropriate equity to assets ratio.
Our management believes the effect of inflation on financial results depends on our ability to react to changes in interest rates and, by such reaction, reduce the inflationary effect on performance. We have an asset/liability management program to monitor and manage our interest rate sensitivity position. In addition, periodic reviews of banking services and products are conducted to adjust pricing in view of current and expected costs.