Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This section and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements can also be identified by words such as “expects,” “anticipates,” “targets,” “goals,” “projects,” “intends,” “plans,” “believes,” “seeks,” “estimates,” “continues,” “may,” “will be,” “will continue,” “will likely results, and similar terms. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and our actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in “Item 1A - Risk Factors” above. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statement and notes thereto included in Item 8 of this report. We assume no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by law.
Overview
We are a global leader in the design, engineering and manufacture of production tools, modules and subsystems for the semiconductor and display capital equipment markets. Our products include chemical delivery modules, frame assemblies, gas delivery systems, fluid delivery systems, precision robotics, process modules as well as other high-level assemblies. Our services provide part cleaning, surface encapsulation, and high sensitivity micro contamination analysis primarily for the semiconductor device makers and wafer fabrication (WFE) equipment markets.
Historically, the Company has operated under one operating segment. However, as a result of recent acquisitions, we elected to reorganize our organizational and reporting structure to capture efficiencies and operating leverage. We now report results for two segments: Products and Services.
We ship a majority of our products and provide most of our services to U.S. registered customers with locations both in and outside the U.S. In addition to U.S. manufacturing and service operations, we manufacture products and provide parts cleaning and other related services in our Asian and European facilities to support local and U.S. based customers.
Over the long-term, we believe the semiconductor market we serve will continue to grow due to multi-year industry inflections creating demand from a broad range of drivers including mobile demand driven by 5G, new CPU architectures which are enabling higher performance servers, and cloud, AI and machine learnings. We also believe that semiconductor equipment OEMs are increasingly relying on partners like UCT to fulfill their expanding capacity requirements.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, which require us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosure at the date of our Consolidated Financial Statements. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to inventories, income taxes, business combinations and goodwill, intangible assets and long-lived assets. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis of our judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates. We consider certain accounting policies related to revenue recognition, inventory valuation, accounting for income taxes, business combinations, valuation of goodwill, intangible assets and long-lived assets to be critical policies due to the estimates and judgments involved in each.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenues for fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018 were highly concentrated in a small number of OEM customers in the semiconductor capital equipment industry. We recognize revenue when promised goods or services (performance obligations) are transferred to a customer in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. We perform the following five steps to determine when to recognize revenue:
1.
Identification of the contract(s) with customers - Our standard arrangement for our customers includes a signed purchase order or contract, no right of return of delivered products and no customer acceptance provisions. We assess collectability based on the creditworthiness of the customer and past transaction history. We perform on-going credit evaluations of, and do not require collateral from, our customers.
2.
Identification of the performance obligations in the contract - Our performance obligations include delivery of promised goods or services.
3.
Determination of the transaction price - The transaction price of our contracts with customers may include both fixed and variable consideration. We include variable consideration in the transaction price to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. We generally invoice our customers upon shipment of goods and completion of services with payment due within 30 to 90 days after issuance.
4.
Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract - For contracts that contain multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price basis. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the contract’s transaction price to each performance obligation using the relative standalone selling price of each distinct good or service in the contract.
5.
Recognition of revenue when, or as, a performance obligation is satisfied - We recognize revenue from products sold at a point in time when we have satisfied our performance obligation by transferring control of the goods to the customer, which typically occurs at shipment or delivery. Revenue from service agreements is recognized upon completion of the services.
Inventory Valuation
We write down the carrying value of our inventory to net realizable value for estimated obsolescence or unmarketable inventory in an amount equal to the difference between the cost of inventory and its estimated realizable value based upon inventory age and assumptions about future demand and market conditions. We assess the valuation of all inventories, including raw materials, work-in-process, finished goods and spare parts on a periodic basis.
Obsolete inventory or inventory in excess of our estimated usage is written down to its estimated market value less costs to sell, if less than its cost. The inventory write-downs are recorded as an inventory valuation allowance established on the basis of obsolete inventory or specifically identified inventory in excess of established usage. Inherent in our estimates of demand and market value in determining inventory valuation are estimates related to economic trends, future demand for our products and technological obsolescence of our products. If actual demand and market conditions are less favorable than our projections, additional inventory write-downs may be required. If the inventory value is written down to its net realizable value, and subsequently there is an increased demand for the inventory at a higher value, the increased value of the inventory is not realized until the inventory is sold either as a component of a subsystem or as separate inventory. For fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018, we wrote down inventory of $3.4 million, $2.5 million, and $3.3 million, respectively.
Accounting for Income Taxes
The determination of our tax provision is highly dependent upon the geographic composition of worldwide earnings and tax regulations governing each region and is subject to judgments and estimates. Management carefully monitors the changes in many factors and adjusts the effective tax rate as required.
We must assess the likelihood that we will be able to recover our deferred tax assets. If recovery is not likely, we must increase our provision for taxes by recording a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be recoverable. In determining whether the realization of these deferred tax assets may be impaired, we make judgments with respect to whether we are likely to generate sufficient future
taxable income to realize these assets. In order to reverse a valuation allowance, accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America suggest that we review our recent cumulative income/loss as well as determine our ability to generate sufficient future taxable income to realize our net deferred tax assets. As of December 25, 2020, we maintained full valuation allowances on our U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets in the amount of $25.6 million as we believe it is more likely than not that these deferred tax assets will not be realized.
In addition, the calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws. We recognize liabilities for uncertain tax positions based on a two-step process. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with our expectations could have a material impact on the results of our operations and financial position. We believe we have adequately reserved for our uncertain tax positions; however, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be different than what we expect. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will impact the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made. The provision for income taxes includes the impact of reserve provisions and changes to reserves that are considered appropriate, as well as the related net interest.
Business Combinations
In accordance with accounting for business combinations, we allocate the purchase price of acquired companies to the identified tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. We may engage third-party valuation firms to assist management in reviewing management’s identification and determination of the fair values of acquired intangible assets such as customer relationships and tradenames. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions. Management makes estimates of fair value based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable. These estimates are based on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain.
Goodwill, Intangibles Assets, and Long-lived Assets
Goodwill is measured as the excess of the cost of an acquisition over the sum of the amounts assigned to identifiable assets acquired less liabilities assumed.
We evaluate our goodwill and indefinite life tradename for impairment on an annual basis, and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be fully recoverable. In addition, we evaluate our identifiable intangible assets and other long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Factors we consider important which could trigger an impairment review include the following:
•
Significant changes in the manner of our use of the acquired assets or the strategy of our overall business;
•
Significant negative changes in revenue of specific products or services;
•
Significant negative industry or economic trends; and
•
Significant decline in our stock price for a sustained period.
We continually apply judgment when performing these evaluations and continuously monitor for events and circumstances that could negatively impact the key assumptions in determining fair value, including long-term revenue growth projections, undiscounted cash flows, discount rates, recent market valuations from transactions by comparable companies, volatility in our market capitalization and general industry, market and macroeconomic conditions. It is possible that changes in such circumstances, or in the variables associated with the judgments, assumptions and estimates used in assessing fair value, would require us to record a non-cash impairment charge.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year
Our fiscal year is the 52- or 53-week period ending on the Friday nearest December 31. Fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018 each contained 52 weeks.
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 can be found under Item 7 in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 27, 2019, filed with the SEC on March 11, 2020, which is available on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and our Investor Relations website at ww.uct.com/investors.
Discussion of Results of Operations
Revenues
Total Products revenues increased in fiscal year 2020 over fiscal year 2019, primarily due to an increase in customer demand in the semiconductor industry, in particular, the wafer fabrication equipment industry.
Total Services revenues increased in fiscal year 2020 over fiscal year 2019, primarily due to increases in demand across its customer base.
On a geographic basis, revenues represent products shipped from or services performed in our U.S. and international locations.
United States revenue increased in absolute terms and as a percentage of total revenue due to two factors. The first of these was an overall increase in semiconductor industry demand in the U.S. The second factor relates to the April, 2019 acquisition of DMS, whose customers are primarily U.S. based.
The increase in foreign revenues in absolute terms and as a percentage of total revenue is due primarily to the overall higher semiconductor and semiconductor capital equipment demand outside of the U.S.
Cost of Revenues
Total cost of revenues increased in fiscal year 2020 over fiscal year 2019 due to higher demand for both Products and Services.
Cost of Products revenues consists of purchased materials, direct labor and manufacturing overhead. Cost of Products revenues increased $215.7 million compared to the prior year, due to higher volume of sales driving increased material costs of $199.2 million, higher direct labor spending of $6.1 million and higher overhead costs of $10.4 million.
Cost of Services revenues consists of direct labor, manufacturing overhead and materials (such as chemicals, gases and consumables). Cost of Services revenues increased $21.7 million compared to the prior year driven by higher volumes of service orders, resulting in an increase in labor costs of $2.0 million (the largest component of total cost of Services revenues), higher material costs of $6.6 million and higher overhead costs of $13.1 million driven by higher service orders.
Gross Margin
Products gross margin increased in fiscal year 2020 over fiscal year 2019 due primarily to higher volume, and the favorable mix of higher margin products. Services gross margin increased in fiscal year 2020 over fiscal year 2019 due to direct labor efficiencies along with lower facility-related costs.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of activities related to new component testing and evaluation, test equipment and fixture development, product design, the advancement of cleaning and coating and analytical processes, and other product-development activities. Research and development expenses remained consistent in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries and commissions paid to our sales employees, salaries paid to our engineers who work with sales and service employees to help determine the components and configuration requirements for new products and other costs related to the sales of our products. Sales and marketing expenses increased $2.7 million in fiscal year 2020 over fiscal year 2019, primarily due to an increase in personnel-related costs resulting from an increase in headcount and higher bonuses.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $0.6 million in fiscal year 2020 over fiscal year 2019, due to higher personnel-related expenses primarily due to increases in headcount, higher bonuses and costs related to the proposed acquisition of Ham-Let (Israel - Canada) Ltd., partially offset by a $1.4 million gain from the sale of property and equipment.
Interest and Other Income (Expense), net
Interest expense decreased in fiscal year 2020 over fiscal year 2019 due to a lower average debt balance, lower interest rates resulting from lower LIBOR rates and higher interest expense capitalized on borrowings related to qualified capital expenditures.
Other income (expense), net, increased $(3.3) million in fiscal year 2020 over fiscal year 2019 primarily due to other expense from the net changes in fair values of the common stock purchase obligation of $(7.4) million, which was partially offset by changes in contingent earn-out liabilities related to prior acquisitions of $1.3 million. These changes were partially offset by increases in other income of $2.6 million, consisting of $1.5 million of government subsidies received by the Company’s subsidiary in China and $1.1 million of increases in the fair value of forward hedge contracts.
Provision for Income Taxes
The change in respective tax rates reflects, primarily, changes in the geographic distribution of our worldwide earnings. For fiscal year 2020, our effective tax rate was lower than the federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to favorable effects of the geographic distribution of our worldwide earnings in foreign jurisdictions with lower effective tax rates.
For the year ended December 25, 2020, the Company concluded that a full valuation allowance against its U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets continues to be necessary. The Company also concluded that some of its foreign deferred tax assets acquired as part of the QGT acquisition required a valuation allowance. As of December 25, 2020, the total U.S. and foreign valuation allowances for deferred tax assets were $23.1 million and $2.5 million, respectively.
Our ability to realize deferred tax assets depends on our ability to generate sufficient future taxable income. In assessing our future taxable income, we have considered all sources of future taxable income available to realize our deferred tax assets, including the taxable income from future reversal of existing temporary differences, carry forwards, and tax-planning strategies. If changes occur in the assumptions underlying our tax planning strategies or in the scheduling of the reversal of our deferred tax liabilities, the valuation allowance may need to be adjusted in the future.
The Company remitted foreign earnings from its subsidiary in Singapore in 2020. The Company has no plans to remit foreign earnings other than possibly from its Singapore subsidiary. We may change our intent to reinvest certain of our undistributed foreign earnings indefinitely, which could require us to accrue or pay taxes on some or all of these undistributed earnings.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and cash Equivalents
The following table summarizes our cash and cash equivalents:
The increase in cash and cash equivalents in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 was primarily due to the cash provided by operating activities of $97.3 million, partially offset by the $36.4 million used for purchases of property, plant and equipment and principal payments on bank borrowings and finance leases of $28.8 million.
Cash Flows
Our primary cash inflows and outflows were as follows:
•
We generated net cash from operating activities of $97.3 million in fiscal year 2020, compared to $121.0 million in fiscal year 2019. The $23.7 million decrease was driven by a decrease of $120.2 million in the net change from operating assets and liabilities offset by an increase of $8.4 million in non-cash items and by an increase of $88.1 million in net income.
•
The major contributors to the net change in operating assets and liabilities, net of effects of acquisition, in fiscal year 2020 were as follows:
o
Accounts receivable increased $32.7 million primarily due to the increase in revenues in fiscal 2020 and the timing of collections.
o
Inventories increased $8.0 million due primarily to the customer demand outlook in 2021.
o
Accounts payable decreased $12.6 million, accrued compensation and related benefits increased $9.7 million, and other liabilities decreased $7.4 million, primarily due to the timing of payments.
•
Cash used in investing activities was $29.8 million in fiscal year 2020 compared to $49.2 million in fiscal year 2019. During fiscal year 2020, net cash used for investing activities primarily consisted of $36.4 million for purchases of property, plant and equipment, offset by $6.6 million in proceeds from insurance related to the Cinos Korea fire in 2018. During fiscal year 2019, net cash used for investing activities primarily consisted of $29.9 million, net of cash acquired, for the DMS acquisition and $26.3 million for purchases of property, plant and equipment.
•
Cash used in financing activities was $31.1 million in fiscal year 2020 compared to cash used by financing activities of $53.4 million in fiscal year 2019. During fiscal year 2020, net cash used in financing activities primarily consisted of $28.8 million net of debt repayments and $1.5 million of taxes paid upon the vesting of restricted stock units. During fiscal year 2019, net cash used in financing activities primarily consisted of $51.2 million net of debt repayments, $0.6 million dividends payments made to a joint venture shareholder and $1.9 million of taxes paid upon the vesting of restricted stock units.
We believe we have sufficient capital to fund our working capital needs, satisfy our debt obligations, maintain our existing capital equipment, purchase new capital equipment and make strategic acquisitions from time to time. As of December 25, 2020, we had cash of $200.3 million compared to $162.5 million as of December 27, 2019. Our cash and cash equivalents, cash generated from operations and amounts available under our revolving line of credit described below were our principal sources of liquidity as of December 25, 2020.
In February of 2018, we completed an underwritten public offering of 4,761,905 shares of our common stock, in which we received net proceeds of approximately $94.3 million, after deducting the underwriting discounts and offering expenses payable by us.
In August 2018, in conjunction with the acquisition of QGT, we entered into a credit agreement with Barclays Bank that provided a Term Loan, a Revolving Credit Facility, and a Letter of Credit Facility (the “Credit Facilities”). See further discussion under Borrowing Arrangements below.
We anticipate that our existing cash and cash equivalents balance and operating cash flow will be sufficient to service our indebtedness and meet our working capital requirements and technology development projects for at least the next twelve months. The adequacy of these resources to meet our liquidity needs beyond that period will depend on our growth, the size and number of any acquisitions, the state of the worldwide economy, our ability to meet our financial covenants with our credit facility, the cyclical expansion or contraction of the semiconductor capital equipment industry and the other industries we serve and capital expenditures required to meet possible increased demand for our products.
In order to expand our business or acquire additional complementary businesses or technologies, we may need to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings. If required, additional financing may not be available on terms that are favorable to us, if at all. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of equity or convertible debt securities, our stockholders’ equity interest will be diluted and these securities might have rights, preferences and privileges senior to those of our current stockholders. We may also require the consent of our new lenders to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings. No assurance can be given that additional financing will be available or that, if available, such financing can be obtained on terms favorable to our stockholders and us.
In 2017, we determined that a portion of the current year and future year earnings of one of our China subsidiaries may be remitted in the future to one of our foreign subsidiaries outside of mainland China and, accordingly, we provided for the related withholding taxes in our Consolidated Financial Statements. As of December 25, 2020, we had undistributed earnings of approximately $267.2 million from our foreign subsidiaries that are indefinitely invested outside of the U.S. As of December 25, 2020, we have cash of approximately $181.4 million in our foreign subsidiaries.
Borrowing Arrangements
In August 2018, we entered into a credit agreement with Barclays Bank that provided a Term Loan, a Revolving Credit Facility and a Letter of Credit Facility (the “Credit Facility”). We and some of our subsidiaries have agreed to secure all of our obligations under the Credit Facility by granting a first priority lien in substantially all of our respective personal property assets (subject to certain exceptions and limitations). In August 2018, we borrowed $350.0 million under the Term Loan and used the proceeds, together with cash on hand, to finance the acquisition of QGT and to refinance our previous credit facilities.
The Term Loan has a maturity date of August 27, 2025, with monthly interest payments in arrears, quarterly principal payments of 0.625% of the original outstanding principal balance payable beginning in January 2019, with the remaining principal paid upon maturity. The Term Loan accrues interest daily at a rate equal to a base LIBOR rate determined by reference to the London interbank offered rate for dollars, plus 4.5% (subject to certain adjustments quarterly based upon the Company’s consolidated leverage ratio). At December 25, 2020, we had an outstanding amount under the Term Loan of $275.0 million, gross of unamortized debt issuance costs of $7.9 million. As of December 25, 2020, the interest rate on the outstanding Term Loan was 4.65%. On December 31, 2021, LIBOR will officially be phased out. The Company will work with its bank to determine alternative risk-free rates.
The Revolving Credit Facility has an initial available commitment of $65.0 million and a maturity date of August 27, 2023. We pay a quarterly commitment fee in arrears equal to 0.25% of the average daily available commitment outstanding. During the first quarter of 2020 we drew $40.0 million under the Revolving Credit Facility to fund operations. In September 2020, the revolver balance of $40.0 million was repaid in full.
The Credit Agreement requires that we maintain certain financial covenants including a consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) as of the last day of any fiscal quarter of at least 1.25 to 1.00, and a consolidated leverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) as of the last day of any fiscal quarter of no greater than 3.75 to 1.00. We were in compliance with all covenants for the quarter ended December 25, 2020.
The Letter of Credit Facility has an initial available commitment of $50.0 million and a maturity date of August 27, 2023. We pay quarterly in arrears a fee equal to 2.5% (subject to certain adjustments as per the Term Loans) of the dollar equivalent of all outstanding letters of credit, and a fronting fee equal to 0.125% of the undrawn and unexpired amount of each letter of credit. As of December 25, 2020, we had $2.4 million outstanding letters of credit with beneficiaries such as landlords of certain facility leases and government agencies making up the majority of the outstanding balance. The remaining available commitments are $47.6 million on the Letter of Credit Facility and $65.0 million on the Revolving Credit Facility.
In fiscal 2020, Cinos China amended its existing Credit Agreement and entered into two additional Credit Agreements with a local bank that provide Revolving Credit Facilities for a total available commitment of $3.5 million with various maturity dates through September 23, 2022 and interest rates ranging from 1.9% to 4.1%. As of December 25, 2020, Cinos China had an outstanding amount of $1.9 million with an interest rates of 2.1% to 4.1% under these Credit Agreements.
Cinos Korea has Credit Agreements with various banks that provide Revolving Credit Facilities for a total available commitment of 1.6 billion Korean Won (approximately $1.4 million) with annual renewals beginning from April 2021 through June 2021 and interest rates ranging from 1.4% - 5.4%. During the fiscal year ended December 25, 2020, borrowings under these Revolving Facilities were insignificant and no amounts were outstanding as of December 25, 2020.
FDS has a credit agreement with a local bank in the Czech Republic that provides for a revolving credit facility in the aggregate of up to 6.0 million euros. As of December 25, 2020, FDS had no outstanding amount under its revolving credit facility.
As of December 25, 2020, our total bank debt was $269.0 million, net of unamortized debt issuance costs of $7.9 million. As of December 25, 2020, we had $65.0 million, $7.3 million (6.0 million euros) and $1.6 million available to draw from our revolving credit facilities in the U.S., Czech Republic and China, respectively.
The fair value of our long-term debt was based on Level 2 inputs, and fair value was determined using quoted prices for similar liabilities in inactive markets. The carrying value of our long-term debt approximates fair value.
Capital Expenditures
Capital expenditures were $37.2 million for the year ended December 25, 2020, primarily attributable to the expansion of our South Korea, Singapore, Czech Republic and certain U.S. facilities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the periods presented, we do not have unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
In conjunction with the sale of our products in the ordinary course of business, we provide standard indemnification against certain liabilities to our customers, which may include claims of losses by their own customers resulting out of property damages, bodily injuries or deaths, or infringement of intellectual property rights by our products. Our potential liability arising out of intellectual property infringement claims by any third party is generally uncapped. As of December 25, 2020, we have not incurred any significant costs to defend lawsuits or settle claims related to these indemnification arrangements. As a result, we believe the estimated fair value of these arrangements is minimal.
Contractual Obligations
Other than operating leases for certain equipment and real estate and purchase order commitments primarily for inventory, we have no off-balance sheet transactions or similar instruments and, other than the arrangements described under “Borrowing Arrangements” above and our common stock purchase obligation resulting from the acquisition of QGT, are not a guarantor of any other entities’ debt or other financial obligations. The following table summarizes our future minimum lease payments, principal payments under debt obligations and our purchase obligations for the purchase of inventory as of December 25, 2020:
(1)
The Company leases facilities in the U.S.A. as well as internationally under non-cancellable leases that expire on various date through 2031.
(2)
Amounts reflect obligations under our Term loan amounting to $275.0 gross of $7.9 million of unamortized debt issuance costs and $1.9 million held by Cinos China.
(3)
The Company is obligated to purchase the common stock owned by one of Cinos’ shareholders. See Note 10 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(4)
Represents our outstanding purchase orders primarily for inventory.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncement
For a description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects, if any, on UCT’s Consolidated Financial Statements, see Note 1, “Organization and Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.