Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation is intended to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of our management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and certain other factors that may affect our future results. You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and the related notes to consolidated financial statements for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and December 29, 2019 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis include forward-looking statements. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below as well as in other sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in “Business,” “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” We make no guarantees regarding outcomes and assume no obligation to update the forward-looking statements herein, except as may be required by law.
For discussion of results of operations for the year ended December 29, 2019, see Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K/A, filed with the SEC on March 30, 2020.
Basis of Presentation
The Company’s policy had been that fiscal years end on the Sunday closest to the end of the calendar year end. Our 2020 fiscal year ended on December 31, 2020, the 2019 fiscal year end ended on December 29, 2019. Beginning in 2020, the Company
began to report on a calendar quarter end and calendar year end basis. Results for December 30 and December 31, 2019 are included in the 2020 fiscal year results. This change had an immaterial impact on our 2020 result of operations. All year and twelve month references prior to 2020 relate to the Company’s fiscal year, unless otherwise stated. For ease of presentation, year and twelve months ended is used throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K to represent both the current year calendar periods and the prior year fiscal year periods.
The Company’s operations are classified in one reportable business segment. Although we have expanded the products that we manufacture and sell to include components used in the appliance, medical and consumer off-road markets, products for these industries are manufactured at facilities that also manufacture or are capable of manufacturing products for the automotive industries. Our manufacturing locations have capabilities to produce diverse products utilizing multiple processes to serve various markets. The manufacturing operations for our transportation, appliance, medical and consumer off-road products share management and labor forces and use common personnel and strategies for new product development, marketing and the sourcing of raw materials.
We are a “smaller reporting company,” which allows us to take advantage of the SEC’s scaled disclosure requirements for smaller reporting companies. As a smaller reporting company, we have not disclosed selected financial data, unaudited quarterly financial information, contractual obligations, or qualitative and quantitative information about market risk. We also have included only two years of consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is permitted under the scaled disclosure requirements for smaller reporting companies. As a smaller reporting company, we also are exempt from certain other disclosure requirements, which we have taken advantage of, including not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements.
Overview
Unique Fabricating, Inc. (the “Company” or “Unique”) engineers and manufactures components for customers in the transportation, appliance, medical, and consumer markets. The Company’s solutions are comprised of multi-material foam, rubber, and plastic components and utilized in NVH management, acoustical management, water and air sealing, decorative and other functional applications. Unique leverages proprietary manufacturing processes, including die cutting, thermoforming, compression molding, fusion molding, and reaction injection molding to manufacture a wide range of products including air management products, HVAC, seals, fender stuffers, air ducts, acoustical insulation, door water shields, gas tank pads, light gaskets, topper pads, mirror gaskets, glove box liners personal protection equipment, and packaging. The Company is headquartered in Auburn Hills, Michigan.
Unique Fabricating serves the North American transportation market, which includes automotive and heavy-duty trucks, as well as the appliance, medical, and consumer markets. Sales are conducted directly to major automotive and heavy-duty truck, appliance, water heater and HVAC manufacturers, referred throughout this report as OEMs, or indirectly through the Tier 1 suppliers of these OEMs. The Company has its principal executive offices in Auburn Hills, Michigan and has sales, engineering and production facilities in Auburn Hills, Michigan; Concord, Michigan; LaFayette, Georgia; Louisville, Kentucky; Monterrey, Mexico; Querétaro, Mexico; and London, Ontario. The Company also has an independent client sales representative who maintains offices in Baldham, Germany.
Unique Fabricating derives most of its net sales from the sales of foam, rubber plastic, and tape adhesive related automotive products. These products are produced by a variety of manufacturing processes including die cutting, compression molding, thermoforming, reaction injection molding and fusion molding. We believe Unique Fabricating has a broader array of processes and materials utilized than any of its direct competitors, based on our product offerings. By sealing out air, noise and water intrusion, and by providing sound absorption and blocking, Unique Fabricating’s products improve the interior comfort of a vehicle, increasing perceived vehicle quality and the overall experience of its passengers. Unique Fabricating’s products perform similar functions for appliances medical and consumer off-road systems, improving thermal characteristics, reducing noise and prolonging equipment life. We primarily operate within the highly competitive and cyclical automotive parts industry.
Recent Developments
Coronavirus
The Company’s results for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 were adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in the idling of most of our automotive customers’ facilities beginning in mid-March 2020 and continuing until June. In response to the unprecedented uncertainty related to the impact the COVID-19 pandemic is having on the global automotive industry, the Company has taken actions to reduce costs and increase financial flexibility. These actions include actively managing costs, capital expenditures, and working capital. Additionally, the Company received a loan of approximately $6.0 million pursuant to the U.S. Small Business Administration Paycheck Protection Program under Title I of
the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act. Refer to Note 8, in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on the Paycheck Protection Program loan.
Due to the ongoing COVID-19 outbreak with its uncertain near, mid, and longer-term impacts on the Company, our customers, our suppliers, and the industries we serve, we are executing a comprehensive set of actions to prudently manage our resources while keeping our customers supplied with the products they continue to require.
The Company continues to follow guidelines with respect to operating during the COVID-19 pandemic provided by the various governmental entities in the jurisdictions where we operate and is taking additional measures to protect our employees.
Our supply chain has been adversely affected by the COVID-19 outbreak. Throughout 2020 we worked with our supply chain to minimize the impact to our customers by improving our suppliers’ visibility of our future demand requirements, utilizing substitutions when possible, and incurring additional freight costs to expedite the delivery of materials from supplier and product to our customers. These additional costs cannot always be passed to our customers and when we are able to pass them to our customers the cost is sometimes delayed due to competitive pressures. Supply chain disruptions have continued into 2021 and they have impacted the entire North American transportation market as well as the other markets.
Due to the inherent uncertainty of the unprecedented and situation including the duration of the actions taken by our various customers and governments, we are unable to determine the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our future operations.
Organizational Changes
On April 2, 2020, the Company named a new Chief Financial Officer (“CFO”) of the Company. The Company’s previous CFO resigned effective October 11, 2019.
During January 2020, we hired new Directors of Human Resources and Purchasing as we continue to strengthen our management team to enable the achievement of our growth and operational targets.
On September 17, 2019, the Company named a new President and Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) of the Company, who began employment with the Company on September 30, 2019.
The Company’s previous President and CEO resigned by mutual agreement with the Company on May 6, 2019 and subsequently resigned as a member of the Company’s board of directors on July 30, 2019. The Company incurred one-time restructuring costs of $0.7 million during the twelve months ended December 29, 2019 in connection with the former CEO’s resignation.
Salaried Restructuring
On May 15, 2019 and February 1, 2019, the Company announced that in order to reduce fixed costs it would be eliminating several salaried positions. The Company provided the affected employees severance pay, health benefits continuation and job search assistance. This reduction took place and the Company incurred restructuring costs of $0.3 million in the twelve months ended December 29, 2019.
During the fourth quarter of 2019, the Company made additional net reductions of 12 salaried positions as part of a streamlining of the company to improve efficiency and better align the organization to its new structure, targets, and vision. There was an immaterial impact on 2019 costs. Some of the resulting cost savings have been used to add specific capabilities in Engineering, Finance, Human Resources, and Purchasing.
Bryan Facility Closure
On November 7, 2019, the Company made the decision to close its manufacturing facility in Bryan, Ohio. Approximately 43 positions were eliminated as a result of the closure. The Company’s decision resulted from its desire to streamline operations and to utilize some of the available excess capacity in our other facilities.
The Company moved Bryan, Ohio production to its existing manufacturing facilities in Querétaro, Mexico and LaFayette, Georgia. The Company provided the affected employees severance pay, health benefits continuation, and job search assistance. The Company evaluated whether or not this closing met the criteria for discontinued operations and concluded that the closing did not meet the definition as it did not represent a strategic shift in the Company's operations and the Company has continuing cash flows from the production that was moved to other facilities within the Company.
The Company incurred one-time severance costs as a result of this plant closure of approximately $0.3 million during the fourth quarter of 2019. The amount of other costs incurred associated with this plant closure, which primarily consist of preparing and moving existing production equipment and inventory at Bryan to other facilities and accelerated depreciation of the building right-of-use lease asset, was approximately $0.6 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
Evansville Facility Closure
On July 16, 2019, the Company made the decision to close its manufacturing facility in Evansville, Indiana. The Company ceased operations at the Evansville facility during the fourth quarter of 2019, an approximately 47 positions were eliminated as a result of the closure. The Company's decision resulted from its desire to streamline operations and to utilize some of the available excess capacity in our other facilities.
The Company moved existing Evansville production to its manufacturing facilities in LaFayette, Georgia, Auburn Hills, Michigan, and Louisville, Kentucky. The Company provided the affected employees severance pay, health benefits continuation, and job search assistance. The Company evaluated whether or not this closing met the criteria for discontinued operations and concluded that the closing did not meet the definition as it did not represent a strategic shift in the Company's operations and the Company has continuing cash flows from the production that was moved to other facilities within the Company.
The Company incurred costs of $0.6 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, which consisted primarily of the relocation of equipment, the disposal of equipment and inventory, and the impairment of the ROU asset for the leased warehouse. Also included in this amount is a non-cash loss related to the loss on the sale of the Evansville building. All of these costs were recorded to the restructuring expense line in continuing operations in the Company’s consolidated statements of operations.
The Company had $0.7 million and $1.1 million of remaining lease payments for a warehouse near the Evansville, Indiana facility as of December 31, 2020 and December 29, 2019, respectively. The Company has secured a sublease of roughly 11% of the facility.
The table below summarizes the restructuring activity during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and December 29, 2019:
Goodwill
The Company performed the annual quantitative assessment as of December 31, 2020, utilizing a combination of the income and market approaches. The results of the quantitative analysis performed indicated the fair value of the reporting unit exceeded the carrying value by approximately 70.0%. Key assumptions used in the analysis were a discount rate of 13.0%, EBITDA margin of 8% in 2021 and at least 9.5% thereafter and a terminal growth rate of 2.5%. Future events and changing market conditions may, however, lead the Company to reevaluate the assumptions that have been used to test for goodwill impairment, including key assumptions used in the expected EBITDA margins, cash flows and discount rates, as well as other assumptions with respect to matters out of the Company’s control, such as discount rates and market multiples of comparable companies.
During the second quarter of 2019, the Company experienced a decline in market capitalization, which under applicable accounting standards, is a potential indicator of impairment. As a result, the Company performed an interim quantitative assessment as of June 30, 2019, utilizing a combination of the income and market approaches, which were weighted evenly. The results of the quantitative analysis performed indicated the carrying value of the Company exceeded the fair value of the Company by $6.8 million and, accordingly, an impairment was recorded during the second quarter of 2019. Key assumptions used in the analysis were a discount rate of 12.5%, EBITDA margin of 5.7% for the last seven months of 2019, 9.25% EBITDA margin for 2020 increasing to 10.0% for 2023, and a terminal growth rate of 2.0%. Future events and changing market conditions may, however, lead us to reevaluate the assumptions we have used to test for goodwill impairment, including key assumptions used in our expected EBITDA margins and cash flows, as well as other key assumptions with respect to matters out of our control, such as discount rates and market multiple comparables. Based on the results of the quantitative test, we
performed sensitivity analysis around the key assumptions used in the analysis, the results of which were a 50 basis point decline in EBITDA margin used to determine expected future cash flows would have resulted in an additional impairment of approximately $12.3 million. No such further indicators of impairment were identified during the remaining two quarters of the year ended December 29, 2019.
Comparison of Results of Operations for the Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2020 and December 29, 2019
Net Sales
Net sales for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 were approximately $120.2 million compared to $152.5 million for the twelve months ended December 29, 2019, representing a decrease of 21.2%. The decrease in net sales in 2020 was primarily caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, which idled our automotive customers’ facilities for several months. Also contributing to the decrease in net sales was the end of certain transportation customer programs, and lost sales from facility closures.
Cost of Sales
The major components of cost of sales are raw materials purchased from third parties, direct labor and benefits, and manufacturing overhead, including facility costs, utilities, supplies, repairs and maintenance, insurance, freight costs of products shipped to customers and depreciation.
Cost of Sales as a Percent of Net Sales
The increase in cost of sales as a percentage of net sales in 2020 was attributable to lower sales, resulting in an under absorption of manufacturing overhead. The increase in direct labor and benefits as a percent of net sales during 2020 is mainly driven by labor premiums throughout the year. The Company continued to provide health and other employee benefits during the COVID-19 related shut downs, without employee contributions, also contributed to the increase. Material cost as a percentage of net sales increased due to lower material utilization related to production moves from previously completed facility closures.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses (“SG&A”)
Selling, general, and administrative expenses for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 decreased $1.3 million to $25.5 million, compared to $26.8 million for the twelve months ended December 29, 2019. The decrease was driven by cost reduction activities including plant closures, reduced management and commission expenses, and lower health care costs. Partially offsetting these cost savings were increased professional fees primarily related to the finance and information technology support.
Operating Loss
Operating loss for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was $6.0 million compared to an operating loss of $4.8 million for the twelve months ended December 29, 2019. The increased operating loss in 2020 was primarily a result of $10.8 million lower gross profit. Offsetting the reduced gross profit was $1.5 million less restructuring expenses in 2020 and the $6.8 million goodwill impairment charge during 2019 that did not reoccur.
Non-Operating Expense
Non-operating expense for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was $3.5 million compared to $4.3 million for the twelve months ended December 29, 2019. The change in non-operating expense was primarily driven by interest expense. Interest expense was approximately $3.6 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, compared to 4.3 million for the twelve months ended December 29, 2019. The decrease in interest expense is primarily driven by the lower interest rate composition of our debt compared to last year.
Income before Income Taxes
As a result of the foregoing factors, loss before income taxes for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was $9.5 million, compared to a loss of $9.0 million for the twelve months ended December 29, 2019.
Income Tax Provision
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, income tax benefit was $3.8 million, and the effective income tax rate was 40%. The effective tax rate was higher than the statutory rate of 21.0% primarily due to the impact of net operating loss carry backs from 2020 and 2019. For the twelve months ended December 29, 2019, income tax expense was less than $0.1 million, and the effective income tax rate was 0%. The effective tax rate was lower than the statutory rate of 21.0% primarily due to earnings generated in Mexico and Canada, which both have higher statutory income tax rates than the U.S., and the U.S.
taxation of foreign earnings under the Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income (GILTI) provisions of the Tax Cut and Jobs Act, partially offset by tax credits.
Net Loss
Net loss for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was $5.7 million compared to net loss of $9.1 million during the twelve months ended December 29, 2019. The decrease in net loss was primarily driven by increased income tax benefit in 2020, goodwill impairment charges in 2019 not recurring, and lower restructuring and interest expenses. These impacts offset the $10.8 million reduction of gross profit, which was driven by the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on sales and production costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash flow from operations and borrowings under our Amended and Restated Credit Agreement from our senior lenders. Our primary uses of cash are payment of vendors, payroll, operating costs, capital expenditures and debt service.
As of December 31, 2020 and December 29, 2019, we had a cash balance of $0.8 million and $0.7 million, respectively. Our excess cash balance is swept daily and applied to reduce borrowings under our revolving line of credit, which remains available for re-borrowing, as needed, subject to compliance with the terms of the facility. As of December 31, 2020 and December 29, 2019, we had $5.7 million and $6.8 million, respectively, available for borrowing under our amended and restated credit facility, subject, in each case, to borrowing base restrictions, compliance with the terms of the facility and outstanding letters of credit. Assuming that we are able to agree on a waiver of defaults by our lenders and an amendment to our Amended and Restated Credit Facility which do not restrict borrowings, we believe that our sources of liquidity, including cash flow from operations, existing cash and our revolving credit facility are sufficient to meet our projected cash requirements for at least the next twelve months.
In 2021, we plan to commit to approximately $4.0 million in capital expenditures, primarily to add new production equipment as we expand and automate our production capabilities, upgrade existing equipment and facilities, and improve our information technology software and hardware throughout our locations. The forbearance agreement, during the forbearance period prohibits any payment to acquire illiquid assets other than ordinary course capital expenditures.
We may elect to pursue additional growth opportunities that could require additional debt or equity financing. If we are unable to secure additional financing at favorable terms in order to pursue such additional growth opportunities, our ability to pursue such opportunities could be materially adversely affected.
Dividends
Our payment of dividends on our common stock in the future will be determined by our board of directors in its sole discretion and will depend on business conditions, our financial condition, earnings, liquidity and capital requirements. Our Amended Credit Agreement contains financial covenants which may have the effect of precluding or limiting the amounts that we can pay as dividends.
Cash Flow Data
The following table presents cash flow data for the periods indicated.
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities consists of net income adjusted for non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization; amortization of debt issuance costs; gain or loss on sale of assets; gain or loss on extinguishment of debt; gain or loss on derivative instruments; bad debt adjustments; stock option expense; changes in deferred income taxes; accrued and other liabilities; prepaid expenses and other assets; and the effect of working capital changes. The primary drivers of the impact COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s operating results.
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $1.4 million, compared to cash provided by operating activities of $12.0 million for the twelve months ended December 29, 2019.
Net cash used by operating activities for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was adversely impacted by increases in prepaid expenses and refundable taxes. Overall operating cash flows decreased as a result of the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on the business.
The net cash provided by operating activities for the twelve months ended December 29, 2019 was positively impacted by decreases in inventory and accounts receivable representing a renewed focus on the management of those two areas.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities consists principally of purchases of property, plant and equipment. In the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, we made capital expenditures of $2.4 million. In the twelve months ended December 29, 2019, we made capital expenditures of $2.8 million.
Financing Activities
Cash flows (used in) provided by financing activities consisted primarily of borrowings and payments under our senior credit facilities, and payment of debt issuance costs.
In the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, we had inflows of $3.0 million primarily due to $6.0 million of the disbursement of the PPP loan. This inflow was primarily offset by $3.2 million in payments on our term loans and capital expenditure line, as further discussed in Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements.
As of December 31, 2020, $11.7 million was outstanding under the revolving credit facility, gross of debt issuance costs. Borrowings under the revolving credit facility are subject to a borrowing base which is reduced to the extent of letters of credit issued under the senior credit facility. The maximum amount available was further subject to borrowing base restrictions, resulting in a net availability of $5.7 million at December 31, 2020, which includes a reduction for a $0.1 million letter of credit issued for the benefit of the landlord of one of the Company’s leased facilities. Amounts repaid under the revolving credit facility will be available to be re-borrowed, subject to borrowing base restrictions and compliance with the terms of the facility.
As of December 29, 2019, $11.7 million was outstanding under the revolving credit facility, gross of debt issuance costs. Borrowings under the revolving credit facility are subject to a borrowing base which is reduced to the extent of letters of credit issued under the new senior credit facility. As of December 29, 2019, the maximum additional available borrowings under the revolving credit facility was $11.3 million, which is further subject to borrowing base restrictions.
Our Debt
On November 8, 2018, the US Borrower and the CA Borrower, entered into an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Amended and Restated Credit Agreement”), which amended and restated the existing Credit Agreement, with Citizens, acting as Administrative Agent, and the other lenders. The Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, provided for borrowings under the Revolver up to $30.0 million, the US Term Loan up to $26.0 million, the CA Term Loan up to $12.0 million, created a two year line to fund capital expenditures of up to $2.5 million through November 8, 2019 and $5.0 million thereafter through November 8, 2020, and extended the maturity dates of all borrowings from April 28, 2021 to November 7, 2023. The Amended and Restated Credit Agreement provides for and required quarterly principal payments of the US Term Loan of $0.3 million through September 30, 2020, $0.6 million thereafter through September 30, 2021, and $0.8 million thereafter though maturity. The CA Term Loan requires quarterly principal payments in the amount of $0.4 million, with a lump sum due at maturity. Finally, the agreement made certain changes to the Company's covenants and financial covenant ratios.
Covenant Compliance and Amendments to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement
As of March 31, 2019, the Company was not in compliance with the total leverage ratio financial covenant. As a result of this non-compliance, on May 7, 2019, the US Borrower and the CA Borrower entered into the waiver and First Amendment (the “First Amendment”) to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, with Citizens, acting as Administrative Agent, and the other lenders. The First Amendment temporarily waived the default on the March 31, 2019 covenant violation until the earlier of June 15, 2019 and the execution and delivery of a further amendment revising the calculation of the total leverage ratio and such other financial covenants as necessary, taking into account the Borrowers current and future financial condition.
On June 14, 2019, the Company entered into the Second Amendment (the “Second Amendment”) to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, with Citizens, acting as Administrative Agent, and the other lenders. The Second Amendment revised the waiver period as defined with respect to the March 31, 2019 covenant violation and resulting default until the earlier of June 30, 2019 (which was June 15, 2019 under the First Amendment to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement) and the execution and delivery of a further amendment revising the calculation of the total leverage ratio and such other financial covenants as are necessary taking into account the Borrowers, then current and future financial condition.
On June 28, 2019, the Company entered into the Third Amendment (the “Third Amendment”) to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, with Citizens, acting as Administrative Agent, and the other lenders. The Third Amendment revised the waiver period as defined with respect to the March 31, 2019 covenant violation and resulting default until the earlier of July 22, 2019 (which was June 30, 2019 under the Second Amendment to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement) and the execution and delivery of a further amendment revising the calculation of the total leverage ratio and such other financial covenants as are necessary taking into account the Borrowers current and future financial condition.
On July 16, 2019, the Company entered into the Waiver and Fourth Amendment (the “Fourth Amendment”) to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, with Citizens, acting as Administrative Agent, and the other lenders. The Fourth Amendment provided a permanent waiver by the Lenders and Agent with respect to the Borrower's non-compliance with the total leverage ratio financial covenant, as defined, as of March 31, 2019. The Fourth Amendment also revised the definition of consolidated EBITDA and certain financial covenants, including the maximum total leverage ratio and the minimum debt service coverage ratio, as well as adding the requirement that the Company maintain minimum liquidity and minimum unadjusted consolidated EBITDA, each as defined. The Fourth Amendment permitted distributions as long as the Borrower is in compliance with specified conditions, including that the Borrower's liquidity, as defined, is not less than $5 million after giving effect to the distributions, total leverage ratio is not more than 2.00 to 1.00, post distribution debt service coverage ratio ("DSCR"), as defined, is not greater than 1.10 to 1.00, and Borrower is in compliance with financial covenants, before and after giving effect to the distributions.
On August 7, 2019, the Company entered into the Fifth Amendment to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement and Loan Documents (The "Fifth Amendment"). The Fifth Amendment amended the definition of unadjusted consolidated EBITDA to include consolidated net income plus the sum of interest expense, tax expense, depreciation and amortization expense, and non-cash impairment charges of goodwill. The Company did not pay dividends following the Fifth Amendment.
On April 3, 2020, the Company entered into the Sixth Amendment to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement and Loan Documents (The “Sixth Amendment”). The Sixth Amendment amended the definition of Consolidated EBITDA to include, as an addition to consolidated net income, solely for the purposes of (i) calculating Total Leverage Ratio under Section 7.1(a) of the Credit Agreement for the first and second quarters of the 2020 fiscal year, an amount equal to $0.6 million resulting from a non-cash inventory write-off taken during the third fiscal quarter in fiscal 2019, (ii) amended the definition of “fiscal year” to reflect that we changed our fiscal year to end on December 31, commencing with the 2020 fiscal year, (iii) eliminated the requirement for a monthly Covenant Compliance Report and (iv) provided for payment of the Capex Loan principal installment that was due December 31, 2019.
Due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company and the global automotive industry, the Company anticipated that it was likely that the EBITDA for the twelve months ended June 30, 2020 would not be sufficient to comply with financial covenants. In response to the anticipated impact of COVID-19, on April 23, 2020, the Borrowers entered into the Seventh Amendment (the “Seventh Amendment”) to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement. The Seventh Amendment, among other things, (i) permitted additional indebtedness in the form of unsecured loans authorized pursuant to and in compliance with the CARES Act under the Paycheck Protection Program of the U.S. Small Business Administration, in an aggregate amount not to exceed $6.0 million; (ii) deferred the June 30, 2020 principal payments on the US Term Loan, CA Term Loan, and Capital Expenditure Line, with the deferred principal amounts payable at the existing maturity dates; (iii) waived the requirement to test Maximum Total Leverage Ratio, Minimum Debt Service Coverage Ratio and Minimum Unadjusted Consolidated EBITDA for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2020; (iv) allowed the release of the lien on the Evansville, Indiana property and for the net cash proceeds from its sale to be applied against any outstanding balance on the Revolver, without permanently reducing the Revolving Credit Aggregate Commitment; (v) added a weekly requirement for the Borrowers to deliver a 13-week cash flow forecast until September 30, 2020; and (vi) added a 1.0% LIBOR Floor and 2.0% Base Rate Floor.
On August 7, 2020, the Company entered into the Eighth Amendment (the “Eighth Amendment”) to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement and Loan Documents. The Eighth Amendment, among other things, amended the definition of Consolidated EBITDA and made changes to the calculations of financial covenants. The definition of Consolidated EBITDA has been amended to include as an addition to Consolidated Net Income (i) costs and expenses incurred in connection with the Eighth Amendment not to exceed $175,000, (ii) restructuring expenses not to exceed $500,000 in any 12 month period, (iii) costs incurred with respect to the purchase and implementation of the ERP system not to exceed (A) $200,000 during each fiscal quarter in 2020 and (B) $100,000 during each fiscal quarter in 2021, and (iv) to the extent added in calculating Consolidated Net Income any portion of the PPP loan that has been forgiven and cancelled. The Eighth Amendment also amended the calculation of certain financial covenants based upon 12 month results to effectively exclude results of the quarter ended June 30, 2020. The calculation of Maximum Total Leverage Ratio has been amended, commencing with the quarter ending September 30, 2020 and through and including the quarter ending March 31, 2021, to annualize Consolidated EBITDA for the periods beginning July 1, 2020 through the date of calculation The calculation of Minimum Debt Service Coverage Ratio for the quarters ended September 30, 2020, December 31, 2020 and March 31, 2021 are based upon results for one, two and three quarters, respectively. The Eighth Amendment further adds a Minimum Liquidity requirement to be calculated monthly through
June 30, 2021 and Minimum Consolidated EBITDA for each measurement period, as defined, through June 30, 2021. The Eighth Amendment permits distributions by US Borrower to the Parent to be declared and made only after December 31, 2021 provided certain conditions are satisfied.
The Company’s financial results for the six months ended December 31, 2020 have resulted in violations of the following financial covenants: (1) Maximum Total Leverage Ratio; (2) Minimum Debt Service Coverage Ratio; and (3) Minimum Consolidated EBITDA; as defined in the Company’s Amended and Restated Credit Agreement. The Company has entered into a forbearance agreement, providing a period commencing on April 9, 2021 and through and including June 15, 2021, during which the Company will be able to borrow on its Revolver, subject to the terms and conditions to making a revolving credit advance, including availability, and the Lenders have agreed, subject to the terms of the forbearance agreement, to forbear from enforcing their rights or seeking to collect payment of the Company’s debt or disposing of the collateral securing the debt. However, entering into a forbearance agreement will not alleviate the substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The Company intends to use the forbearance period to continue negotiations with the Lenders to enter into an amendment and waiver to cure the defaults. During the forbearance period, the Company may not make any payment, transfer, or distribution out of the ordinary course of business or payments, including salary or compensation or distributions to or for the benefit of any member, owner, or director other than normal and customary employment salaries which do not exceed sums paid for similar positions in the Company’s marketplace.
The Credit Agreement, as amended, bears interest at the Company’s election of either (i) the greater of the Prime Rate or the Federal Funds Effective Rate (the “Base Rate”) or (ii) the LIBOR rate, plus an applicable margin ranging from 1.75% to 3.25% per annum in the case of the Base Rate and 2.75% to 4.25% per annum in the case of the LIBOR rate, in each case, based on senior leverage ratio thresholds, measured quarterly, as increased by the Waiver and Fourth Amendment to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement. As stated above, the Seventh Amendment added a 1.0% LIBOR Floor and 2.0% Base Rate Floor.
Reconciliation of Net Income to Consolidated EBITDA
The following is a reconciliation of net income, as reported, which is a U.S. GAAP measure of our operating results, to Consolidated EBITDA, as defined in our Credit Agreement, a non-GAAP measure:
_________________________________
(a) Represents any other non-recurring, non-cash gains during such period, including without limitation, (i) gains from the sale or exchange of assets other than in the ordinary course of business, and (ii) gains from early extinguishment of Indebtedness or Hedging Agreements
(b) Represents restructuring costs and expenses incurred from time to time at various locations, in an aggregate amount under the definition, during any twelve-month period, not to exceed $500,000
(c) Represents cost incurred with respect to the purchase and implementation of the Company’s enterprise resource planning system, in an aggregate amount under the definition, not to exceed (i) $200,000 during each of the Company’s fiscal quarters in 2020, (ii) $100,000 during each of the Company’s fiscal quarters in 2021, and (iii) $0 with respect to any calculation thereafter
(d) Represents costs and expenses incurred in connection with the Eighth Amendment to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, in an aggregate amount not to exceed $175,000
(e) Total Consolidated Indebtedness, as defined, excludes the $6.0 million PPP loan for covenant purposes until final determination by the SBA and Lender on whether the PPP loan will be forgiven
(f) Ratio of Total Consolidated Indebtedness, as defined, divided by Consolidated EBITDA, as defined. To calculate the Total Leverage Ratio at December 31, 2020, the Consolidated EBITDA for the six months ended December 30, 2020 is annualized by multiplying it by 2
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, sales or expenses, results of operations, liquidity or capital expenditures, or capital resources that are material to an investment in our securities.
Indemnification Agreements
In the normal course of business, we provide customers with indemnification provisions of varying scope against claims of intellectual property infringement by third parties arising from the use of our products. Historically, costs related to these indemnification provisions have not been significant and we are unable to estimate the maximum potential impact of these indemnification provisions on our future results of operations. In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with directors and certain officers and employees that will require us, among other things, to indemnify them against certain liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors, officers or employees. No demands have been made upon us to provide indemnification under such agreements and there are no claims that we are aware of that could have a material effect on our consolidated balance sheets, consolidated statements of operations, consolidated statements of stockholders’ equity or consolidated cash flows.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect amounts reported in those statements. We have made our best estimates of certain amounts contained in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable. These form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities. However, actual results could differ materially from these estimates that are based upon the exercise of judgment and use of assumptions as to future uncertainties. Management believes that the estimates, assumptions, and judgments involved in the accounting policies described below have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Acquisitions. In accordance with accounting guidance for the provisions in Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification 805, Business Combinations, we allocate the purchase price of an acquired business to its identifiable assets and liabilities based on estimated fair values. The excess of the purchase price over the amount allocated to the assets and liabilities, if any, is recorded as goodwill.
We use all available information to estimate fair values. We typically engage outside appraisal firms to assist in the fair value determination of identifiable intangible assets and any other significant assets or liabilities. We adjust the preliminary purchase price allocation, as necessary, up to one year after the acquisition closing date as we obtain more information regarding asset valuations and liabilities assumed.
Our purchase price allocation methodology contains uncertainties because it requires management to make assumptions and to apply judgment to estimate the fair value of acquired assets and liabilities. Management estimates the fair value of assets and liabilities based upon quoted market prices, the carrying value of the acquired assets and widely accepted valuation techniques, including discounted cash flows and market multiple analysis. Unanticipated events or circumstances may occur which could affect the accuracy of our fair value estimates, including assumptions regarding industry economic factors and business strategies.
Other estimates used in determining fair value include, but are not limited to, future cash flows or income related to intangibles, market rate assumptions and appropriate discount rates. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but inherently uncertain, and therefore, may not be realized. Accordingly, there can be no assurance that the estimates, assumptions, and values reflected in the valuations will be realized, and actual results could vary materially.
Revenue Recognition. Revenue is recognized by the Company once all performance obligations under the terms of a contract with the Company's customers are satisfied. Generally, this occurs with the transfer of control of its automotive, HVAC, and other products. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for transferring its products. The Company’s payment terms vary by the type and location of its customers and the products offered. The term between invoicing and when payment is due is not significant.
In general, for sales arrangements, the Company deems control to transfer at a single point in time and recognizes revenue when it ships products from its manufacturing facilities to its customers. Once a product has shipped, the customer is able to direct the use of, and obtain substantially all of the remaining benefits from, the asset. The Company considers control to transfer upon shipment because the Company has a present right to payment at that time, the customer has legal title to the asset, and the customer has significant risks and rewards of ownership of the asset. Provisions for discounts and rebates to customers, estimated returns and allowances, and other adjustments are provided for in the same period the related sales are recorded.
Stock Based Compensation. The Company accounts for its stock-based compensation using the fair value of the award estimated at the grant date of the award. The Company estimates the fair value of awards, consisting of stock options, using the Black Scholes option pricing model. Compensation expense is recognized in earnings using the straight-line method over the vesting period, which represents the requisite service period.
Accounts Receivable Allowance. Establishing valuation allowances for doubtful accounts requires the use of estimates and judgment regarding the risks associated with ultimate realization. We establish the allowance for doubtful accounts based upon an analysis of the aging of receivables at the end of each period with consideration given to specific customer credit issues. Changes to our assumptions could materially affect our recorded allowance. The Company has a large and diverse customer base with no customer greater than 10% of the total receivables at any point of time. A general economic downturn or other significant economic factor could result in higher than expected defaults resulting in the need to revise the allowance.
Inventories. Inventories are valued at lower of cost or net realizable value, using the first-in, first-out (FIFO) method. Inventory includes the cost of materials, labor, and overhead. Abnormal amounts of idle facility expense, freight in, handling costs and spoilage are recognized as current period charges. Overhead is allocated to inventory based upon normal capacity at the production facility.
Goodwill. We review our goodwill for impairment annually as part of our year-end procedures, or whenever adverse events or changes in circumstances indicate a possible impairment. If it is determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value is greater than the carrying value of a reporting unit then a qualitative assessment may be used for the annual impairment test. Otherwise, a one-step process is used which requires estimating the fair value of each reporting unit compared to the carrying value. If the carrying value exceeds the estimated fair value, goodwill impairment will be the amount by which a reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill.
The determination of the fair value of the reporting unit and corresponding goodwill require us to make significant judgments and estimates and are subject to a considerable degree of uncertainty. We believe that the assumptions and estimates in our review of goodwill for impairment are reasonable. However, different assumptions could materially affect our conclusions on this matter. Currently, the reporting unit is not at risk of impairment.
The Company performed the annual quantitative assessment as of December 31, 2020, utilizing a combination of the income and market approaches. The results of the quantitative analysis performed indicated the fair value of the reporting unit exceeded the carrying value by approximately 70.0%. Key assumptions used in the analysis were a discount rate of 13.0%, EBITDA margin of 8% in 2021 and at least 9.5% thereafter and a terminal growth rate of 2.5%. Future events and changing market conditions may, however, lead the Company to reevaluate the assumptions that have been used to test for goodwill impairment, including key assumptions used in the expected EBITDA margins, cash flows and discount rates, as well as other assumptions with respect to matters out of the Company’s control, such as discount rates and market multiples of comparable companies.
There are many uncertainties regarding the COVID-19 global pandemic that could negatively affect the Company's results of operations, financial position, and cash flows. As a result, if there is an adverse change to the Company’s projected financial information, due to business performance or market conditions, this may be indicative that the fair value of its reporting units and indefinite-lived intangible assets have declined below their carrying values, which may result in non-cash goodwill or intangible asset impairment charges in a future period.
Impairment and Amortization of Long-Lived and Intangible Assets. Our identifiable intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis, which approximates the pattern in which the economic benefit of the respective intangible is realized, over its estimated useful life. The remaining useful lives of intangible assets are reviewed annually to determine whether events and circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining period of amortization. Our long-lived assets and intangible assets subject to amortization are reviewed for impairment whenever adverse events or changes in circumstances indicate that the related carrying amount may be impaired. An impairment loss is recognized when the carrying value of a long-lived asset exceeds its fair value. Significant judgments and estimates are used by management when evaluating long-lived assets for impairment. If
management used different estimates and assumptions in its impairment tests, then the Company could recognize different amounts of expense over future periods.
Income Taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect temporary differences between the amount of assets and liabilities for financial and tax reporting purposes. Such amounts are adjusted, as appropriate, to reflect changes in tax rates expected to be in effect when the temporary differences reverse. A valuation allowance is recorded to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. Changes in tax laws or accounting standards and methods may affect recorded deferred taxes in future periods.
When establishing a valuation allowance, we consider future sources of taxable income such as “future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carry-forwards” and “tax planning strategies.” A tax planning strategy is defined as “an action that: is prudent and feasible; an enterprise ordinarily might not take but would take to prevent an operating loss or tax credit carry-forward from expiring unused; and would result in realization of deferred tax assets.” In the event we determine it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized in the future, the valuation adjustment to the deferred tax assets will be charged to earnings in the period in which we make such a determination. The valuation of deferred tax assets requires judgment and accounting for the deferred tax effect of events that have been recorded in the financial statements or in tax returns and our future projected profitability. Changes in our estimates, due to unforeseen events or otherwise, could have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations.
We calculate our current and deferred tax provision based on estimates and assumptions that could differ from the actual results reflected in income tax returns filed in subsequent years. Adjustments based on filed returns are recorded when identified. The amount of income taxes we pay is subject to audits by federal, state and foreign tax authorities. Our estimate of the potential outcome of any uncertain tax issue is subject to management’s assessment of relevant risks, facts, and circumstances existing at that time. We use a more-likely-than-not threshold for financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We record a liability for the difference between the benefit recognized and measured and tax position taken or expected to be taken on our tax return. To the extent that our assessment of such tax positions changes, the change in estimate is recorded in the period in which the determination is made. We report tax-related interest and penalties as a component of income tax expense. We do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the tax related balances or valuation allowance balances. However, due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may be materially different from the current estimate.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements in Part II Item 8. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.