ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
The Company is an innovative designer and custom manufacturer of components, subassemblies, products and packaging utilizing highly specialized foams, films, and plastics primarily for the medical market. The Company manufactures its products by converting raw materials using laminating, molding, radio frequency and impulse welding and fabricating manufacturing techniques. The Company is diversified by also providing highly engineered products and components to customers in the aerospace and defense, automotive, consumer, electronics, and industrial markets. The Company consists of a single operating and reportable segment.
The Company’s current strategy includes further organic growth and growth through strategic acquisitions.
As further summarized below, the COVID-19 pandemic has had, and we believe it will continue to have, negative effects on our business and financial results. In particular, sales for the Company for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 9.6% to $179.4 million from $198.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the impact on demand for product as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Gross margin decreased to 25.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020, from 27.2% in 2019. Operating income and net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 both decreased by 31.7%, respectively.
IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON OUR BUSINESS
Through much of 2020, COVID-19 spread across the country to areas in which our products are designed, manufactured, distributed or sold. The spread of COVID-19 and the response to it negatively impacted operating conditions for our business in 2020. Although we expect COVID-19 will continue to have negative impacts on our operating results in future periods, the magnitude and duration of the continuing impact is uncertain.
To stall the spread of COVID-19, authorities in states in which we do business implemented numerous measures, including social distancing guidelines, travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, curfews, stay-at-home orders, and business shutdowns. These measures have impacted and will likely further impact us, our customers, consumers, employees, suppliers and other third parties with whom we do business. It is uncertain how these and any future measures in response to the pandemic will impact our business, including whether and to what extent they will result in further changes in demand for our products or further increases in operating costs. The timing of distribution and the effectiveness of recently introduced vaccines is also uncertain. Our top priorities continue to be ensuring the health and safety of our workforce and serving our various constituencies with as little disruption as possible.
Our operations expose us to risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted the cost of manufacturing our goods, including higher labor costs, maintenance costs and manufacturing inefficiencies due to employee absenteeism and significantly enhanced cleaning and sterilization. Elective medical procedures and exams have been delayed or canceled, there has been a significant reduction in physician office visits, and hospitals have postponed or canceled capital purchases. We believe that these responses negatively impacted demand for the Company’s components for medical devices. Additionally, many of our customers in the automotive markets experienced closures of their businesses in connection with the pandemic. Such closures negatively impacted the demand for our automobile component products particularly in the second quarter. Any continued reduced demand for our products, including reduced need for components for medical devices as well as continued economic uncertainty, could adversely and materially affect our business, financial condition and results of operations, as well as those of our customers.
To ensure the health and safety of our employees and to comply with governmental orders, since March 2020 we have required or enabled certain employees to work from home or remotely where practicable, and expanded IT and communication support to enhance their productivity; adjusted work spaces and shifted schedules to facilitate social distancing and sterilization for those who continue to work in our facilities; enhanced cleaning and disinfecting procedures at our facilities; required face coverings and worked to procure and distributed personal protective equipment; implemented health checks and visitor protocols and restricted travel.
In response to the economic uncertainties resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, we initiated and at present are continuing certain cost-cutting measures, including restrictions on travel and labor cost reduction measures (including employee terminations).
Although the impact of the pandemic on our business and financial results will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, and which may vary by market, we have a strong liquidity position, solid balance sheet, and access to capital which we expect will enable us to effectively manage through the COVID-19 pandemic.
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”)
The CARES Act was enacted on March 27, 2020 in the United States. The CARES Act and related notices include several significant provisions, including delaying certain payroll tax payments and estimated income tax payments that we expect to defer to future periods. Accordingly, the Company has deferred social security payments of approximately $1.6 million as of December 31, 2020. We do not currently expect the CARES Act to have a material impact on our financial results, including on our annual estimated effective tax rate, or on our liquidity. We will continue to monitor and assess the impact the CARES Act may have on our business and financial results.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth, for the years indicated, the percentage of revenues represented by the items as shown in the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Income:
2020 Compared to 2019
Sales
Net sales decreased 9.6% to $179.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from net sales of $198.4 million in 2019. The decrease in sales was primarily due to the impact on demand for product as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe that the cancellation or delay of elective medical procedures in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic has had a negative impact on the demand for the Company’s components for medical devices. We refer you to “Recent Developments-COVID-19” above for additional discussion of product demand.
Gross Profit
Gross profit as a percentage of sales (“Gross Margin”) decreased to 24.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020, from 27.2% in 2019. As a percentage of sales, material and direct labor costs collectively decreased approximately 2.2%, while overhead increased approximately 4.4%. The decrease in collective material and labor costs as a percentage of sales was primarily due to gains in manufacturing efficiencies resulting from continuous improvement initiatives and an improvement in the overall book of business. The increase in overhead as a percentage of sales was primarily due to fixed overhead costs measured against decreased sales.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses (“SG&A”) decreased approximately 6.0% to $27.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $29.3 million in 2019. As a percentage of sales, SG&A increased to 15.3%, from 14.7% in 2019. The decrease in SG&A was primarily due to decreases in compensation programs and company-wide travel and entertainment. The increase in SG&A as a percentage of sales was primarily due to relatively fixed SG&A expenses measured against lower sales.
Interest Income and Expense
Net interest expense was approximately $83 thousand and $674 thousand for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in net interest expense was primarily due to lower debt levels.
Other Expense
Other expense was approximately $366 thousand and $388 thousand for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Other expense was primarily generated by changes in the fair value of the swap liability, which is driven by anticipated future interest rate changes as well as a declining notional amount.
Income Taxes
The Company recorded income tax expense, as a percentage of income before income tax expense, of 17.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 16.5% for the same period in 2019. The increase in the effective tax rate for the current period as compared to the prior period was largely due to a lower anticipated effective tax rate in 2019 due to credits available for increased research activities. The Company notes the potential for volatility in its effective tax rate, as any windfall or shortfall tax benefits related to its share-based compensation plans will be recorded directly into income tax expense.
2019 Compared to 2018
Sales
Net sales increased 4.2% to $198.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 from net sales of $190.5 million in 2018. The increase in sales was primarily due to increased sales to customers in the medical, and aerospace and defense markets of 16.9%, and 5.0%, respectively. These increases were partially offset by a collective decline in sales to the consumer, electronics, and industrial markets of 24.1%. The increase in sales to customers in the medical market was primarily due to strong sales at Dielectrics (including one additional month of sales of $3.1 million) as well as increased demand from legacy UFP medical customers. The increased demand for sales to customers in the aerospace & defense market is due to increased government spending. The collective decline in sales to customers in the consumer, electronics and industrial markets was primarily due to decreased demand for molded fiber packaging.
Gross Profit
Gross profit as a percentage of sales (“Gross Margin”) increased to 27.2% for the year ended December 31, 2019, from 25.4% in 2018. As a percentage of sales, material and direct labor costs collectively decreased approximately 0.5%, while overhead decreased approximately 1.3%. The decrease in collective material and labor costs as a percentage of sales is primarily due to gains in manufacturing efficiencies resulting from continuous improvement initiatives and an improvement in the overall book of business. The decline in overhead as a percentage of sales was primarily due to leveraging fixed overhead costs against increased sales as well as targeted cost cuts.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses (“SG&A”) increased approximately 5.8% to $29.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, from $27.7 million in 2018. As a percentage of sales, SG&A increased to 14.7% in 2019, from 14.5% in 2018. The increase in SG&A is primarily due to one extra month of operations at Dielectrics as well as compensation increases and new strategic management hires at the Company’s plants.
Interest Income and Expense
The Company had net interest expense of approximately $0.7 million and $1.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The decrease in net interest expense was primarily due to lower debt levels.
Income Taxes
The Company recorded income tax expense, as a percentage of income before income tax expense, of 16.5% for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 22.2% for the same period in 2018. The decline in the Company’s effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2019, was largely due to a significant increase in the amount of business tax credits earned in its federal and state 2018 tax returns due, in part, to qualifying research expenses at Dielectrics.
The Company notes the potential for volatility in its effective tax rate, as any windfall or shortfall tax benefits related to its share-based compensation plans will be recorded directly into income tax expense.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company generally funds its operating expenses, capital requirements, and growth plan through internally generated cash and bank credit facilities.
Cash Flows
Net cash provided by operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $25.0 million and was primarily a result of net income generated of approximately $13.4 million, depreciation and amortization of approximately $8.3 million, loss on sale of fixed assets of approximately $0.5 million, share-based compensation of approximately $1.8 million, an increase in deferred taxes of approximately $0.1 million, a decrease in accounts receivable of approximately $2.2 million primarily due to lower sales in the last two months of 2020 as compared to 2019, a decrease in refundable income taxes of approximately $0.3 million, and an increase in other long-term liabilities of approximately $1.1 million due primarily to the deferral of employer social security tax payments in connection with the CARES Act. These cash inflows and adjustments to income were partially offset by an increase in inventory of approximately $0.4 million, an increase in prepaid expenses of approximately $0.3 million, and increase in other assets of approximately $0.1 million, a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses of approximately $1.2 million due to the timing of vendor payments in the ordinary course of business and reductions in accrued compensation, and a decrease in deferred revenue of approximately $0.7 million.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $4.3 million and was primarily the result of additions of manufacturing machinery and equipment and various building improvements across the Company.
Net cash used for financing activities was approximately $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting from payments of statutory withholding for stock options exercised and restricted stock units vested of approximately $0.8 million, partially offset by net proceeds received upon stock options exercises of approximately $0.5 million.
Outstanding and Available Debt
As of December 31, 2020, under the Company’s Restated Credit Agreement (as described below), the Company had (i) outstanding $0.7 million in standby letters of credit, drawable as a financial guarantee on worker’s compensation insurance policies and (ii) no other amounts outstanding.
On February 1, 2018, the Company, as the borrower, entered into an unsecured $70 million Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Amended and Restated Credit Agreement”) with certain of the Company’s subsidiaries (the “Subsidiary Guarantors”) and Bank of America, N.A., in its capacity as the initial lender, Administrative Agent, Swingline Lender and L/C Issuer, and certain other lenders from time to time party thereto. The Amended and Restated Credit Agreement amended and restated the Company’s prior credit agreement.
On December 31, 2020, the Company, as the borrower, and Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent and sole lender, entered into a First Amendment (the “First Amendment”) to the Company’s Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated February 1, 2018 (as amended, the “Restated Credit Agreement”).
The First Amendment amended the Restated Credit Agreement by (i) extending the scheduled maturity date from February 1, 2023 to December 31, 2025, and (ii) creating procedures and guidelines for establishing a successor benchmark rate if LIBOR ceases to be available during the term of the revolving credit facility. The Restated Credit Agreement called for interest of LIBOR plus a margin that ranges from 1.0% to 1.5% or, at the discretion of the Company, the bank’s prime rate less a margin that ranges from 0.25% to zero. The First Amendment calls for interest of LIBOR plus a margin that ranges from 1.25% to 1.75% or, at the discretion of the Company, the bank’s prime rate plus a margin that ranges from zero to 0.25%. In both cases the applicable margin remains dependent upon Company performance. The First Amendment also added certain representations and covenants concerning compliance by the Company with legal requirements.
The credit facilities under the Restated Credit Agreement consist of a $20 million unsecured term loan to the Company and an unsecured revolving credit facility, under which the Company may borrow up to $50 million. The proceeds of the Restated Credit Agreement may be used for general corporate purposes, as well as permitted acquisitions. The Company’s obligations under the Restated Credit Agreement are guaranteed by the Subsidiary Guarantors.
Under the Restated Credit Agreement, the Company is subject to a minimum fixed-charge coverage financial covenant as well as a maximum total funded debt to EBITDA financial covenant. The Restated Credit Agreement contains other covenants customary for transactions of this type, including restrictions on certain payments, permitted indebtedness and permitted investments. As of December 31, 2020, the applicable interest rate was approximately 1.15% and the Company was in compliance with all covenants under the Restated Credit Agreement.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company used interest-rate-related derivative instruments to manage its exposure related to changes in interest rates on certain of its variable-rate debt instruments. The Company does not enter into derivative instruments for any purpose other than cash flow hedging. Derivative financial instruments expose the Company to credit risk and market risk. Credit risk is the failure of the counterparty to perform under the terms of the derivative contract. When the fair value of a derivative contract is positive, the counterparty owes the Company, creating credit risk for the Company. When the fair value of a derivative contract is negative, the Company owes the counterparty and, therefore, in these circumstances the Company is not exposed to the counterparty’s credit risk. The Company minimizes counterparty credit risk in derivative instruments by entering into transactions with carefully selected major financial institutions based upon their credit profile. Market risk is the adverse effect on the value of a derivative instrument that results from a change in interest rates.
The Company assesses interest rate risk by continually identifying and monitoring changes in interest rate exposures that may adversely impact expected future cash flows and by evaluating hedging opportunities. The Company’s debt obligations exposed the Company to variability in interest payments due to changes in interest rates. The Company believed that it was prudent to limit the variability of a portion of its interest payments. To meet this objective, in connection with the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, the Company entered into a $20 million, 5-year interest rate swap agreement under which the Company receives three-month LIBOR plus the applicable margin and pays a 2.7% fixed rate plus the applicable margin. The swap modified the Company’s interest rate exposure by converting the term loan from a variable rate to a fixed rate in order to hedge against the possibility of rising interest rates during the term of the loan. The notional amount was $11,428,568 at December 31, 2020. The fair value of the swap as of December 31, 2020 was approximately $(465) thousand and is included in other liabilities. Changes in the fair value and net cash settlement amounts related to the swap are recorded in other expense and resulted in expense of approximately $366 thousand and $388 thousand during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
As the Company has paid the remaining balance of the term loan in its entirety, there is no longer underlying debt to hedge against with the swap. The changes in the fair value of the swap will continue to be accounted for as a financial instrument until the sooner of the time that the Company elects to cancel it or until its maturity.
Future Liquidity
The Company requires cash to pay its operating expenses, purchase capital equipment, and to service its contractual obligations. The Company’s principal sources of funds are its operations and its amended and restated credit facility. The Company generated cash of approximately $25.0 million in operations during the year ended December 31, 2020; however, the Company cannot guarantee that its operations will generate cash in future periods. The Company’s longer-term liquidity is contingent upon future operating performance and draws on the revolving credit facility are possible. Further, the continued economic uncertainty resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic could affect the Company’s long-term ability to access the public markets and obtain necessary capital in order to properly capitalize and continue operations.
Throughout fiscal 2021, the Company plans to continue to add capacity to enhance operating efficiencies in its manufacturing plants. The Company may consider additional acquisitions of companies, technologies, or products that are complementary to its business. The Company believes that its existing resources, including its revolving credit facility, together with cash expected to be generated from operations, will be sufficient to fund its cash flow requirements, including capital asset acquisitions, through the next twelve months.
The Company may also require additional capital in the future to fund capital expenditures, acquisitions or other investments. These capital requirements could be substantial. The Company anticipates that any future expansion of its business will be financed through existing resources, cash flow from operations, the Company's revolving credit facility, or other new financing. The Company cannot guarantee that it will be able to meet existing financial covenants or obtain other new financing on favorable terms, if at all. The Company's liquidity will be impacted to the extent additional stock repurchases are made under the Company's stock repurchase program.
Stock Repurchase Program
The Company accounts for treasury stock under the cost method, using the first-in, first-out flow assumption, and includes treasury stock as a component of stockholders’ equity. On June 16, 2015, the Company announced that its Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $10.0 million of the Company’s outstanding common stock. Under the program, the Company is authorized to repurchase shares through Rule 10b5-1 plans, open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, block purchases or otherwise in accordance with applicable federal securities laws, including Rule 10b-18 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. The stock repurchase program will end upon the earlier of the date on which the plan is terminated by the Board or when all authorized repurchases are completed. The timing and amount of stock repurchases, if any, will be determined based upon our evaluation of market conditions and other factors. The stock repurchase program may be suspended, modified or discontinued at any time, and the Company has no obligation to repurchase any amount of its common stock under the program. There were no share repurchases during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018. At December 31, 2020, approximately $9.4 million was available for future repurchases of the Company’s common stock under this authorization.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires the Company to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. The Company evaluates its estimates, including those listed below, on an ongoing basis. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, including current and anticipated worldwide economic conditions, both in general and specifically in relation to the packaging and component product industries, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The Company’s significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Report. The Company believes the following critical accounting policies necessitated that significant judgments and estimates be used in the preparation of its consolidated financial statements.
The Company has reviewed these policies with its Audit Committee.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue when a customer obtains control of a promised good or service. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration that the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for promised goods or services. The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with the core principles of ASC 606 which include (1) identifying the contract with a customer, (2) identifying separate performance obligations within the contract, (3) determining the transaction price, (4) allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations, and (5) recognizing revenue. The Company recognizes all but an immaterial portion of its product sales upon shipment. The Company recognizes revenue from the sale of tooling and machinery primarily upon customer acceptance, with the exception of certain tooling where control does not transfer to the customer, resulting in revenue being recognized over the estimated time for which parts are produced with the use of each respective tool. The Company recognizes revenue from engineering services, which are primarily product development services, as the services are performed or as otherwise determined based on the substance of the agreement. The Company recognizes revenue from bill and hold transactions at the time the specified goods are complete and available to the customer. In the ordinary course of business, the Company accepts sales returns from customers for defective goods, such amounts being immaterial. Although only applicable to an insignificant number of transactions, the Company has elected to exclude sales taxes from the transaction price. The Company has elected to account for shipping and handling activities for which the Company is responsible under the terms and conditions of the sale not as performance obligations but rather as fulfillment costs. These activities are required to fulfill the Company’s promise to transfer the good and are expensed when revenue is recognized.
Goodwill
Goodwill is tested for impairment annually and will be tested for impairment between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would indicate that the carrying amount may be impaired. Impairment testing for goodwill is done at a reporting unit level. Reporting units are one level below the business segment level but can be combined when reporting units within the same segment have similar economic characteristics. An impairment loss generally would be recognized when the carrying amount of the reporting unit’s net assets exceeds the estimated fair value of the reporting unit. The Company consists of a single reporting unit. The Company last performed “step 1” of the goodwill impairment test as of December 31, 2018. In testing goodwill for impairment at December 31, 2018, the Company primarily utilized the guideline public company (“GPC”) method under the market approach and the discounted cash flows method (“DCF”) under the income approach to determine the fair value of the reporting unit for purposes of testing the reporting unit’s carrying value of goodwill for impairment. The GPC method derives a value by generating a multiple of EBITDA through the comparison of the Company to similar publicly traded companies. The DCF approach derives a value based on the present value of a series of estimated future cash flows at the valuation date by the application of a discount rate, one that a prudent investor would require before making an investment in our equity securities. The key assumptions used in our approach included:
●
The reporting unit’s estimated financials and five-year projections of financial results, which were based on our strategic plans and long-range forecasts. Sales growth rates represent estimates based on current and forecasted sales mix and market conditions. The profit margins were projected based on historical margins, projected sales mix, current expense structure and anticipated expense modifications.
●
The projected terminal value which reflects the total present value of projected cash flows beyond the last period in the DCF. This value reflects a growth rate for the reporting unit, which is approximately the same growth rate of expected inflation into perpetuity.
●
The discount rate determined using a Weighted Average Cost of Capital method (“WACC”), which considered market and industry data as well as Company-specific risk factors.
●
Selection of guideline public companies which are similar in size and market capitalization to each other and to the Company.
As of December 31, 2018, based on our calculations under the above noted approach, the fair value of the reporting unit significantly exceeded the carrying value of the reporting unit. In performing these calculations, management used its most reasonable estimates of the key assumptions discussed above. If our actual operating results and/or the key assumptions utilized in management’s calculations differ from our expectations, it is possible that a future impairment charge may be necessary.
The Company’s annual impairment testing date is December 31. The Company performed a qualitative assessment (“step 0”) as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 and determined that it was more likely than not that the fair value of its reporting unit exceeded its’ carrying amount. As a result, the Company is not required to proceed to a “step 1” impairment assessment. Factors considered included the 2018 step 1 analysis and the calculated excess fair value over carrying amount, financial performance, forecasts and trends, market cap, regulatory and environmental issues, macro-economic conditions, industry and market considerations, raw material costs and management stability.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.