Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our results of operations and financial condition should be read together with the financial statements and related notes and the other financial information included elsewhere in this Report. Such discussion and analysis reflects our historical results of operations and financial position. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and elsewhere in this Report. All share and per share amounts presented herein have been restated to reflect the implementation of the 1-for-6 reverse stock split as if it had occurred at the beginning of the earliest period presented.
Overview AND HISTORY - See “Item 1. Business” for a further description of our History and Background
We are a leading engineering and design services company focused on the sustainable commercial indoor horticulture market. We engineer and design indoor CEA facilities and then integrate complex environmental equipment systems into those facilities.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
COVID-19 Pandemic
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, COVID-19, was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China. In January 2020, this coronavirus spread to other countries, including the United States, and efforts to contain the spread of this coronavirus intensified. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of the coronavirus a pandemic. We are a business that supplies other essential businesses with support and supplies necessary to operate and we therefore believe we are an essential business allowed to continue operating under the Stay-At-Home Orders that may be issued by many states and cities. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 and the actions to contain COVID-19 or treat its impact. The outbreak and any preventative or protective actions that governments or we may take in respect of COVID-19 may result in a period of business disruption, reduced client business and reduced operations.
Due to the uncertainty and adverse impact on our operations and financial condition resulting from the outbreak of COVID-19, we took the following actions:
● In March 2020, we began executing a substantial reduction in discretionary marketing and general & administrative expenses.
● On March 30, 2020, we reduced our headcount by 13 people (27%), from 48 to 35, by terminating ten employees and furloughing three other employees, including one member of our leadership team.
● Effective April 6, 2020, we reduced compensation for almost every remaining employee, including a 20% reduction for the senior members of our leadership team.
● Effective July 27, 2020, the reduced compensation for everyone other than the leadership team was reinstated. Effective September 7, 2020, the reduced compensation for the leadership team was reinstated.
The ultimate magnitude of COVID-19, including the extent of its impact on our financial and operational results, which could be material, will depend on the length of time that the pandemic continues, its effect on the demand for our products and our supply chain, the effect of governmental regulations imposed in response to the pandemic, as well as uncertainty regarding all of the foregoing. We cannot at this time predict the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, but it could have a larger material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows beyond what is discussed within this Report.
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”)
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was enacted. The CARES Act is an approximate $2 trillion emergency economic stimulus package passed in response to the coronavirus outbreak. The CARES Act, among other things, includes broad sweeping provisions such as direct financial assistance to Americans in the form of one-time payments to individuals; aid to businesses in the form of loans and grants; and efforts to stabilize the U.S. economy and keep Americans employed in general. On April 16, 2020, we received a loan in the amount of $1,020,600 under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) of the CARES Act. The PPP provides for loans to qualifying businesses for amounts up to 2.5 times the average monthly payroll expenses of the qualifying business. On June 5, 2020, the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act of 2020 (the “PPPFA”) was enacted. The PPPFA extended the covered period of the loans under the PPP from eight weeks to 24 weeks from the origination date of the loan, or December 31, 2020, whichever is earlier. Therefore, the PPP now provides a mechanism for forgiveness of up to the full amount borrowed after 24 weeks as long as the borrower uses the loan proceeds during the 24-week period after the loan origination for eligible purposes, including payroll costs, certain benefits costs, rent and utilities costs or other permitted purposes, and maintains its payroll levels, subject to certain other requirements and limitations. The amount of loan forgiveness is subject to reduction, among other reasons, if the borrower terminates employees or reduces salaries during the 24-week period. The interest rate on the loan is 1.0% per annum. The PPPFA also extended the deferment period for principal and interest payments on PPP loans from six months to ten months. Therefore, the payments of principal and interest under our PPP loan are deferred for ten months from the final day of the loan forgiveness period (the “Deferral Period”). Although the Company believes the PPP loan proceeds were used in accordance with the CARES Act guidance, the Company has not yet determined if any of the PPP loan is subject to forgiveness and has therefore continued to show the entire PPP loan as an obligation on its financial statements. Any unforgiven portion of the PPP loan is payable over the two-year term, with payments deferred during the Deferral Period. The Company may elect to prepay the unforgiven loan at any time without payment of any premium.
Bridge Financing
During the fourth quarter of 2020 the Company entered into bridge financing notes (the “Bridge Financing Notes”) totalling $1,854,500. The Bridge Financing Notes are a combination of $1,004,500 in the New James Lowe Note (See Note 3 - Related Party Transactions), $350,000 received in November 2020, and an additional $500,000 received in December 2020. The Bridge Financing Notes carry interest at the rate of 12% and mature on December 31, 2021. The Bridge Financing Notes provided for a mandatory conversion into common stock upon the closing of a sale of the securities of the Company, whether in a private placement or pursuant to an effective registration statement under the Securities Act, resulting in at least $2,500,000 of gross proceeds to the Company (a “Qualified Offering”). In the event of a Qualified Offering, the outstanding principal and interest of the Bridge Financing Notes will be converted into the identical security issued at such Qualified Offering at 75% of the per security price paid by investors in connection with the Qualified Offering. The offering described above under Item 5 “Market for the Registrant’s Common Equity and Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities-Completion of Registered Public Offering” was a Qualified Offering and the Bridge Financing Notes plus accrued interest of $53,725 were converted into 254,430 shares of common stock in connection with the offering on February 17, 2021.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
We generate revenues from (i) engineering design and managed services, (ii) the sale, integration, and commissioning of customized environmental and cultivation equipment systems, and (iii) selling consumable products once facilities are operational.
Comparison of Results of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated revenues of $25.8 million compared to revenues of $24.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $1.6 million, or 7%. Equipment systems sales revenue increased $3.7 million primarily due to an increase in cultivation equipment sales, services revenue decreased $1.3 million primarily due to a decrease in the average size of the facilities being designed and consumable product sales decreased $0.8 million due to fewer products sold. We signed 77 new engineering design project contracts in the year ended December 31, 2020, including six new projects in Europe, and secured our first horticulture commissioning project, an East Coast based lettuce facility. During the year ended December 31, 2020 one client represented 25% and another client represented 13% of our total revenue. During the year ended December 31, 2019 one client represented 21% of our total revenue. Substantially all of the revenue derived from each of these separate clients were equipment systems sales.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cost of revenues was $20.1 million compared to $17.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $2.5 million, or 14%. This increase is attributable to an increase in revenue from our lower margin product equipment systems sales and a reduction in our higher margin services revenue.
Gross profit was $5.7 million (22% of revenue) during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $6.6 million (27% of revenue) during the year ended December 31, 2019. Gross profit as a percentage of revenue decreased due to a revenue mix shift in the current period favoring equipment systems versus services revenue as noted above.
Operating expenses decreased by $4.0 million, or 32%, to $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $12.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in operating expenses was comprised of a $2.9 million reduction in general operating expenses, mainly due to reduced salary and travel expenses, a $0.7 million reduction of marketing related expenses, and a $0.5 million decrease in amortization of broker issuing costs and broker warrants associated with our offering of convertible debentures in 2019.
Non-operating expenses were $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $0.2 million (8%). Interest expense, excluding amortization related to the convertible debentures of $1.3 million in 2019, increased by $0.8 million to $1.5 million compared to $0.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, due to an increase in debt. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company recognized an impairment loss of $0.3 million and $0.5 million, respectively, related to the investment in Total Grow Control Holdings Inc. (“TGH”). The Company incurred a $0.2 million expense for contingent consideration from the acquisition of Impact Engineering, Inc. during the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company also recorded a foreign exchange loss of $0.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the revaluation of our Canadian denominated debt.
As a result of the above, we incurred a net loss of $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, or a net loss per share of $1.06, compared to a net loss of $8.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, or a net loss per share of $1.90.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
The Company uses the supplemental financial measure of Adjusted Earnings before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization (“Adjusted EBITDA”) as a measure of our operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA is not calculated in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) and it is not a substitute for other measures prescribed by GAAP such as net income (loss), income (loss) from operations, and cash flows from operating activities. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) attributable to urban-gro, Inc., determined in accordance with GAAP, excluding the effects of certain operating and non-operating expenses including, but not limited to, interest expense, depreciation of tangible assets, amortization of intangible assets, impairment of investments, and stock-based compensation that we do not believe reflect our core operating performance.
Our board of directors and management team focus on Adjusted EBITDA as a key performance and compensation measure. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA assists us in comparing our operating performance over various reporting periods because it removes from our operating results the impact of items that our management believes do not reflect our core operating performance.
The following table reconciles net loss attributable to the Company to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $184,469, which represented a decrease of $264,234 from December 31, 2019.
Since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses and have funded our operations primarily through issuances of equity securities, debt, and operating revenue. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $21,964,321, a working capital deficit of $9,300,836, and negative stockholders’ equity of $7,406,164. Prior to the $62.1 million common stock offering on February 17, 2021, our ability to generate sufficient revenues to pay our debt obligations and accounts payable when due was subject to risks and uncertainties. Historical consolidated financial statements included in this Report were prepared on a going concern basis and do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or amounts of liabilities that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. Our ability to continue as a going concern was dependent upon, among other things, our ability to generate revenue, control costs and raise capital. With the completion of the $62.1 million common stock offering on February 17, 2021 management believes these doubts have been alleviated.
As described in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Report, on February 21, 2020, we entered into the letter agreement by and among us, as borrower, urban-gro Canada Technologies Inc. and Impact Engineering, Inc., as guarantors, the lenders party thereto, and Bridging Finance Inc., as administrative agent for the lenders, providing for a senior secured demand term loan facility in the amount of C$2.7 million ($2.0 million) and a demand revolving credit facility of up to C$5.4 million ($4.0 million). All amounts outstanding under the Credit Agreement were repaid in February of 2021 with a portion of the net proceeds from the $62.1 million common stock offering and the Credit Agreement was terminated.
Effective January 9, 2019, we executed a letter agreement with an exclusive placement agent in connection with a private placement offering. Beginning in March 2019, the placement agent initiated an offering of up to $6.0 million from the sale of Units, with each Unit consisting of a $1,000 Convertible Debenture (the “Debentures”) and Common Stock Purchase Warrants to purchase 34.58 shares of our Common Stock at $18.00 per share for a period of two years from the purchase date. The Debentures were due May 31, 2021 and bore interest at 8%, compounded annually, with interest due at maturity. On October 16, 2019, the $2.6 million in Debentures plus $92,037 in accrued interest were converted into 183,752 shares of common stock at $14.46 per share pursuant to their terms as a result of our registration of the securities on a registration statement that was declared effective on such date. The Warrants contain a mandatory exercise provision if the weighted average share price of our Common Stock exceeds $30.00 per share for a period of five consecutive days.
Net cash used in operating activities was $3.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.5 million used for the year ended December 31, 2019. Operating cash has been positively impacted from an increase in client deposits as demand for our services and equipment solutions increased in the year ended December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2020, we had $4.9 million in client deposits related to client orders, which compared favorably to client deposits of $2.9 million as of December 31, 2019. We require prepayments from clients before any design work is commenced and before any material is ordered from the vendor. These prepayments are booked to the client deposits liability account when received. Our standard policy is to collect the following before action is taken on a client order: 50% deposit; and the remaining 50% payment made prior to shipping. We expect client deposits to be relieved from the deposits account no longer than 12 months for each project. We do not have trade payable terms with most of our vendors and as a result, we are required to prepay a portion or all of the total order. At December 31, 2020, we had $0.7 million in accounts payable, compared to $3.8 million at December 31, 2019.
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. Historically, cash has been used to increase our investments in strategic partnerships and to acquire property and equipment. We will continue to have ongoing needs to purchase property and equipment to maintain our operations. We had no material commitments for capital expenditures as of December 31, 2020.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. Cash provided from financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily related to $5.3 million in proceeds received from the issuance of debt, $1.0 million related to a long-term loan, and $0.9 million of convertible notes related to the Bridge Financing, offset by $3.0 million used in the repayment of notes payable and $0.7 million in financing fees related to the issuance of debt.
Gross debt, excluding operating leases, was $8.4 million and $3.8 million as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. This represents an increase in gross debt of $4.6 million primarily due to $5.3 million in proceeds received from the issuance of debt offset by principal paydowns.
Inflation
Although our operations are influenced by general economic conditions, we do not believe that inflation had a material effect on our results of operations during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in this Report for a discussion of our significant accounting policies.
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
From time to time, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) or other standards setting bodies issue new accounting pronouncements. Updates to the FASB’s Accounting Standard Codifications (“ASCs”) are communicated through issuance of an Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”). Unless otherwise discussed, we believe that the impact of recently issued guidance, whether adopted or to be adopted in the future, is not expected to have a material impact on our financial statements upon adoption.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, “Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments” (ASU 2016-13), creating ASC Topic 326 - Financial Instruments - Credit Losses. ASU 2016-13 is intended to improve financial reporting by requiring timelier recording of credit losses on financial assets measured at amortized cost basis (including, but not limited to loans), net investments in leases recognized as lessor and off-balance sheet credit exposures. ASU 2016-13 eliminates the probable initial recognition threshold under the current incurred loss methodology for recognizing credit losses. Instead, ASU 2016-13 requires the measurement of all expected credit losses for financial assets held at the reporting date based on historical experience, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. The Company will continue to evaluate the extent of the impact of ASU 2016-13 on the Company’s financial position, results of operations and cash flows. With the release of ASU 2019-10, the Company will monitor this impact through the effective date for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022.
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board FASB issued ASU 2020-06-Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)-Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity. ASU 2020-06 simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. Consequently, more convertible debt instruments will be reported as a single liability instrument with no separate accounting for embedded conversion features. ASU 2020-06 removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, which will permit more equity contracts to qualify for it. ASU 2020-06 also simplifies the diluted net income per share calculation in certain areas. The new guidance is effective for annual and interim periods beginning after December 15, 2021, and early adoption is permitted for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, and interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company is currently evaluating the impact that this new guidance will have on its consolidated financial statements.
There are other various updates recently issued by the FASB, most of which represented technical corrections to the accounting literature or application to specific industries and are not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management has reviewed all other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements and do not believe the future adoption of any such pronouncements may be expected to cause a material impact on our financial condition or the results of our operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources and would be considered material to investors.