ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS EXECUTIVE LEVEL OVERVIEW
Forward-Looking Information
This Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, regarding, among other things, the Company’s plans, earnings, cash flow and expense estimates, strategies and prospects, both business and financial. All statements other than statements of current or historical fact contained in this report are forward-looking statements. The words “believe,’’ “expect,’’ “anticipate,’’ “should,’’ “plan,’’ “will,’’ “may,’’ “intend,’’ “estimate,’’ “potential,’’ “continue’’ and similar expressions, as they relate to the Company, are intended to identify forward-looking statements.
The Company has based these forward-looking statements largely on its current expectations and projections about future events, financial trends, market opportunities, competition, and the adequacy of the Company’s available cash resources, which the Company believes may affect its financial condition, results of operations, business strategy and financial needs. This Form 10-K also contains forward-looking statements attributed to third parties. All such statements can be affected by inaccurate assumptions, including, without limitation, with respect to risks, uncertainties, new business prospects and the rate of expense increases. In light of these risks, uncertainties and assumptions, the forward-looking statements in this report may not occur and actual results could differ materially from those anticipated or implied in the forward-looking statements. For these reasons, and because of the uncertainty relating to the current financial conditions in today’s economic environment and the potential change in demand for the Company’s products, you should not consider this information to be a guarantee by the Company or any other person that its objectives and plans will be achieved. When you consider these forward-looking statements, you should keep in mind the “Risk Factors” and other cautionary statements set forth in this Item 7 and elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The Company’s forward-looking statements speak only as of the date made. The Company undertakes no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes, and keeping in mind this cautionary statement regarding forward-looking information.
Introduction
This Comprehensive Form 10-K includes, in one comprehensive filing, the business and financial information for the Company for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020. Therefore, this Management’s Discussion and Analysis provides an analysis of the annual financial condition and results of operations for each of the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2020. This review should be read in conjunction with the Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, which are included in Item 8 of this Comprehensive Form 10-K.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of the Years ended December 31, 2019, and 2020
Revenues
The Company had no revenue in the fiscal years ended December 31, 2019, and 2020. Going forward we expect our revenues to be derived from our electric vehicles.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
The Company had no selling, general and administrative expenses in the fiscal years ended December 31, 2019, and 2020.
Interest Expense
The Company had no interest expenses in the fiscal years ended December 31, 2019, and 2020.
Net Losses
We experienced no losses in the fiscal years ended December 31, 2019, and 2020.