ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
FORWARD LOOKING STATEMENTS AND RISK FACTORS
See the discussion of forward-looking statements and risk factors in Part I Item 1 and Item 1A of this report.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations constitutes management's review of the factors that affected our financial and operating performance for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. For a discussion of the year ended December 31, 2018, including a comparison to the year ended December 31, 2019, see Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, on Registrant's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 27, 2020.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Recent Developments - COVID-19
At this time, we are unable to predict the extent and magnitude of the negative impact on our business of the COVID-19 pandemic and related governmental reaction due to numerous uncertainties. To limit the impact of COVID-19 on our business operations, customers and associates, we have modified our operations to comply with multiple state-level proclamations and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidance and best practices by restricting travel, maintaining remote work programs for associates, restricting lobby access to stores and having customers bank by appointment, online, or via our mobile banking app, increasing facilities cleaning scope and frequency, and deploying resources for new programs such as the Payroll Protection Program. We have also addressed other customer needs during the pandemic by continuing to offer our Umpqua Go-To® application which offers customers and associates a safe and effective way to conduct banking.
We have increased our community support by allocating $3.0 million in grants and investments to organizations providing COVID-19 community relief and small business microloans, activating an associate 3:1 giving match to donations, and initiating virtual volunteerism opportunities. We enhanced associate benefits by introducing supplemental front line associate pay, providing a pandemic pay bank for associates needing additional paid time off due to COVID-19 impacts, and implementing flexible work rotations and remote work for higher-risk associates.
While we do not know and cannot quantify all of the specific impacts, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our business, results of operations, and financial condition, as well as our regulatory capital and liquidity ratios, continues to depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including the scope and duration of the pandemic; actions taken by governmental authorities and other third parties in response to the pandemic, including vaccinations; the effect on our customers, counterparties, employees and third party service providers; and the effect on the economy and markets.
We expect that the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to negatively impact the economy and our business including our results of operations and stock price. The federal government response to the COVID-19 pandemic has had a positive impact on our business, including our involvement in the PPP, as well as increased mortgage loan production fueled by the decline in interest rates, although these benefits may be short-term in nature and are offset by other impacts on the Bank in a prolonged low interest rate environment. The risks to our business are more fully described in Part I, item 1A "Risk Factors" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We are closely monitoring the impact of COVID-19 on all aspects of our business.
Financial
Significant items for the year ended December 31, 2020 were as follows:
Financial Performance
•Net loss per diluted common share was $6.92 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net income per diluted common share of $1.60 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020, was due to the goodwill impairment, increased provision for credit losses, as well as net interest margin compression, offset by an increase in non-interest income.
•In March 2020, the Company recorded a goodwill impairment of $1.8 billion. An interim goodwill impairment analysis was completed due to the decline in the economic environment, specifically the impact of significant decreases in interest rates, declines in the Company's stock price, as well as estimated higher credit losses. The non-cash goodwill impairment recorded does not impact tangible equity or our regulatory capital ratios.
•Net interest income was $882.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $920.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net interest income compared to the same period in the prior year was due to lower yields on interest-earning assets due to interest rate cuts by the Federal Reserve, partially offset by higher average earning asset balances and lower cost of interest-bearing liabilities.
•Net interest margin, on a tax equivalent basis, was 3.23% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 3.71% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net interest margin compared to the same period in the prior year was driven by lower yields on interest-earning assets, due to the interest rate cuts that the Federal Reserve instituted as a response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The decrease was partially offset by a reduction in the cost of interest-bearing liabilities as a result of the Company's management of the cost of our funding sources.
•Non-interest income was $412.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $339.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily driven by the increase in residential mortgage banking revenue. In 2019, we recorded a one-time gain of $81.9 million from the sale of Visa Inc. Class B common stock.
•Residential mortgage banking revenue was $270.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $101.8 million for year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in residential mortgage banking revenue was primarily driven by an increase in originations in the current year due to elevated refinance demand from lower mortgage interest rates. Income from the origination and sale of residential mortgages increased by $203.8 million, as compared to the prior year, offset by losses on the fair value of the MSR asset due to increases in actual and projected prepayment speeds.
•For-sale mortgage closed loan volume increased by 116% in 2020, as compared to 2019. In addition, the gain on sale margin increased to 4.62%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 3.38% in 2019. The increase in the gain on sale margin was due to constrained industry capacity.
•Non-interest expense was $2.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $719.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in non-interest expense compared to the same period in the prior year was driven by the $1.8 billion goodwill impairment that was recorded in the first quarter. In addition, salaries and employee benefits expense increased due to the significant mortgage banking activity, partially offset by decreases in other expenses as the Company limited travel and used remote collaboration tools.
•Total gross loans and leases were $21.8 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $583.7 million, or 3%, compared to December 31, 2019. The increase in total loans was primarily due to the production of PPP loans. Excluding PPP loan production, loan balances declined due to reduced origination activity in the current economic environment and a strategic decision to allocate a greater percentage of home lending production to LHFS.
•The Company participates in the PPP, offering loans to both customers and non-customers throughout our footprint. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had approximately 14,800 PPP loans and $1.8 billion in PPP loans, with an average customer loan balance of $118,000. PPP loan balances will decline as customers complete the applicable loan forgiveness process through the Company and the SBA.
•Total deposits were $24.6 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $2.1 billion, or 10%, from December 31, 2019. This increase was due to growth in non-interest bearing demand deposits, which was mainly attributable to an increase in commercial customers' non-interest bearing accounts to increase their liquidity position, and personal customers decreasing discretionary spending. This increase was partially offset by decreases in higher cost time deposits and commercial money market relationships.
•Total consolidated assets were $29.2 billion as of December 31, 2020, compared to $28.8 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase was mainly due to the increase in loans due to PPP loan production and an increase in on-balance sheet liquidity, offset by the goodwill impairment recorded in the first quarter of 2020 and an increase in the allowance for credit losses.
Credit Quality
•Non-performing assets increased to $69.2 million, or 0.24% of total assets, as of December 31, 2020, compared to $67.5 million, or 0.23% of total assets, as of December 31, 2019. Non-performing loans were $67.4 million, or 0.31% of total loans and leases, as of December 31, 2020, compared to $64.2 million, or 0.30% of total loans and leases, as of December 31, 2019.
•The allowance for credit losses on loans and leases was $328.4 million, as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $170.8 million, as compared to December 31, 2019. The reserve for unfunded commitments was $20.3 million, as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $15.2 million, as compared to December 31, 2019. The significant increases in the allowance for credit losses are due to the economic forecasts which reflect the rapidly changing economic environment as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, additional risk associated with payment deferrals, political uncertainty and unknown fiscal support anticipating a continued economic downturn, as well as the implementation of CECL. The initial adjustment to the allowance for credit losses, which includes the allowance for credit losses on loans and leases and the reserve for unfunded commitments, with the adoption of CECL as of January 1, 2020, was $53.2 million.
•The provision for credit losses was $204.9 million for 2020. This was compared to a provision for credit losses (including the provision related to the reserve for unfunded commitments) of $73.1 million for 2019. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019, was attributable to the economic forecasts influenced by the COVID-19 pandemic used in the CECL calculation of the allowance for credit losses. As an annualized percentage of average outstanding loans and leases, the provision for credit losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 0.92%, as compared to 0.35% for the same period in 2019.
Liquidity
•Total cash and cash equivalents was $2.6 billion as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.2 billion from December 31, 2019. The increase in cash and cash equivalents reflects the Bank's current liquidity strategy to have an elevated on-balance sheet liquidity position to further enhance flexibility due to the increased market volatility and uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Capital and Growth Initiatives
•Umpqua launched "Next Gen 2.0" as a continuation of our initiative to modernize the Bank. Like its predecessor, the Next Gen 2.0 program includes initiatives to grow revenue, invest in strategic areas for future growth, including technology and digital enhancements, and to continue to advance operational excellence goals to reduce operating costs and invest the savings in strategic growth opportunities. We prioritize strategic investments to grow the balance sheet, including key human digital initiatives to advance the customer experience, and gain market share.
•The Company's total risk based capital was 15.6% and its Tier 1 common to risk weighted assets ratio was 12.3% as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2019, the Company's total risk based ratio was 14.0% and its Tier 1 common to risk weighted assets ratio was 11.2%.
•The Company declared cash dividends of $0.63 per common share during the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company shifted the timing of its dividend declarations from historical intra-quarter announcements to after quarterly earnings are finalized and applicable regulatory approval processes are complete. Accordingly, the fourth quarter 2020 dividend of $0.21 per common share was declared on February 1, 2021. In addition, we repurchased 331,000 shares of common stock during the year.
SUMMARY OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The SEC defines "critical accounting policies" as those that require application of management's most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in future periods. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report. Not all of our significant accounting policies require management to make difficult, subjective or complex judgments or estimates. Management believes that the following policies would be considered critical under the SEC's definition.
Allowance for Credit Losses Policy
The Bank has established an Allowance for Credit Losses Committee, which is responsible for, among other things, regularly reviewing the ACL methodology, including allowance levels, and ensuring that it is designed and applied in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. The Company's Audit and Compliance Committee provides board oversight of the ACL process and reviews and approves the ACL methodology on a quarterly basis.
CECL is not prescriptive in the methodology used to determine the expected credit loss estimate. Therefore, management has flexibility in selecting the methodology. However, the expected credit losses must be estimated over a financial asset's contractual term, adjusted for prepayments, utilizing quantitative and qualitative factors.
The estimate of current expected credit losses is based on relevant information about past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts that affect the collectability of the reported amounts. Historical loss experience is the starting point for estimating expected credit losses. Adjustments are made to historical loss experience to reflect differences in asset-specific risk characteristics, such as underwriting standards, portfolio mix or asset terms, and differences in economic conditions - both current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts. When the Company is not able to make or obtain reasonable and supportable forecasts for the entire life of the financial asset, it has estimated expected credit losses for the remaining life after the forecasted period, using an approach that reverts to historical credit loss information.
The Company utilizes complex models to obtain reasonable and supportable forecasts; most of the models calculate two predictive metrics: the probability of default and loss given default. The PD measures the probability that a loan will default within a given time horizon and primarily measures the adequacy of the debtor's cash flow as the primary source of repayment of the loan or lease. The LGD is the expected loss which would be realized presuming a default has occurred and primarily measures the value of the collateral or other secondary source of repayment related to the collateral.
Loans and leases deemed to be collateral dependent, or loans deemed to be reasonably expected to become troubled debt restructured or troubled debt restructured, are individually evaluated for loss based on the value of the underlying collateral or a discounted cash flow analysis.
The Company considers various qualitative factors when determining the overall adequacy of the ACL, including changes within the portfolio, changes to Bank policies and processes, as well as external factors, which may result in qualitative overlays to the model results. Loss factors from the models, prepayment speeds, and qualitative factors are input into the Company's CECL accounting application which aggregates the information. The Company then uses two methods to calculate the current expected credit loss: 1) the discounted cash flow method, which is used for all loans except lines of credit and 2) the non-discounted cash flow method which is used for lines of credit due to the difficulty of calculating an effective interest rate when lines of credit have not yet been drawn on.
The reserve for unfunded commitments is established to absorb inherent losses associated with our commitment to lend funds, such as with a letter or line of credit. The adequacy of the ACLLL and RUC are monitored on a regular basis and are based on management's evaluation of numerous factors, including: the CECL model outputs; quality of the current loan portfolio; the trend in the loan portfolio's risk ratings; current economic conditions; loan concentrations; loan growth rates; past-due and non-performing trends; evaluation of specific loss estimates for all significant problem loans; historical charge-off and recovery experience; and other pertinent information.
Management believes that the ACL was adequate as of December 31, 2020. There is, however, no assurance that future loan losses will not exceed the levels provided for in the ACL and could result in additional provision for loan and lease losses in future periods.
Residential Mortgage Servicing Rights
We have a significant investment in residential mortgage servicing rights. The Company determines its classes of servicing assets based on the asset type being serviced along with the methods used to manage the risk inherent in the servicing assets, which includes the market inputs used to value the servicing assets. The Company measures its residential mortgage servicing assets at fair value and reports changes in fair value through earnings. Fair value adjustments encompass market-driven valuation changes and the runoff in value that occurs from the passage of time, which are separately reported. Under the fair value method, the MSR is carried on the balance sheet at fair value and the changes in fair value are reported in earnings within residential mortgage banking revenue for the period in which the change occurs.
Retained mortgage servicing rights are measured at fair value as of the date of the related loan sale. We use quoted market prices when available. Subsequent fair value measurements are determined using a discounted cash flow model. In order to determine the fair value of the MSR, the present value of expected net future cash flows is estimated. Assumptions used include market discount rates, anticipated prepayment speeds, delinquency and foreclosure rates, and ancillary fee income net of servicing costs. This model is periodically validated by an independent model validation group. The model assumptions and the MSR fair value estimates are also compared to observable trades of similar portfolios as well as to MSR broker valuations and industry surveys, as available.
Valuation of Goodwill
Goodwill is not amortized but instead is periodically tested for impairment on an annual basis, or more frequently if events or circumstances, such as adverse changes in the business, indicate that there may be justification for conducting an interim test. Impairment testing is performed at the reporting unit level. The impairment analysis requires management to make subjective judgments. Events and factors that may significantly affect the estimates include, among others, competitive forces, customer behaviors and attrition, changes in revenue growth trends, cost structures, technology, changes in discount rates and specific industry and market conditions.
The Company performs its analysis of goodwill at the reporting unit level analyzing any factors that would impact the estimated fair value of the reporting unit compared to its carrying value. Goodwill is allocated between the reporting units of Wholesale Bank, Retail Bank, and Wealth Management. The Company first assesses qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events and circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that goodwill is impaired. If the qualitative assessment results indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value of any reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then the quantitative impairment test is performed. Various valuation methodologies are considered when completing the quantitative impairment test to determine the estimated fair value of the reporting unit which is then compared to its carrying value, including goodwill. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, an impairment charge would be taken for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit's fair value, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
The Company assessed goodwill for impairment at the interim date of March 31, 2020, due to events and circumstances indicating potential impairment. At that time, the Company recorded a goodwill impairment of $1.8 billion based on the results of the quantitative assessment. The goodwill impairment reduced the goodwill allocated to the Wholesale Bank and Retail Bank reporting units to zero. As of October 31, 2020, the Company completed its annual goodwill impairment analysis for the remaining $2.7 million, which is at the Wealth Management reporting unit, and determined that no impairment was indicated.
Fair Value
A hierarchical disclosure framework associated with the level of pricing observability is utilized in measuring financial instruments at fair value. The degree of judgment utilized in measuring the fair value of financial instruments generally correlates to the level of pricing observability. Financial instruments with readily available active quoted prices or for which fair value can be measured from actively quoted prices generally will have a higher degree of pricing observability and a lesser degree of judgment utilized in measuring fair value. Conversely, financial instruments rarely traded or not quoted will generally have little or no pricing observability and a higher degree of judgment utilized in measuring fair value. Pricing observability is impacted by a number of factors, including the type of financial instrument, whether the financial instrument is new to the market and not yet established and the characteristics specific to the transaction. In developing our fair value measurements, we maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Information regarding Recent Accounting Pronouncements is included in Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 below.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had a net loss of $1.5 billion, or $6.92 loss per diluted common share, compared to net income of $354.1 million, or $1.60 earnings per diluted common share for the year ended December 31, 2019. The net loss for 2020 was attributable to goodwill impairment of $1.8 billion, an increase in provision for credit losses, and interest margin compression. The net loss was partially offset by an increase in non-interest income from increased residential mortgage banking revenue, due to strong mortgage production and higher margins, driven by lower interest rates during the period. The goodwill impairment taken as of March 31, 2020, based on an interim impairment analysis triggered by the deterioration in the economic environment, resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, specifically the reduction in interest rates, the increase in projected credit losses, and the decline in the Company's stock price. The increase in the provision for credit losses is due to the COVID-19 pandemic influenced economic forecast used in the calculation of the allowance for credit losses using CECL.
The following table presents the returns on average assets, average common shareholders' equity and average tangible common shareholders' equity for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018. For each of the periods presented, the table includes the calculated ratios based on reported net (loss) income. Our return on average common shareholders' equity has historically been negatively impacted as the result of capital required to support goodwill. To the extent this performance metric is used to compare our performance with other financial institutions that do not have merger and acquisition-related intangible assets, we believe it is beneficial to also consider the return on average tangible common shareholders' equity. The return on average tangible common shareholders' equity is calculated by dividing net (loss) income by average shareholders' common equity less average goodwill and intangible assets, net (excluding MSRs). The return on average tangible common shareholders' equity is considered a non-GAAP financial measure and should be viewed in conjunction with the return on average common shareholders' equity.
Return on Average Assets, Common Shareholders' Equity and Tangible Common Shareholders' Equity
For the Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018
Additionally, management believes tangible common equity and the tangible common equity ratio are meaningful measures of capital adequacy. Umpqua believes the exclusion of certain intangible assets in the computation of tangible common equity and tangible common equity ratio provides a meaningful base for period-to-period and company-to-company comparisons, which management believes will assist investors in analyzing the operating results and capital of the Company. Tangible common equity is calculated as total shareholders' equity less preferred stock and less goodwill and other intangible assets, net (excluding MSRs). In addition, tangible assets are total assets less goodwill and other intangible assets, net (excluding MSRs). The tangible common equity ratio is calculated as tangible common shareholders' equity divided by tangible assets. The tangible common equity and tangible common equity ratio is considered a non-GAAP financial measure and should be viewed in conjunction with the total shareholders' equity and the total shareholders' equity ratio.
The following table provides a reconciliation of ending shareholders' equity (GAAP) to ending tangible common equity (non-GAAP), and ending assets (GAAP) to ending tangible assets (non-GAAP) as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Non-GAAP financial measures have inherent limitations, are not required to be uniformly applied, and are not audited. Although we believe these non-GAAP financial measures are frequently used by stakeholders in the evaluation of a company, they have limitations as analytical tools, and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analyses of results as reported under GAAP.
NET INTEREST INCOME
Net interest income is the largest source of our income. Net interest income for 2020 was $882.5 million, a decrease of $38.1 million or 4% compared to the same period in 2019 due to margin compression during 2020. The decrease in net interest income in 2020 compared to 2019 was driven by lower yields on interest-earning assets due to a decrease in short and long-term interest rates from the interest rate cuts that the Federal Reserve instituted as a response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The decrease was partially offset by higher average interest-earning assets (due to the PPP program) and lower cost of interest-bearing liabilities as the Bank actively managed the cost of funds. The Bank has reduced deposit exception pricing on money market and time deposits to reduce the cost of these deposits. In addition, the Bank has allowed higher-cost deposits, such as brokered time deposits, to run off.
The net interest margin (net interest income as a percentage of average interest-earning assets) on a fully tax equivalent basis was 3.23% for 2020, a decrease of 48 basis points compared to 2019. The decrease in the net interest margin primarily resulted from a decrease in the average yields on interest-earning assets, partially offset by the decline in the cost of interest-bearing liabilities and the increase in average loan and lease balances. In March 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Federal Open Market Committee of the Federal Reserve System, lowered the target range for the federal funds rate 150 basis points to a range of 0.00% to 0.25%. The FOMC expects to maintain this target until it is confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals. Key interest rate declines experienced in 2020 have negatively impacted the Company's net interest margin. The yield on loans and leases for 2020 decreased by 74 basis points compared to 2019, although the average balance of loans and leases increased by $1.2 billion over the same period. The total cost of interest-bearing liabilities for 2020 was 0.75%, representing a decrease of 51 basis points compared to 2019.
Our net interest income is affected by changes in the amount and mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, as well as changes in the yields earned on interest-earning assets and rates paid on deposits and borrowed funds. The following table presents condensed average balance sheet information, together with interest income and yields on average interest-earning assets, and interest expense and rates paid on average interest-bearing liabilities for years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
(1)Non-accrual loans and leases are included in the average balance.
(2)Tax-exempt income has been adjusted to a tax equivalent basis at a 21% tax rate. The amount of such adjustment was an addition to recorded income of approximately $1.4 million, $1.6 million, and $1.9 million for the years ended 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
The following table sets forth a summary of the changes in tax equivalent net interest income due to changes in average asset and liability balances (volume) and changes in average rates (rate) for 2020 compared to 2019. Changes in tax equivalent interest income and expense, which are not attributable specifically to either volume or rate, are allocated proportionately between both variances.
(1) Tax exempt income has been adjusted to a tax equivalent basis at a 21% tax rate.
PROVISION FOR CREDIT LOSSES
The provision for credit losses was $204.9 million for 2020, compared to $73.1 million for 2019 (which includes both the provision for loan and lease losses and the provision for the reserve for unfunded commitments). The increase in the provision for credit losses in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to CECL as well as the economic forecasts related to the COVID-19 pandemic. As a percentage of average outstanding loans and leases, the provision for credit losses recorded for 2020 was 0.92%, an increase of 57 basis points from 2019.
Net-charge offs were $71.1 million for 2020, or 0.32% of average loans and leases, compared to net charge-offs of $59.8 million, or 0.29% of average loans and leases, for 2019. The majority of net charge-offs relate to the lease and equipment finance portfolio, which is included in the commercial loan portfolio.
Typically, loans in a non-accrual status will not have an allowance for credit loss as they will be written down to their net realizable value or charged-off. However, the net realizable value for homogeneous leases and equipment finance agreements are determined by the loss given default calculated by the CECL model, and therefore homogeneous leases and equipment finance agreements on non-accrual will have an allowance for credit loss amount until they become 181 days past due, at which time they are charged-off. The non-accrual leases and equipment finance agreements of $18.7 million as of December 31, 2020 have a related allowance for credit losses of $16.7 million, with the remaining loans written-down to their estimated fair value, less estimated costs to sell, and are expected to be resolved with no additional material loss, absent further decline in market prices.
NON-INTEREST INCOME
Non-interest income for 2020 was $412.0 million, an increase of $72.2 million, or 21%, compared to the same period in 2019. The following table presents the key components of non-interest income for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Service charges on deposits for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased $6.0 million due to the Bank waiving certain ATM fees and deposit account related fees as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, there has been a change in customers' spending habits as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which has resulted in overdraft and interchange fees decreasing as customers are keeping more funds liquid and making fewer transactions.
Residential mortgage banking revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period of 2019 increased by $169.0 million. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in originations in 2020 due to lower interest rates which elevated refinance demand. Revenue related to origination and sale of residential mortgages increased by $203.8 million, as compared to the prior period. This was offset by higher loss on fair value of the MSR asset of $73.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to a loss on fair value of $44.8 million for the same period in 2019. For-sale mortgage closed loan volume increased 116% as compared to the prior period. Gain on sale margin increased to 4.62%, compared to 3.38% in 2019 due to constrained industry capacity.
Origination volume for mortgage loans is generally linked to the level of interest rates. When rates fall, origination volumes are expected to be elevated relative to historical levels. If rates rise, origination volumes would be expected to fall. Margins observed in the current period could be expected to narrow somewhat in future periods as mortgage industry capacity constraints ease and refinance demand is met. In addition, government-sponsored entity investors started to increase fees charged for refinance loans sold to them in December 2020, which we anticipate may reduce refinance activity and gain on sale margins. The MSR asset value is also sensitive to interest rates, and generally falls with lower rates and rises with higher rates.
Servicing income was $35.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $42.2 million for the same period of 2019. Income was lower primarily due to a smaller portfolio of loans serviced for others, resulting from a sale of a portion of the servicing portfolio in 2019. Operating expenses associated with mortgage servicing activities are at risk of increasing in future periods due to the potential of higher default frequency as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The following table presents our residential mortgage banking revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(1)The changes in valuation inputs and assumptions principally reflect changes in discount rates and prepayment speeds, which are primarily affected by changes in interest rates.
The loss on sale of debt securities of $7.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was due to a strategic restructuring of our available for sale debt securities portfolio to reduce interest rate sensitivity, which has not been repeated in the current period. Gain on equity securities for the year ended December 31, 2019, was due to the one-time gain on sale of all of the shares of Visa Inc. Class B common stock held by the Company.
Other income in 2020 compared to 2019 decreased by $11.5 million, due primarily to the decline in revenue from market swap fees of $8.2 million and an increase in the loss on the swap derivative fair value.
NON-INTEREST EXPENSE
Non-interest expense for 2020 was $2.5 billion, an increase of $1.8 billion, or 254%, compared to 2019. Excluding the goodwill impairment, non-interest expense, for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased $42.1 million over the same period in the prior year. The following table presents the key elements of non-interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Goodwill impairment of $1.8 billion was recorded in March 2020, based on an interim impairment analysis triggered by the decline in interest rates and economic impacts of COVID-19, as well as declines in the Company's stock price. The impairment was a result of market volatility and forecasts for a prolonged low interest rate environment, as well as estimated higher credit losses expected due to the economic downturn.
Salaries and employee benefits costs increased $58.9 million for 2020 compared to the prior year. This increase was primarily related to an increase in home lending compensation of $41.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, related to higher origination volumes during the period.
Occupancy and equipment expense increased by $7.4 million in 2020 compared to the prior year due to an increase in software expenses of $13.6 million, mainly due to one-time software impairment charges associated with technology contract exits completed during the period.
Marketing expense decreased by $4.9 million in 2020 compared to 2019, due to the advertising in 2019 to attract wholesale and middle-market customers and to promote our Umpqua Go-To® app, which did not recur in 2020.
Services expense decreased by $7.5 million in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily related to lower consulting fees related to engagements in the prior year to assist with the identification and implementation of operational efficiencies that did not recur in 2020. In addition, consulting engagements were put on hold or delayed in some cases due to COVID-19 related to economic uncertainties and cost containment measures.
Other non-interest expense decreased by $9.7 million in 2020 compared to 2019, due primarily to a decrease in travel expenses as the Bank limited travel in 2020, a decrease in exit and disposal costs, as well as decrease in legal settlements. The decreases were offset slightly by an increase in charitable donations.
INCOME TAXES
Our consolidated effective tax rate as a percentage of pre-tax (loss) income for 2020 was (4.6)%, compared to 24.5% for 2019. The 2020 effective tax rate became negative primarily due to impairment of non-deductible goodwill. Additionally, the 2020 effective tax rate differed from the federal statutory rate of 21% principally because of state taxes, non-taxable income arising from bank-owned life insurance, income on tax-exempt investment securities, nondeductible FDIC premiums, and tax credits arising from low income housing investments.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS
Cash and cash equivalents were $2.6 billion at December 31, 2020, compared to $1.4 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase in interest bearing cash and temporary investments reflects management's strategy to adopt an elevated on-balance sheet liquidity position. Having high quality liquid assets enhances the Company's liquidity flexibility given the market volatility and uncertainty in the current environment. In addition, deposit growth has outpaced loan growth in the current year, allowing for cash and cash equivalents to increase.
INVESTMENT SECURITIES
The composition of our investment securities portfolio reflects management's investment strategy of maintaining an appropriate level of liquidity while providing a relatively stable source of interest income. The investment securities portfolio provides a vehicle for the investment of available funds, a source of liquidity (by pledging as collateral or through repurchase agreements) and collateral for certain public funds deposits.
Equity and other securities consist primarily of investments in fixed income mutual funds to support our CRA initiatives and securities invested in rabbi trusts for the benefit of certain current or former executives and employees as required by the underlying agreements. Equity and other securities were $83.1 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $80.2 million at December 31, 2019. This increase is primarily due to additional investments in CRA-qualified mutual fund initiatives during the period.
Investment debt securities available for sale were $2.9 billion as of December 31, 2020, compared to $2.8 billion at December 31, 2019. The increase is due to purchases of $867.7 million of investment securities and an increase in fair value of investment securities available for sale of $106.6 million, offset partially by sales and paydowns of $828.8 million.
Investment debt securities held to maturity were $3.0 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to holdings of $3.3 million at December 31, 2019. The change relates to paydowns and maturities of investment securities held to maturity.
The following table presents information regarding the amortized cost, fair value, average yield and maturity structure of the investment portfolio at December 31, 2020:
(1) Weighted average yields are stated on a federal tax-equivalent basis of 21%. Weighted average yields for available for sale investments have been calculated on an amortized cost basis.
The mortgage-related securities in the table above include both pooled mortgage-backed issues and high-quality collateralized mortgage obligation structures, with an average duration of 3.0 years. These mortgage-related securities provide yield spread to U.S. Treasury or agency securities; however, the cash flows arising from them can be volatile due to refinancing of the underlying mortgage loans.
We review investment securities on an ongoing basis for the presence of impairment, taking into consideration current market conditions, fair value in relationship to cost, extent and nature of the change in fair value, issuer rating changes and trends, whether we intend to sell a security or if it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security before recovery of our amortized cost basis of the investment, which may be maturity, and other factors.
Gross unrealized losses in the available for sale investment portfolio was $792,000 at December 31, 2020. This consisted primarily of unrealized losses on residential mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations of $449,000. The unrealized losses were primarily attributable to changes in market interest rates or the widening of market spreads subsequent to the initial purchase of these securities and are not attributable to changes in credit quality. In the opinion of management, no allowance for credit losses was considered necessary on these securities as of December 31, 2020.
RESTRICTED EQUITY SECURITIES
Restricted equity securities were $41.7 million and $46.5 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, the majority of which represents the Bank's investment in the Federal Home Loan Bank of Des Moines. The decrease is attributable to redemptions of FHLB stock during the period due to decreased FHLB borrowing activity during the period. FHLB stock is carried at par and does not have a readily determinable fair value. Ownership of FHLB stock is restricted to the FHLB and member institutions, and can only be purchased and redeemed at par. At December 31, 2020, the Bank's minimum required investment in FHLB stock was $41.4 million.
LOANS AND LEASES
Total loans and leases outstanding at December 31, 2020 were $21.8 billion, an increase of $583.7 million compared to year-end 2019. This increase was principally attributable to net new loan and lease originations of $862.1 million, partially offset by loans sold of $105.1 million, charge-offs of $84.5 million and a transfer of indirect auto loans to loans held for sale of $78.1 million.
The following table presents the concentration distribution of our loan and lease portfolio by major type as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The following table presents the maturity distribution of our loan portfolios and the rate sensitivity of these loans to changes in interest rates as of December 31, 2020:
In April 2020, the Bank began originating loans to qualified small businesses under the PPP administered by the SBA under the provisions of the CARES Act. Loans covered by the PPP may be eligible for loan forgiveness for certain costs incurred related to payroll, group health care benefit costs and qualifying mortgage, rent and utility payments. The remaining loan balance after forgiveness of any amounts is still fully guaranteed by the SBA and therefore these loans carry no allowance for credit loss as of December 31, 2020.
Terms of the PPP loans typically include the following:
•Fixed interest rate of 1.00%;
•Loans issued have a maturity date of two or five years, depending on their date of issuance, and have the ability to prepay with no fees;
•First payment deferred for up to six months, with the potential ability to extend for another six months;
•Loan forgiveness up to the full principal amount of the loan and any accrued interest, subject to certain requirements including that no more than 25% of the loan forgiveness amount may be attributable to non-payroll costs;
•No collateral or personal guarantees are required;
•Maximum amount limited to the lesser of $10.0 million or an amount calculated using a payroll-based formula.
In return for processing and booking the loan, the SBA will pay the lender a processing fee tiered by the size of the loan; 5% for loans of up to $350,000; 3% for loans greater than $350,000 and less than $2.0 million; and 1% for loans of at least $2.0 million.
As of December 31, 2020, we have approximately $1.8 billion of SBA-approved PPP loans to approximately 14,800 customers for an average customer loan balance of $118,000, which are classified as commercial term loans. We expect to recognize the remaining unamortized balance of the PPP-related net loan processing fees of approximately $26.9 million, as a yield adjustment over the remaining term of these loans. The Bank has seen an acceleration of PPP fees due to processed forgiveness applications during the fourth quarter of 2020.
The following table summarizes our PPP loans broken out by state as of December 31, 2020:
In December 2020, the Economic Aid Act rebooted the PPP with many of the same parameters as the first program but with several important differences. Those changes include businesses who previously received a PPP loan are eligible for a second-draw PPP loan of up to $2 million, provided they meet certain criteria. The Act also opened up first-draw PPP loans to additional companies and set aside funds for new and smaller borrowers, low and moderate income borrowers and for community and small lenders. It also allowed additional costs to be eligible for loan forgiveness and PPP borrowers will be required to spend no less than 60% of the funds on payroll over a covered period. We anticipate a renewed interest in PPP loans with the new parameters during 2021.
ASSET QUALITY AND NON-PERFORMING ASSETS
The following table summarizes our non-performing assets and restructured loans, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(1)Excludes government guaranteed GNMA mortgage loans that Umpqua has the right but not the obligation to repurchase that are past due 90 days or more totaling $4.3 million as of December 31, 2019. There were no non-performing mortgage loans guaranteed by GNMA, which Umpqua has the unilateral right to repurchase but has not done so at December 31, 2020.
(2)Represents accruing TDR loans performing according to their restructured terms.
Restructured Loans
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, loans of $15.0 million and $18.6 million were classified as accruing restructured loans, respectively. The restructurings were granted in response to borrower financial difficulty, and generally provide for a temporary modification of loan repayment terms. In order for a new TDR loan to be considered performing and on accrual status, the loan's collateral coverage generally will be greater than or equal to 100% of the loan balance, the loan must be current on payments, and the borrower must either prefund an interest reserve or demonstrate the ability to make payments from a verified source of cash flow.
A further decline in the economic conditions due to the COVID-19 pandemic as well as in our general market areas or other factors could adversely impact individual borrowers or the loan portfolio in general. Accordingly, there can be no assurance that loans will not become 90 days or more past due, placed on non-accrual status, restructured or transferred to other real estate owned in the future. Umpqua is committed to helping borrowers during this unprecedented time of uncertainty and is working with customers on payment deferrals, forbearances, and other loan modifications.
COVID-19 Related Payment Deferral and Forbearance
Due to the deterioration of the U.S. economy resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company has had an increase in loan payment deferral and forbearance requests. Once a deferral or forbearance request is received, a late charge waiver is put in place and payments are suspended for an agreed-upon period. Accrued and unpaid interest during the deferral period will be collected upon the expiration of the deferral or on a regular repayment schedule at the end of the deferral period. For certain loan types, the maturity date may be extended one to six months to allow for full amortization. In accordance with the deferral guidance at the federal and state levels, these loans are generally classified based on their past due status prior to their deferral period, so they are classified as performing loans that accrue interest.
A summary of outstanding loan balances with active payment deferral or forbearance as of December 31, 2020 are shown in the table below, disaggregated by major types of loans and leases:
Included in the mortgage loans with payment deferrals or forbearance in the above table are $177.7 million of GNMA loans repurchased by the Bank from GNMA during the year, due to the fact that GNMA considers them delinquent, so the Bank exercised their right to repurchase the loans.
The Bank continues to monitor COVID-19 deferrals and if a customer continues to experience financial difficulty after the initial deferral and further concessions are granted, the loan will be reviewed to determine if a TDR designation is appropriate.
ALLOWANCE FOR CREDIT LOSSES
The ACL totaled $348.7 million at December 31, 2020, an increase of $186.0 million from the $162.7 million at December 31, 2019. The following table shows the activity in the ACL for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(1) For comparability, the provision for credit losses as a percentage of average loans and leases annualized includes both the provision for loan and lease losses and the provision for unfunded commitments in prior periods.
(2) The total provision for credit losses disclosed in this table does not include the provision related to accrued interest on loans deferred due to COVID-19, which is included in the provision for credit losses in the income statement for the year ended December 31, 2020.
With the adoption of CECL, we recorded a one-time cumulative-effect pre-tax adjustment in the amount of $53.2 million. The allowance for credit losses on loans and leases increased by $50.0 million and the allowance for unfunded commitments increased by $3.2 million, resulting in a January 1, 2020, or day 1, balance of the Allowance for Credit Losses of $216.0 million.
The provision for credit losses includes the provision for credit losses on loans and leases, the provision for unfunded commitments, and the provision for credit losses related to accrued interest on loans deferred due to COVID-19. The provision for credit losses was $204.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase from $73.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was principally attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on the forecasts used to determine the expected credit losses of the loan and lease portfolio in the current year. In addition, the Bank used CECL in the current year, but incurred loss in the prior year. CECL is expected to cause the provision for credit losses to be more volatile as we now reflect current expected credit losses, instead of incurred losses.
The following table sets forth the allocation of the allowance for credit losses on loans and leases and percent of loans and leases in each category to total loans and leases, net of deferred fees, as of December 31 for each of the last two years:
The following table shows the change in the allowance for credit losses from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020:
(1) The total allowance for credit losses disclosed in this table does not include the provision related to accrued interest on loans deferred due to COVID-19, which is included in the provision for credit losses in the income statement for the year December 31, 2020.
To calculate the ACL, the CECL models use a forecast of future economic conditions and are dependent upon specific macroeconomic variables that are relevant to each of the Bank's loan and lease portfolios. The changes in the ACL estimate for all portfolio segments, during the year ended December 31, 2020, were primarily related to changes in the economic assumptions. Because of the rapidly changing economic environment due to the COVID-19 pandemic, additional risk associated with payment deferrals, political uncertainty, and unknown fiscal support, the Bank opted to use Moody's Analytics proprietary baseline economic forecast which included macroeconomic developments through November 2020 for estimating the ACL as of December 31, 2020. Key components of the Moody's November Baseline scenario include the U.S. GDP growth rate, unemployment rates, U.S. economy recovery and growth, and fiscal stimulus. The models for calculating the ACL are sensitive to changes in these and other economic variables, which could result in volatility as these assumptions change over time. In addition, the forward-looking assumptions revert to historical data when they reach the point where future assumptions are no longer estimated.
We believe that the allowance for credit losses as of December 31, 2020 is sufficient to absorb losses inherent in the loan and lease portfolio and in credit commitments outstanding as of that date based on the information available. If the economic conditions continue to decline, the Bank may need additional provisions for credit losses in future periods.
RESIDENTIAL MORTGAGE SERVICING RIGHTS
The following table presents the key elements of our residential mortgage servicing rights asset as of December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
(1) The changes in valuation inputs and assumptions principally reflect changes in discount rates and prepayment speeds, which are primarily affected by changes in interest rates.
Information related to our serviced loan portfolio as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
Residential mortgage servicing rights are adjusted to fair value with the change recorded in residential mortgage banking revenue. The value of servicing rights can fluctuate based on changes in interest rates and other factors. Generally, as interest rates decline and borrowers are able to take advantage of a refinance incentive, prepayments increase and the total value of existing servicing rights declines as expectations of future servicing fees collections decline. Historically, the fair value of our residential mortgage servicing rights will increase as market rates for mortgage loans rise and decrease if market rates fall. Mortgage refinance volumes remain elevated due to low mortgage rates during the current periods, which caused accelerated prepayments and higher expectations for prepayment speeds in the future.
The fair value of the MSR asset decreased by $19.7 million due to the passage of time, including the impact of regularly scheduled repayments, paydowns and payoffs, as compared to the decrease of $25.4 million in 2019. The fair value of the MSR asset decreased $53.4 million due to changes to the valuation model inputs including changes in discount rates and estimated prepayment speeds caused by the low mortgage rate environment during the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the valuation inputs, such as discount rates and estimated prepayment speeds, decreased the MSR fair value by $19.4 million.
GOODWILL AND OTHER INTANGIBLE ASSETS
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had goodwill of $2.7 million and $1.8 billion, respectively. Goodwill impairment of $1.8 billion was recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020, based on an interim impairment analysis triggered by the decline in interest rates and economic impacts of COVID-19, as well as declines in the Company's stock price. The impairment was a result of market volatility and forecasts for a prolonged low interest rate environment, as well as higher credit losses expected due to the forecasted economic downturn. For the year ended December 31, 2019, there were no goodwill impairment losses recognized.
At December 31, 2020, we had other intangible assets of $13.4 million, compared to $18.3 million at December 31, 2019, which decreased as a result of amortization of the other intangible assets of $5.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. We amortize other intangible assets on an accelerated or straight-line basis over an estimated ten year life.
DEPOSITS
Total deposits were $24.6 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $2.1 billion, or 10%, compared to year-end 2019. The increase is mainly attributable to growth in non-interest bearing demand deposits, offset by a decline in time deposits. The increase in non-maturity deposit account categories is driven by increased customer savings rates as customers look to increase their own liquidity in this uncertain environment. The decrease in time deposits is mainly due to lower brokered deposits as the Company has allowed these higher-cost deposits to runoff, as well as the Company reducing its exception pricing on customer money market and time deposits.
The following table presents the deposit balances by major category as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The following table presents the scheduled maturities of uninsured deposits greater than $250,000 as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Included in uninsured deposits are brokered deposits of $144.9 million, that exceed the FDIC insurance limits of $250,000.
The Company's total brokered deposits were $424.1 million or 2% of total deposits, at December 31, 2020, compared to $1.2 billion or 5%, at December 31, 2019.
BORROWINGS
At December 31, 2020, the Bank had outstanding $375.4 million of securities sold under agreements to repurchase and no outstanding federal funds purchased balances. The Bank had outstanding borrowings of $771.5 million at December 31, 2020, consisting of advances from the FHLB, which decreased $135.2 million since December 31, 2019 as a result of maturity payoffs, offset by new advances. The Company allowed higher cost borrowings to mature, using our excess liquidity.
JUNIOR SUBORDINATED DEBENTURES
We had junior subordinated debentures with carrying values of $343.5 million and $363.3 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease is mainly due to the $18.8 million decline in the fair value for the junior subordinated debentures elected to be carried at fair value, which is due mostly to the implied forward curve shifting lower and an increase in the credit spread. As of December 31, 2020, substantially all of the junior subordinated debentures had interest rates that are adjustable on a quarterly basis based on a spread over three month LIBOR.
LIQUIDITY AND CASH FLOW
The principal objective of our liquidity management program is to maintain the Bank's ability to meet the day-to-day cash flow requirements of our customers who either wish to withdraw funds or to draw upon credit facilities to meet their cash needs. The Bank's liquidity strategy is focused on an elevated on-balance sheet liquidity position to further enhance flexibility due to the increased market volatility and uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, the Company believes that it has sufficient cash and access to borrowings to effectively manage through the COVID-19 pandemic as well as meet its working capital and other needs. The Company will continue to prudently evaluate and expand liquidity sources, including the management of availability and utilization of our borrowing sources.
We monitor the sources and uses of funds on a daily basis to maintain an acceptable liquidity position. One source of funds includes public deposits. Individual state laws require banks to collateralize public deposits, typically as a percentage of their public deposit balance in excess of FDIC insurance. Public deposits represent 7% and 9% of total deposits at December 31, 2020 and 2019 respectively. The amount of collateral required varies by state and may also vary by institution within each state, depending on the individual state's risk assessment of depository institutions. Changes in the pledging requirements for uninsured public deposits may require pledging additional collateral to secure these deposits, drawing on other sources of funds to finance the purchase of assets that would be available to be pledged to satisfy a pledging requirement, or could lead to the withdrawal of certain public deposits from the Bank. In addition to liquidity from core deposits and the repayments and maturities of loans and investment securities, the Bank can utilize established uncommitted federal funds lines of credit, sell securities under agreements to repurchase, borrow on a secured basis from the FHLB or issue brokered certificates of deposit.
The Bank had available lines of credit with the FHLB totaling $6.2 billion at December 31, 2020, subject to certain collateral requirements, namely the amount of pledged loans and investment securities. The Bank had available lines of credit with the Federal Reserve totaling $475.3 million, subject to certain collateral requirements, namely the amount of certain pledged loans. The Bank had uncommitted federal funds line of credit agreements with additional financial institutions totaling $460.0 million at December 31, 2020. Availability of these lines is subject to federal funds balances available for loan and continued borrower eligibility. These lines are intended to support short-term liquidity needs, and the agreements may restrict consecutive day usage. The Bank would also have additional funding available through the Federal Reserve PPP Liquidity Facility to provide funding related to PPP loans, but has not utilized this facility to date.
The Company is a separate entity from the Bank and must provide for its own liquidity. Substantially all of the Company's revenues are obtained from dividends declared and paid by the Bank. There were $213.0 million of dividends paid by the Bank to the Company in 2020. There are statutory and regulatory provisions that limit the ability of the Bank to pay dividends to the Company. The Company recorded a net loss of $6.92 per diluted common share for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to a $1.8 billion goodwill impairment charge recorded during the period. As a result, the Company has an accumulated deficit, instead of retained earnings at December 31, 2020.
Due to the accumulated deficit, the Company is required to notify the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System prior to declaring and paying a cash dividend to our shareholders and may not pay a dividend if the FRB objects. Additionally, the Company is required to seek FDIC and Oregon Division of Financial Regulation approval for quarterly dividends from Umpqua Bank to the Company. In the second quarter of 2020, the Company changed the timing of its dividend to shareholders from an intra-quarter announcement to after quarterly earnings are released. The shift in announcement timing was made to provide the Company’s Board of Directors and regulators the opportunity to review final quarterly financial results and financial projections prior to approval of any dividends. The Company expects to continue this cadence for dividend payments in future quarters.
As disclosed in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, net cash provided by operating activities was $93.8 million during 2020, with the difference between cash provided by operating activities and net loss consisting primarily of proceeds from the sale of loans held for sale of $6.8 billion, non-cash goodwill impairment of $1.8 billion, as well as the provision for credit losses of $204.9 million, offset by originations of loans held for sale of $6.7 billion, the gain on sale of loans of $289.2 million, and the increase in other assets of $209.8 million. This compares to net cash used in operating activities of $80.5 million during 2019, with the difference between cash used in operating activities and net income largely consisting of originations of loans held for sale of $3.1 billion, the increase in other assets of $138.0 million, the gain on sale of loans of $95.4 million, and the gain on equity securities of $83.5 million, offset by proceeds from the sale of loans held for sale of $2.8 billion, as well as the provision for loan and lease loss of $72.5 million.
Net cash of $960.1 million used in investing activities during 2020 consisted principally of $867.7 million in purchases of investment securities available for sale, $862.1 million of net change in loans and leases, and net cash paid in divestiture of stores of $171.4 million, partially offset by proceeds from investment securities available for sale of $828.8 million and proceeds from sale of loans and leases of $111.9 million. This compares to net cash of $550.2 million used in investing activities during 2019, which consisted principally of net changes in loans and leases of $1.1 billion, purchases of investment securities available for sale of $698.0 million, and purchase of restricted equity securities of $220.2 million, partially offset by proceeds from investment securities available for sale of $918.7 million, proceeds from sale of loans and leases of $251.8 million and the redemption of restricted equity securities of $214.0 million.
Net cash of $2.1 billion provided by financing activities during 2020 primarily consisted of $2.3 billion increase in net deposits and proceeds from borrowings of $600.0 million, partially offset by repayment of debt of $735.0 million and dividends paid on common stock of $185.0 million. This compares to net cash of $1.4 billion provided by financing activities during 2019, which consisted primarily of $1.4 billion increase in net deposits and $940.7 million proceeds from borrowings, partially offset by repayment of borrowings of $785.7 million and dividends paid on common stock of $185.1 million.
Although we expect the Bank's and the Company's liquidity positions to remain satisfactory during 2021, it is possible that our deposit balances may not be maintained at previous levels due to pricing pressure, store consolidations, or customers' spending habits due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, in order to generate deposit growth, our pricing may need to be adjusted in a manner that results in increased interest expense on deposits.
OFF-BALANCE-SHEET-ARRANGEMENTS
Information regarding Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangements is included in Note 18 and 19 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 below.
The following table presents a summary of significant contractual obligations extending beyond one year as of December 31, 2020 and maturing as indicated:
(1) Deposits with indeterminate maturities, such as demand, savings and money market accounts, are reflected as obligations due in less than one year.
(2) Represents the issued amount of all junior subordinated debentures.
(3) Includes maximum payments related to employee benefit plans, assuming all future vesting conditions are met. Additional information about employee benefit plans is provided in Note 17 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 below.
The table above does not include interest payments or purchase accounting adjustments related to deposits, borrowings or junior subordinated debentures or imputed interest on operating leases.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company has a liability for unrecognized tax benefits, including accrued interest, in the amount of $4.4 million. As the Company is not able to estimate the period in which this liability will be paid in the future, this amount is not included in the future contractual obligations table above.
CONCENTRATIONS OF CREDIT RISK
Information regarding Concentrations of Credit Risk is included in Note 2, 4, and 18 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 below.
CAPITAL RESOURCES
Shareholders' equity at December 31, 2020 was $2.7 billion, a decrease of $1.6 billion from December 31, 2019. The decrease in shareholders' equity during the year ended was principally due to net loss of $1.5 billion, which is mainly related to the goodwill impairment as of March 31, 2020, which resulted in an accumulated deficit as of December 31, 2020. The decrease was also due to common stock dividends declared of $139.5 million, offset by other comprehensive income, net of tax of $93.2 million.
The Federal Reserve Board has in place guidelines for risk-based capital requirements applicable to U.S. banks and bank/financial holding companies. These risk-based capital guidelines take into consideration risk factors, as defined by regulation, associated with various categories of assets, both on and off-balance sheet. Refer to the discussion of the capital adequacy requirements in Supervision and Regulation in Item 1 of this 10-K.
Under the Basel III guidelines, capital strength is measured in three tiers, which are used in conjunction with risk-adjusted assets to determine the risk-based capital ratios. The guidelines require an 8% total risk-based capital ratio, of which 6% must be Tier 1 capital and 4.5% must be CET1. Our CET1 capital primarily includes shareholders' equity less certain deductions for goodwill and other intangibles, net of taxes, net unrealized gains (losses) on AFS securities, net of tax, net unrealized gains (losses) related to fair value of liabilities, net of tax, and certain deferred tax assets that arise from tax loss and credit carry-forwards, and totaled $2.6 billion at December 31, 2020. Tier 1 capital is primarily comprised of common equity Tier 1 capital, less certain additional deductions applied during the phase-in period, totaled $2.6 billion at December 31, 2020. Tier 2 capital components include all, or a portion of, the allowance for credit losses in excess of Tier 1 statutory limits and combined trust preferred security debt issuances. The total of Tier 1 capital plus Tier 2 capital components is referred to as Total Risk-Based Capital, and was $3.3 billion at December 31, 2020. The percentage ratios, as calculated under the guidelines, were 12.31%, 12.31% and 15.63% for CET1, Tier 1 and Total Risk-Based Capital, respectively, at December 31, 2020. The CET1, Tier 1 and Total Risk-Based Capital ratios at December 31, 2019 were 11.20%, 11.20% and 13.96%, respectively.
A minimum leverage ratio is required in addition to the risk-based capital standards and is defined as period-end shareholders' equity, less accumulated other comprehensive income, goodwill and deposit-based intangibles, divided by average assets as adjusted for goodwill and other intangible assets. Although a minimum leverage ratio of 4% is required for the highest-rated financial holding companies that are not undertaking significant expansion programs, the Federal Reserve Board may require a financial holding company to maintain a leverage ratio greater than 4% if it is experiencing or anticipating significant growth or is operating with less than well-diversified risks in the opinion of the Federal Reserve Board. The Federal Reserve Board uses the leverage and risk-based capital ratios to assess capital adequacy of banks and financial holding companies. Our consolidated leverage ratios at December 31, 2020 and 2019 were 8.98% and 9.16%, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, the most recent notification from the FDIC categorized the Bank as "well-capitalized" under the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action. There are no conditions or events since that notification that management believes have changed the Bank's regulatory capital category.
Along with enactment of the CARES Act, the federal bank regulatory authorities issued an interim final rule to provide banking organizations that are required to implement CECL before the end of 2020 the option to delay the estimated impact on regulatory capital by up to two years, with a three-year transition period to phase out the cumulative benefit to regulatory capital provided during the two-year delay. The Company has elected this capital relief and will delay the estimated regulatory capital impact of adopting CECL, relative to the incurred loss methodology's effect on regulatory capital.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company made no capital contributions to the Bank. At December 31, 2020, all four of the capital ratios of the Bank exceeded the minimum ratios required by federal regulation. Management monitors these ratios on a regular basis to ensure that the Bank remains within regulatory guidelines.
During 2020, Umpqua's Board of Directors approved cash dividends of $0.21 for all quarters. Subsequent to the first quarter dividend payment in April 2020, the Company shifted to an intra-quarter dividend timing to provide the Company’s Board of Directors and regulators the opportunity to review final quarterly financial results and financial projections prior to approval of any dividends. The second quarter dividend was paid in August 2020, and the third quarter dividend was paid in November 2020. On February 1, 2021, the Company declared a cash dividend for 2020 in the amount of $0.21 per common share based on fourth quarter 2020 performance, which will be paid on February 26, 2021.
These dividends were made pursuant to our existing dividend policy and in consideration of, among other things, earnings, regulatory capital levels, the overall payout ratio and expected asset growth. We expect that the dividend rate will be reassessed on a quarterly basis by the Board of Directors in accordance with the dividend policy.
The payment of future cash dividends is at the discretion of our Board of Directors and subject to a number of factors, including results of operations, general business conditions, growth, financial condition and other factors deemed relevant by the Board of Directors. Further, our ability to pay future cash dividends is subject to certain regulatory requirements and restrictions discussed in the Supervision and Regulation section in Item 1 above.
The following table presents cash dividends declared and dividend payout ratios (dividends declared per common share divided by basic earnings per common share) for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
The Company's share repurchase plan, which was first approved by the Board and announced in August 2003, provided authority to repurchase up to 15 million shares of our common stock. The Board of Directors has approved extensions of the repurchase plan to July 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2020, a total of 9.5 million shares remained available for repurchase. The Company repurchased 331,000 shares under the repurchase plan in 2020. The timing and amount of future repurchases will depend upon the market price for our common stock, securities laws restricting repurchases, asset growth, earnings, and our capital plan. In addition, our stock plans provide that option and award holders may pay for the exercise price and tax withholding in part or whole by tendering previously held shares.