ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read together with the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements thereto included in Part II Item 8, “Financial Statements.” Readers are cautioned the statements, estimates, projections or outlook contained in this report, including discussions regarding financial prospects, economic conditions, trends and uncertainties contained in this Item 7, may constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the PSLRA. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties which may cause our actual results to differ materially from the expectations expressed or implied in the forward-looking statements. A description of some of the risks and uncertainties can be found further below in this Item 7 and in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.”
Discussions of year-over-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 are not included in this Form 10-K and can be found in Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of the Company’s Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
General
UnitedHealth Group is a diversified health care company with a mission to help people live healthier lives and help make the health system work better for everyone. Our two complementary businesses - Optum and UnitedHealthcare - are driven by this unified mission and vision to improve health care access, affordability, experiences and outcomes for the individuals and organizations we are privileged to serve.
We have four reportable segments across our two business platforms, Optum and UnitedHealthcare:
•OptumHealth;
•OptumInsight;
•OptumRx; and
•UnitedHealthcare, which includes UnitedHealthcare Employer & Individual, UnitedHealthcare Medicare & Retirement, UnitedHealthcare Community & State and UnitedHealthcare Global.
Further information on our business and reportable segments is presented in Part I, Item 1, “Business” and in Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements.”
COVID-19 Trends and Uncertainties
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve and the ultimate impact on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows remains uncertain. During the second quarter, the global health system experienced unprecedented levels of care deferral, which impacted all of our businesses. As the pandemic advanced, access to and demand for care was most constrained from mid-March through April, began to recover in May and June and restored to near normal seasonal levels in the third quarter. Care patterns continued to normalize in the fourth quarter, returning to, and even exceeding, seasonal baselines, including COVID-19 treatment and testing costs, towards the end of the quarter. The temporary deferral of care experienced in 2020 may cause care patterns to moderately exceed normal baselines in future periods as utilization of health system capacity continues to increase. From time to time, health system capacity may be subject to possible increased volatility due to the pandemic. Specific trends and uncertainties related to our two business platforms are as follows:
Optum. The temporary deferral of care impacted the Optum businesses for the year ended December 31, 2020. For example, our fee-for-service care delivery business, such as traditional procedure work at our ambulatory surgery centers, was negatively impacted, while our risk-based care delivery business performance reflected lower demand for care. Our OptumInsight and OptumRx volume-based businesses were negatively impacted by the lower level of care encounters which took place, as well as by broader economic factors, contributing to lower managed services and prescription volume. As the health system returned to normal seasonally adjusted levels of care, we have seen business activity approach normal levels. COVID-19 will also continue to influence customer and consumer behavior, both during and after the pandemic, which could impact how care is delivered and the manner in which consumers wish to receive their prescription drugs or infusion services. The impact of COVID-19 on our care provider and payer clients could impact the volume and types of services Optum provides, as well as the pacing of potential new business opportunities. As a result of the dynamic situation and broad-reaching impact to the health system, the ultimate impact of COVID-19 on our Optum businesses is uncertain.
UnitedHealthcare. During 2020, we expanded benefit coverage in areas such as COVID-19 care and testing, telemedicine, and pharmacy benefits; provided customers assistance in the form of co-pay waivers and premium forgiveness; offered additional enrollment opportunities to those who previously declined employer-sponsored offerings; extended certain premium payment terms for customers experiencing financial hardship; simplified administrative practices; and accelerated payments to care providers, all with the aim of assisting our customers, care providers, members and communities in addressing the COVID-19 crisis. Temporary care deferrals significantly impacted UnitedHealthcare’s results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. The impact of temporary care deferrals was offset by COVID-19 related care and testing, the significant financial assistance we provided our customers, rebate requirements and broader economic impacts. Enrollment in our commercial products declined primarily due to employer actions in response to the pandemic.
Increased consumer demand for care, potentially even higher acuity care, along with continued COVID-19 care and testing costs are expected to result in increased future medical costs. Disrupted care patterns, as a result of the pandemic, may temporarily affect the ability to obtain complete member health status information, impacting future revenue in businesses utilizing risk adjustment methodologies. The ultimate overall impact is uncertain and dependent on the future pacing and intensity of the pandemic, the duration of policies and initiatives to address COVID-19, and general economic uncertainty.
Business Trends
Our businesses participate in the United States, South America and certain other international health markets. In the United States, health care spending has grown consistently for many years and comprises 18% of gross domestic product (GDP). We expect overall spending on health care to continue to grow in the future, due to inflation, medical technology and pharmaceutical advancement, regulatory requirements, demographic trends in the population and national interest in health and well-being. The rate of market growth may be affected by a variety of factors, including macro-economic conditions, such as the economic impact of COVID-19, and regulatory changes, which could impact our results of operations, including our continued efforts to control health care costs.
Pricing Trends. To price our health care benefit products, we start with our view of expected future costs, including any potential impacts from COVID-19. We frequently evaluate and adjust our approach in each of the local markets we serve, considering relevant factors, such as product positioning, price competitiveness and environmental, competitive, legislative and regulatory considerations, including minimum MLR thresholds. We will continue seeking to balance growth and profitability across all of these dimensions.
The commercial risk market remains highly competitive in both the small group and large group segments. We expect broad-based competition to continue as the industry adapts to individual and employer needs. The ACA had an annual, nondeductible insurance industry tax (Health Insurance Industry Tax) to be levied proportionally across the insurance industry for risk-based health insurance products. Pricing for contracts covering some portion of calendar year 2021 reflected the permanent repeal of the Health Insurance Industry Tax.
Medicare Advantage funding continues to be pressured, as discussed below in “Regulatory Trends and Uncertainties.”
We expect Medicaid revenue growth due to anticipated changes in mix and increases in the number of people we serve; we also believe the payment rate environment creates the risk of continued downward pressure on Medicaid margin percentages. We continue to take a prudent, market-sustainable posture for both new business and maintenance of existing relationships. We continue to advocate for actuarially sound rates commensurate with our medical cost trends and we remain dedicated to partnering with those states who are committed to the long-term viability of their programs.
Medical Cost Trends. Our medical cost trends primarily relate to changes in unit costs, health system utilization and prescription drug costs. COVID-19 care and testing costs and certain of our customer assistance initiatives have also impacted medical cost trends in the current year and may continue in future years. We endeavor to mitigate those increases by engaging physicians and consumers with information and helping them make clinically sound choices, with the objective of helping them achieve high-quality, affordable care. The uncertain impact of COVID-19 may impact our ability to estimate medical costs payable, which could result in increased variability to medical cost reserve development in future periods.
Delivery System and Payment Modernization. The health care market continues to change based on demographic shifts, new regulations, political forces and both payer and patient expectations. Health plans and care providers are being called upon to work together to close gaps in care and improve overall care quality, improve the health of populations and reduce costs. We continue to see a greater number of people enrolled in plans with underlying performance-based care provider payment models rewarding high-quality, affordable care and foster collaboration. We work together with clinicians to leverage our data and analytics to provide the necessary information to close gaps in care and improve overall health outcomes for patients.
We are increasingly rewarding care providers for delivering improvements in quality and cost-efficiency. As of December 31, 2020, we served nearly 18 million people through some form of aligned contractual arrangement, including full-risk, shared-risk and bundled episode-of-care and performance incentive payment approaches.
This trend is creating needs for health management services which can coordinate care around the primary care physician, including new primary care channels, and for investments in new clinical and administrative information and management systems, which we believe provide growth opportunities for our Optum business platform.
Regulatory Trends and Uncertainties
Following is a summary of management’s view of the trends and uncertainties related to some of the key provisions of the ACA and other regulatory matters. For additional information regarding the ACA and regulatory trends and uncertainties, see Part I, Item 1 “Business - Government Regulation” and Item 1A, “Risk Factors.”
Medicare Advantage Rates. Final 2021 Medicare Advantage rates resulted in an increase in industry base rates of approximately 1.7%, short of the industry forward medical cost trend, creating continued pressure in the Medicare Advantage program.
The ongoing Medicare Advantage funding pressure places continued importance on effective medical management and ongoing improvements in administrative efficiency. There are a number of adjustments we have made to partially offset these rate pressures and reductions. In some years, these adjustments impact the majority of the seniors we serve through Medicare Advantage. For example, we seek to intensify our medical and operating cost management, make changes to the size and composition of our care provider networks, adjust members' benefits and implement or increase the member premiums supplementing the monthly payments we receive from the government. Additionally, we decide annually on a county-by-county basis where we will offer Medicare Advantage plans.
Our Medicare Advantage rates are currently enhanced by CMS quality bonuses in certain counties based on our local plans’ Star ratings. The level of Star ratings from CMS, based upon specified clinical and operational performance standards, will impact future quality bonuses.
ACA Tax. After a moratorium in 2019, the industry-wide amount of the Health Insurance Industry Tax for 2020, which was primarily borne by customers, was $15.5 billion, with our portion being approximately $3.0 billion. The return of the tax impacted year-over-year comparability of our financial statements, including revenues, operating costs, medical care ratio (MCR), operating cost ratio, effective tax rate and cash flows from operations. The Health Insurance Industry Tax was permanently repealed by Congress, effective January 1, 2021.
SELECTED OPERATING PERFORMANCE ITEMS
The following represents a summary of select 2020 year-over-year operating comparisons to 2019.
•Consolidated revenues increased by 6%, UnitedHealthcare revenues increased 4% and Optum revenues grew 21%.
•UnitedHealthcare served 420,000 fewer people domestically primarily due to increased unemployment and attrition in commercial group benefits, partially offset by growth in government programs.
•Earnings from operations increased by 14%, including increases of 20% at UnitedHealthcare and 7% at Optum.
•Diluted earnings per common share increased 12% to $16.03.
•Cash flows from operations were $22.2 billion, an increase of 20%.
•Return on equity was 24.9%.
RESULTS SUMMARY
The following table summarizes our consolidated results of operations and other financial information:
________
(a)Medical care ratio is calculated as medical costs divided by premium revenue.
(b)Net earnings margin attributable to UnitedHealth Group shareholders.
(c)Return on equity is calculated as net earnings attributable to UnitedHealth Group common shareholders divided by average shareholders’ equity. Average shareholders’ equity is calculated using the shareholders’ equity balance at the end of the preceding year and the shareholders’ equity balances at the end of each of the four quarters of the year presented.
2020 RESULTS OF OPERATIONS COMPARED TO 2019 RESULTS
Consolidated Financial Results
Revenue
The increases in revenue were primarily driven by the increase in the number of individuals served through Medicare Advantage and Medicaid; pricing trends; and organic and acquisition growth across the Optum business, primarily due to expansion in pharmacy care services and care delivery. The increases were partially offset by decreased individuals served through our commercial and Global benefits businesses, certain voluntary customer assistance programs and rebate requirements. Revenues were also negatively impacted by decreases in our fee-for-service care delivery and other volume-based businesses, primarily as a result of the care deferral and economic impacts of COVID-19.
Medical Costs and MCR
Medical costs increased as a result of growth in people served through Medicare Advantage and Medicaid, medical cost trends and COVID-19 care and testing costs, partially offset by decreased people served in commercial and Global, modestly lower care patterns and increased prior year favorable development. The MCR decreased primarily due to the temporary deferral of care and the revenue effects of the return of the Health Insurance Industry Tax, partially offset by COVID-19 care and testing costs, rebate requirements and voluntary customer assistance measures.
Operating Cost Ratio
The operating cost ratio increased primarily due to the impact of the return of the Health Insurance Industry Tax, COVID-19 response efforts and business mix, partially offset by operating efficiency gains.
Income Tax Rate
Our effective tax rate increased primarily due to the impact of the return of the nondeductible Health Insurance Industry Tax.
Reportable Segments
See Note 14 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements” for more information on our segments. We utilize various metrics to evaluate and manage our reportable segments, including individuals served by UnitedHealthcare by major market segment and funding arrangement, people served by OptumHealth and adjusted scripts for OptumRx. These metrics are the main drivers of revenue, earnings and cash flows at each business. The metrics also allow management and investors to evaluate and understand business mix, customer penetration and pricing trends when comparing the metrics to revenue by segment.
The following table presents a summary of the reportable segment financial information:
UnitedHealthcare
The following table summarizes UnitedHealthcare revenues by business:
The following table summarizes the number of individuals served by our UnitedHealthcare businesses, by major market segment and funding arrangement:
Fee-based and risk-based commercial business decreased primarily due to increased unemployment and related attrition. Medicare Advantage increased due to growth in people served through individual Medicare Advantage plans. The increase in people served through Medicaid was primarily driven by states easing redetermination requirements due to COVID-19 and growth in people served via Dual Special Needs Plans. The decrease in people served by UnitedHealthcare Global is a result of increased unemployment and underwriting discipline.
UnitedHealthcare’s revenue increased due to growth in the number of individuals served through Medicare Advantage and Medicaid, a greater mix of people with higher acuity needs and the return of the Health Insurance Industry Tax, partially offset by a decrease in the number of individuals served through the commercial and Global businesses and foreign currency impacts. In 2020, earnings from operations increased due to the deferral of care caused by COVID-19 on the health system and the factors impacting revenue, partially offset by the return of the Health Insurance Industry Tax, COVID-19 care and testing costs, customer assistance programs and broader economic effects.
Optum
Total revenues increased as each segment reported revenue growth. Earnings from operations increased due to growth at OptumHealth and OptumInsight.
The results by segment were as follows:
OptumHealth
Revenue and earnings at OptumHealth increased primarily due to organic growth and acquisitions in risk-based care delivery. Reduced care volumes in fee-for-service arrangements as a result of COVID-19 partially offset the increases in revenues and earnings. OptumHealth served approximately 98 million people as of December 31, 2020 compared to 96 million people as of December 31, 2019.
OptumInsight
Revenue and earnings from operations at OptumInsight increased primarily due to growth in technology and managed services, partially offset by decreased activity levels in volume-based services due to the impact of COVID-19 on payer and care provider clients.
OptumRx
Revenue at OptumRx and the corresponding eliminations increased due to the inclusion of retail pharmacy co-payments. See Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements" for further detail. Revenue at OptumRx also increased due to organic and acquisition growth in pharmacy care services, including specialty pharmacy, and new client wins, partially offset by an expected large client transition and lower script volumes driven by COVID-19 related care deferral and fewer people served due to economic-driven employment attrition. Earnings from operations remained relatively flat as COVID-19 impacts were partially offset by the factors impacting revenue and improved
supply chain management. OptumRx fulfilled 1.3 billion adjusted scripts in both 2020 and 2019 with growth offset by the large client transition.
LIQUIDITY, FINANCIAL CONDITION AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity
Introduction
We manage our liquidity and financial position in the context of our overall business strategy. We continually forecast and manage our cash, investments, working capital balances and capital structure to meet the short-term and long-term obligations of our businesses while seeking to maintain liquidity and financial flexibility. Cash flows generated from operating activities are principally from earnings before noncash expenses.
Our regulated subsidiaries generate significant cash flows from operations and are subject to, among other things, minimal levels of statutory capital, as defined by their respective jurisdiction, and restrictions on the timing and amount of dividends paid to their parent companies.
Our U.S. regulated subsidiaries paid their parent companies dividends of $8.3 billion and $5.6 billion in 2020 and 2019, respectively. See Note 10 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements” for further detail concerning our regulated subsidiary dividends.
Our nonregulated businesses also generate significant cash flows from operations available for general corporate use. Cash flows generated by these entities, combined with dividends from our regulated entities and financing through the issuance of long-term debt as well as issuance of commercial paper or the ability to draw under our committed credit facilities, further strengthen our operating and financial flexibility. We use these cash flows to expand our businesses through acquisitions, reinvest in our businesses through capital expenditures, repay debt and return capital to our shareholders through dividends and repurchases of our common stock.
Summary of our Major Sources and Uses of Cash and Cash Equivalents
2020 Cash Flows Compared to 2019 Cash Flows
Increased cash flows provided by operating activities were primarily driven by higher net earnings as well as changes in working capital accounts. Other significant changes in sources or uses of cash year-over-year included an increase in customer funds administered and net purchases of investments, and decreases in net issuances of long-term debt and short-term borrowings, cash paid for acquisitions and share repurchases.
Financial Condition
As of December 31, 2020, our cash, cash equivalent, available-for-sale debt securities and equity securities balances of $59.0 billion included $16.9 billion of cash and cash equivalents (of which $1.3 billion was available for general corporate use), $39.8 billion of debt securities and $2.3 billion of equity securities. Given the significant portion of our portfolio held in cash equivalents, we do not anticipate fluctuations in the aggregate fair value of our financial assets to have a material impact on our liquidity or capital position. Other sources of liquidity, primarily from operating cash flows and our commercial paper program, which is fully supported by our bank credit facilities, reduce the need to sell investments during adverse market conditions. See Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements” for further detail concerning our fair value measurements.
Our available-for-sale debt portfolio had a weighted-average duration of 3.7 years and a weighted-average credit rating of “Double A” as of December 31, 2020. When multiple credit ratings are available for an individual security, the average of the available ratings is used to determine the weighted-average credit rating.
Capital Resources and Uses of Liquidity
Cash Requirements. The Company’s cash requirements within the next twelve months include medical costs payable, accounts payable and accrued liabilities, commercial paper and current maturities of long-term debt, other current liabilities, and purchase commitments and other obligations. We expect the cash required to meet these obligations to be primarily generated through cash flows from current operations; cash available for general corporate use; and the realization of current assets, such as accounts receivable.
Our long-term cash requirements under our various contractual obligations and commitments include:
•Debt Obligations. See Note 8 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements” for further detail of our commercial paper and long-term debt and the timing of expected future payments. Interest coupon payments are typically paid semi-annually.
•Operating leases. See Note 12 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements” for further detail of our obligations and the timing of expected future payments.
•Purchase and other obligations. These include $5.3 billion, $2.0 billion of which is expected to be paid within the next twelve months, of fixed or minimum commitments under existing purchase obligations for goods and services, including agreements cancelable with the payment of an early termination penalty, and remaining capital commitments for venture capital funds and other funding commitments. These amounts exclude agreements cancelable without penalty and liabilities to the extent recorded in our Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2020.
•Other Liabilities. These include other long-term liabilities reflected in our Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2020, including obligations associated with certain employee benefit programs, unrecognized tax benefits and various long-term liabilities, which have some inherent uncertainty in the timing of these payments.
•Redeemable noncontrolling interests. See Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements” for further detail. We do not have any material required redemptions in the next twelve months.
We expect the cash required to meet our long-term obligations to be primarily generated through future cash flows from operations. However, we also have the ability to generate cash to satisfy both our current and long-term requirements through the issuance of commercial paper, issuance of long-term debt, or drawing under our committed credit facilities or the ability to sell investments. We believe our capital resources are sufficient to meet future, short-term and long-term, liquidity needs.
Short-Term Borrowings. Our revolving bank credit facilities provide liquidity support for our commercial paper borrowing program, which facilitates the private placement of senior unsecured debt through independent broker-dealers, and are available for general corporate purposes. For more information on our commercial paper and bank credit facilities, see Note 8 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements.”
Our revolving bank credit facilities contain various covenants, including covenants requiring us to maintain a defined debt to debt-plus-shareholders’ equity ratio of not more than 60%, subject to increase in certain circumstances set forth in the applicable credit agreement. As of December 31, 2020, our debt to debt-plus-shareholders’ equity ratio, as defined and calculated under the credit facilities, was 38%.
Long-Term Debt. Periodically, we access capital markets to issue long-term debt for general corporate purposes, such as, to meet our working capital requirements, to refinance debt, to finance acquisitions or for share repurchases. For more information on our debt, see Note 8 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements.”
Credit Ratings. Our credit ratings as of December 31, 2020 were as follows:
The availability of financing in the form of debt or equity is influenced by many factors, including our profitability, operating cash flows, debt levels, credit ratings, debt covenants and other contractual restrictions, regulatory requirements and economic and market conditions. A significant downgrade in our credit ratings or adverse conditions in the capital markets may increase the cost of borrowing for us or limit our access to capital.
Share Repurchase Program. As of December 31, 2020, we had Board authorization to purchase up to 58 million shares of our common stock. For more information on our share repurchase program, see Note 10 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements.”
Dividends. In June 2020, the Company’s Board of Directors increased the Company’s quarterly cash dividend to shareholders to an annual rate of $5.00 compared to $4.32 per share, which the Company had paid since June 2019. For more information on our dividend, see Note 10 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements.”
Pending Acquisitions. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we entered into agreements to acquire multiple companies in the health care sector, which are expected to close in the first half of 2021, subject to regulatory approval and other customary closing conditions. Additionally, in January 2021, we entered into agreements to purchase multiple companies in the health care sector, most notably, Change Healthcare (NASDAQ: CHNG). This acquisition is expected to close in the second half of 2021, subject to Change Healthcare shareholders’ approval, regulatory approvals and other customary closing conditions. The total anticipated capital required for these acquisitions, excluding the payoff of acquired indebtedness, is approximately $13 billion.
We do not have other significant contractual obligations or commitments requiring cash resources. However, we continually evaluate opportunities to expand our operations, which include internal development of new products, programs and technology applications and may include acquisitions.
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
See Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements” for a discussion of new accounting pronouncements which affect us.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
Critical accounting estimates are those estimates requiring management to make challenging, subjective or complex judgments, often because they must estimate the effects of matters inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. Critical accounting estimates involve judgments and uncertainties which are sufficiently sensitive and may result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions.
Medical Costs Payable
Medical costs and medical costs payable include estimates of our obligations for medical care services rendered on behalf of insured consumers, but for which claims have either not yet been received or processed. Depending on the health care professional and type of service, the typical billing lag for services can be up to 90 days from the date of service. Approximately 90% of claims related to medical care services are known and settled within 90 days from the date of service and substantially all within twelve months. As of December 31, 2020, our days outstanding in medical payables was 48 days, calculated as total medical payables divided by total medical costs times the number of days in the period.
In each reporting period, our operating results include the effects of more completely developed medical costs payable estimates associated with previously reported periods. If the revised estimate of prior period medical costs is less than the previous estimate, we will decrease reported medical costs in the current period (favorable development). If the revised estimate of prior period medical costs is more than the previous estimate, we will increase reported medical costs in the current period (unfavorable development). Medical costs in 2020, 2019 and 2018 included favorable medical cost development related to prior years of $880 million, $580 million and $320 million, respectively.
In developing our medical costs payable estimates, we apply different estimation methods depending on the month for which incurred claims are being estimated. For example, for the most recent two months, we estimate claim costs incurred by applying
observed medical cost trend factors to the average per member per month (PMPM) medical costs incurred in prior months for which more complete claim data is available, supplemented by a review of near-term completion factors.
Completion Factors. A completion factor is an actuarial estimate, based upon historical experience and analysis of current trends, of the percentage of incurred claims during a given period adjudicated by us at the date of estimation. Completion factors are the most significant factors we use in developing our medical costs payable estimates for periods prior to the most recent two months. Completion factors include judgments in relation to claim submissions such as the time from date of service to claim receipt, claim levels and processing cycles, as well as other factors. Our judgments also consider the impacts of COVID-19 on these factors. If actual claims submission rates from providers (which can be influenced by a number of factors, including provider mix and electronic versus manual submissions) or our claim processing patterns are different than estimated, our reserve estimates may be significantly impacted.
The following table illustrates the sensitivity of these factors and the estimated potential impact on our medical costs payable estimates for those periods as of December 31, 2020:
Medical Cost Per Member Per Month Trend Factors. Medical cost PMPM trend factors are significant factors we use in developing our medical costs payable estimates for the most recent two months. Medical cost trend factors are developed through a comprehensive analysis of claims incurred in prior months, provider contracting and expected unit costs, benefit design and a review of a broad set of health care utilization indicators, which included consideration of COVID-19 in 2020. These factors include but are not limited to pharmacy utilization trends, inpatient hospital authorization data and influenza incidence data from the National Centers for Disease Control. We also consider macroeconomic variables such as GDP growth, employment and disposable income. A large number of factors can cause the medical cost trend to vary from our estimates, including: our ability and practices to manage medical and pharmaceutical costs, changes in level and mix of services utilized, mix of benefits offered, including the impact of co-pays and deductibles, changes in medical practices, catastrophes, epidemics and pandemics, such as COVID-19.
The following table illustrates the sensitivity of these factors and the estimated potential impact on our medical costs payable estimates for the most recent two months as of December 31, 2020:
The completion factors and medical costs PMPM trend factors analyses above include outcomes considered reasonably likely based on our historical experience estimating liabilities for incurred but not reported benefit claims.
Management believes the amount of medical costs payable is reasonable and adequate to cover our liability for unpaid claims as of December 31, 2020; however, actual claim payments may differ from established estimates as discussed above. Assuming a hypothetical 1% difference between our December 31, 2020 estimates of medical costs payable and actual medical costs payable, excluding AARP Medicare Supplement Insurance and any potential offsetting impact from premium rebates, 2020 net earnings would have increased or decreased by approximately $157 million.
For more detail related to our medical cost estimates, see Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements.”
Goodwill
We evaluate goodwill for impairment annually or more frequently when an event occurs or circumstances change indicating the carrying value may not be recoverable. When testing goodwill for impairment, we may first assess qualitative factors to determine if it is more likely than not the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value. During a qualitative analysis, we consider the impact of changes, if any, to the following factors: macroeconomic, industry and market factors, cost factors, changes in overall financial performance, and any other relevant events and uncertainties impacting a reporting unit. If our qualitative assessment indicates a goodwill impairment is more likely than not, we perform additional quantitative analyses. We may also elect to skip the qualitative testing and proceed directly to the quantitative testing. For reporting units where a quantitative analysis is performed, we perform a test measuring the fair values of the reporting units and comparing them to their aggregate carrying values, including goodwill. If the fair value is less than the carrying value of the reporting unit, an impairment is recognized for the difference, up to the carrying amount of goodwill.
We estimate the fair values of our reporting units using a discounted cash flow method or a weighted combination of discounted cash flows and a market-based method. The discounted cash flow method includes assumptions about a wide variety of internal and external factors. Significant assumptions used in the discounted cash flow method include financial projections of free cash flow, including revenue trends, medical costs trends, operating productivity, income taxes and capital levels; long-term growth rates for determining terminal value beyond the discretely forecasted periods; and discount rates. Financial projections and long-term growth rates used for our reporting units are consistent with, and use inputs from, our internal long-term business plan and strategies. Discount rates are determined for each reporting unit and include consideration of the implied risk inherent in their forecasts. Our most significant estimate in the discount rate determinations involves our adjustments to the peer company weighted average costs of capital reflecting reporting unit-specific factors. We have not made any adjustments to decrease a discount rate below the calculated peer company weighted average cost of capital for any reporting unit. Company-specific adjustments to discount rates are subjective and thus are difficult to measure with certainty. The passage of time and the availability of additional information regarding areas of uncertainty with respect to the reporting units’ operations could cause these assumptions to change in the future. Additionally, as part of our quantitative impairment testing, we perform various sensitivity analyses on certain key assumptions, such as discount rates, cash flow projections and peer company multiples to analyze the potential for a material impact. The market-based method requires determination of appropriate peer group whose securities are traded on an active market. The peer group is used to derive market multiples to estimate fair value. As of October 1, 2020, we completed our annual impairment tests for goodwill with all of our reporting units having fair values substantially in excess of their carrying values.
LEGAL MATTERS
A description of our legal proceedings is presented in Note 12 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements.”
CONCENTRATIONS OF CREDIT RISK
Investments in financial instruments such as marketable securities and accounts receivable may subject us to concentrations of credit risk. Our investments in marketable securities are managed under an investment policy authorized by our Board of Directors. This policy limits the amounts which may be invested in any one issuer and generally limits our investments to U.S. government and agency securities, state and municipal securities and corporate debt obligations of investment grade. Concentrations of credit risk with respect to accounts receivable are limited due to the large number of employer groups and other customers constituting our client base. As of December 31, 2020, there were no significant concentrations of credit risk.