Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This annual report on Form 10-K and other reports filed by Unique Logistics International, Inc. and its wholly owned subsidiaries, (together the “Company”, “we”, “our”, and “us”) from time to time with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) contain or may contain forward-looking statements and information that are based upon beliefs of, and information currently available to, the Company’s management as well as estimates and assumptions made by Company’s management. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which are only predictions and speak only as of the date hereof. When used in the filings, the words “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “future,” “intend,” “plan,” or the negative of these terms and similar expressions as they relate to the Company or the Company’s management identify forward-looking statements. Such statements reflect the current view of the Company with respect to future events and are subject to risks, uncertainties, assumptions, and other factors, including the risks contained in the “Risk Factors” section of the Annual Report on Form 10-K, relating to the Company’s industry, the Company’s operations and results of operations, and any businesses that the Company may acquire. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should the underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may differ significantly from those anticipated, believed, estimated, expected, intended, or planned.
Although the Company believes that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, the Company cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance, or achievements. Except as required by applicable law, including the securities laws of the United States, the Company does not intend to update any of the forward-looking statements to conform these statements to actual results.
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). These accounting principles require us to make certain estimates, judgments, and assumptions. We believe that the estimates, judgments and assumptions upon which we rely are reasonable based upon information available to us at the time that these estimates, judgments and assumptions are made. These estimates, judgments and assumptions can affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. Our consolidated financial statements would be affected to the extent there are material differences between these estimates and actual results. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by GAAP and does not require management’s judgment in its application. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting any available alternative would not produce a materially different result. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this report.
Business Overview
We are a global logistics and freight forwarding company. We operated via our wholly owned subsidiaries, Unique Logistics Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“UL HI”), Unique Logistics International (BOS) Inc, a Massachusetts corporation (“UL BOS”) and Unique Logistics International (NYC) LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“UL NYC”).
The Company provides a range of international logistics services that enable its customers to outsource to the Company sections of their supply chain process. The services provided by the Company are seamlessly managed by its network of trained employees and integrated information systems. We enable our customers to share data regarding their international vendors and purchase orders with us, execute the flow of goods and information under their operating instructions, provide visibility to the flow of goods from factory to distribution center or store and when required, update their inventory records.
Our range of services can be categorized as follows:
● Air Freight services
● Ocean Freight services
● Customs Brokerage and Compliance services
● Warehousing and Distribution services
● Order Management
Results of Operations
Revenue
The Company’s recorded total revenue from operations for the year ended May 31, 2021, and for the period October 28, 2019 (inception) through May 31, 2020, in the amounts of $371.9 million and $1.1 million, respectively. This increase represents management’s success in combining the acquired entities, achievement of synergies, as well as significant increase in a number of customers, shipping volumes and the market prices, for both air and ocean freight services, during the year. Management is also projecting strong demand for international logistics services driven by a recovering US economy. The Company is in a strong position to deliver on its strategy, ensuring growth both organically and through acquisitions in strategic geographic areas of our business.
Costs and Operating Expenses
Costs and operating expenses were $368.4 million for the year ended May 31, 2021, compared with $1.5 million for the period October 28, 2019 (inception) through May 31, 2020. This increase in cost was attributable to a full year of operations with significant increase in volume. The Company maintained its historical gross margins for products and services and is anticipating to be able to maintain in the near term as it continues to grow its volume and customer base.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) is comprised of interest expense, gain on forgiveness of promissory notes and loss on extinguishment of convertible debt. During the year ended May 31, 2021, interest expense totaled approximately $1.8 million and was comprised of $121,000 for bank interest charges, $310,000 for loan interest and approximately $1.4 million for accretion of debt discount related to the Company’s convertible notes. The Company recorded loss on extinguishment of convertible note payable of approximately $1.1 million, In addition, during the year ended May 31, 2021, the Company was granted forgiveness of the Paycheck Protection Program loans under the CARES Act, (the “PPP Loan”) and recorded a gain on forgiveness of approximately $1.6 million.
Net Income (Loss)
Net income was $1.7 million for the year ended May 31, 2021, compared to a net loss of $409,000 for the period October 28, 2019 (inception) through May 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the period October 28, 2019 (inception) through May 31, 2020 were reflective of a newly formed business compared to full operations during the year ended May 31, 2021 when the Company’s management successfully combined the acquired entities, achieved synergies, and strategically grew new business during the year.
Adjusted EBITDA
We define adjusted EBITDA to be earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, factoring fees, other income, net, stock-based compensation and expenses, merger and acquisition costs, restructuring, transition and acquisitions expense, net, goodwill impairment and certain other items.
Consolidated adjusted EBITDA for the year ended May 31, 2021 increased by approximately $9.3 million compared to the period October 28, 2019 (inception) through May 31, 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA is not a measurement of financial performance under GAAP and may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies. We present adjusted EBITDA because we believe that adjusted EBITDA is a useful supplement to net income from operations as an indicator of operating performance. We use adjusted EBITDA as a financial metric to measure the financial performance of the business because management believes it provides additional information with respect to the performance of its fundamental business activities. For this reason, we believe adjusted EBITDA will also be useful to others, including our stockholders, as a valuable financial metric.
We believe that adjusted EBITDA is a performance measure and not a liquidity measure, and therefore a reconciliation between net income from continuing operations and adjusted EBITDA has been provided in the financial results. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to income from operations or net income from operations as an indicator of performance or as an alternative to cash flows from operating activities as an indicator of cash flows, in each case as determined in accordance with GAAP, or as a measure of liquidity. In addition, adjusted EBITDA does not take into account changes in certain assets and liabilities as well as interest and income taxes that can affect cash flows. We do not intend the presentation of these non-GAAP measures to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for results prepared in accordance with GAAP. These non-GAAP measures should be read only in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Following is the reconciliation of our consolidated net income to adjusted EBITDA:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis. As a consequence of acquisition financing at inception, the Company experienced negative working capital and adverse cash flows from operations. As of May 31, 2021, the Company had cash of approximately $253,000, negative working capital of approximately $3.5 million and cash used in operations of approximately $162,000. This was a significant improvement from May 31, 2020, when its negative working capital was approximately $10.7 million.
The Company has financed its first year of operations primarily through the sale of convertible notes, PPP loans, promissory notes, and cash advances received from factoring arrangements. The negative working capital resulted primarily from increases to short term liabilities, such as trade accounts payable, PPP loans received, operating lease liability and current portion of a long-term debt incurred by the company during the acquisition. During its latest fiscal year, the Company paid down most of the acquisition related debt, received forgiveness of PPP loans and reached an agreement to exchange most of its convertible debt into common stocks. In addition, on August 4, 2021 the parties to the TBK Agreement entered into an agreement to increase the Company’s credit facility from $30 million to $40 million during the period August 4, 2021, through and including December 2, 2021.
The Company expects to turn its operating capital positive early in the upcoming fiscal year as we continue to invest in our network, products, customer development, sales and marketing activities. Management is fully aware that the Company’s business plan is dependent upon the generation of sufficient revenues from its products to offset expenses, increased cash flow from ongoing operations the collection of outstanding receivables and the restructuring of the current debt burden. Although the Company believes in the viability of management’s strategy to generate sufficient revenue, control costs and the ability to raise additional funds, if necessary, there can be no assurances to that effect. In the event that the Company does not generate sufficient cash flows from operations and is unable to obtain funding, the Company will be forced to delay, reduce, or eliminate some or all of its discretionary spending, which could adversely affect the Company’s business prospects, ability to meet long-term liquidity needs or ability to continue operations. Based on the above analysis and business performance of the Company subsequent to the balance sheet date, management has concluded that the Company’s cash and operating capital as of May 31, 2021, would be sufficient to continue as a going concern for at least one year from the date these consolidated financial statements are available for issuance.
The following table summarizes total current assets, liabilities and working capital at May 31, 2021 compared to May 31, 2020:
The change in working capital deficit is primarily attributable to an increase in trade accounts receivable of $12,437,437, an increase of contract asset of $18,586,306, an increase in factoring reserve of $6,622,941, an increase in prepaid expenses of $669,787, a decrease in accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $1,2365,301 and a decrease of $5,983,000 in the current portion of long-term debt due to related parties. These amounts were offset by a decrease in cash of $1,096,748, an increase in accounts payable - trade of $29,401,066, an increase in accrued freight of $6,926,050, an increase in the current portion of operating lease liabilities of $178,193 and an increase in the current portion of notes payable of $808,725.
Operating activities used cash of $161,906 for the year ended May 31, 2021 compared to net cash provided by operations of $1,562,052 for the period October 28, 2019 (inception) through May 31, 2020. Primary reason for cash used for the year ended May 31, 2021, was a significant increase in accounts receivables, reflecting extended credit terms, specifically as it relates to charter operations, where prepayments have to be made in advance of the upcoming flights. This cash outlays were balanced by a corresponding increase in accounts payable, reflecting company’s ability to finance operations through extended credit with diverse network of suppliers, partners and shipping companies.
Investing activities used cash of $51,489 for the year ended May 31, 2021 compared to $212,689 for the period October 28, 2019 (inception) through May 31, 2020. During the year ended May 31, 2021, investing activities consisted of purchasing computer equipment. During the period October 28, 2019 (inception) through May 31, 2020, investing activities consisted of net cash of $212,689 acquired in the acquisition of a business.
Financing activities used cash of $883,353 for the year ended May 31, 2021 and were the result of receiving aggregate gross proceeds of $5,174,902 from promissory notes and convertible notes. These proceeds were offset by payments on notes payable and related party debt of $858,330 and $5,149,925, respectively. In addition, the Company paid debt issuance costs of $50,000 in relation to the issuance of convertible notes.
Adoption of Recent Accounting Standards
In October 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-16, “Income Taxes (Topic 740): Intra-Entity Transfers of Assets Other than Inventory”, which eliminates the exception that prohibits the recognition of current and deferred income tax effects for intra-entity transfers of assets other than inventory until the asset has been sold to an outside party. The updated guidance is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption of the update is permitted. The Company adopted the new standard on June 1, 2020. The adoption of the new standard did not have a significant impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-04, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment, that simplifies the subsequent measurement of goodwill by eliminating Step 2 of the goodwill impairment test. The Step 2 test requires an entity to calculate the implied fair value of goodwill to measure a goodwill impairment charge. Instead, an entity will record an impairment charge based on the excess of a reporting unit’s carrying value over its fair value determined in Step 1. This update also eliminates the qualitative assessment requirements for a reporting unit with zero or negative carrying value. The Company adopted the standard upon its inception.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, “Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework-Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement”. This update is to improve the effectiveness of disclosures in the notes to the financial statements by facilitating clear communication of the information required by U.S. GAAP that is most important to users of each entity’s financial statements. The amendments in this update apply to all entities that are required, under existing U.S. GAAP, to make disclosures about recurring or nonrecurring fair value measurements. The amendments in this update are effective for all entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, and interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company adopted this standard on June 1, 2020 and the adoption of the new standard did not have a significant impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326), Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, and has subsequently issued several amendments (collectively, “ASU 2016-13”). ASU 2106-13 adds to U.S. GAAP an impairment model (known as the current expected credit loss model) that is based on expected losses rather than incurred losses. Under the new guidance, an entity recognizes as an allowance its estimate of expected credit losses. ASU 2016-13 will be effective for smaller reporting companies for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022. Earlier application is permitted only for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company is currently evaluating the potential impact of this standard on its consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued authoritative guidance intended to simplify the accounting for income taxes (ASU 2019-12, “Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes”). This guidance eliminates certain exceptions to the general approach to the income tax accounting model and adds new guidance to reduce the complexity in accounting for income taxes. This guidance is effective for annual periods after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those annual periods. The Company is currently evaluating the potential impact of this guidance on its consolidated financial statements.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06- Debt- ”Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity”. This ASU amends the guidance on convertible instruments and the derivatives scope exception for contracts in an entity’s own equity, and also improves and amends the related EPS guidance for both Subtopics. The ASU will be effective for annual reporting periods after December 15, 2021 and interim periods within those annual periods and early adoption is permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of the new guidance on its consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
Accounting policies, methods and estimates are an integral part of the condensed consolidated financial statements prepared by management and are based upon management’s current judgments. These judgments are normally based on knowledge and experience regarding past and current events and assumptions about future events. Certain accounting policies, methods and estimates are particularly sensitive because of their significance to the financial statements and because of the possibility that future events affecting them may differ from management’s current judgments. While there are a number of accounting policies, methods and estimates that affect our condensed consolidated financial statements, the areas that are particularly significant include revenue recognition; the fair value of acquired assets and liabilities; fair value of contingent consideration; the assessment of the recoverability of long-lived assets, goodwill and intangible assets; and leases.
We perform an impairment test of goodwill for each year unless events or circumstances indicate impairment may have occurred before that time. We assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying amount. After assessing qualitative factors, if further testing is necessary, we would determine the fair value of each reporting unit and compare the fair value to the reporting unit’s carrying amount.
Intangible assets consist of customer relationships, trade names and trademarks and non-compete agreements arising from our acquisitions. Customer relationships are amortized on a straight-line basis over 12 to 15 years. Tradenames, trademarks and non-compete agreements, are amortized on a straight-line basis over 3 to 10 years.
We review long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. If the sum of the undiscounted expected future cash flows over the remaining useful life of a long-lived asset is less than its carrying amount, the asset is considered to be impaired. Impairment losses are measured as the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. When fair values are not available, we estimate fair value using the expected future cash flows discounted at a rate commensurate with the risks associated with the recovery of the asset. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell.
For the year ended May 31, 2021 and the period from October 28, 2019 (inception) through May 31, 2020, the Company conducted its annual review of impairment of goodwill and intangible assets and no impairment was identified.
Our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 1 of our consolidated financial statements.