ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K beginning on page. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Investors should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are based on current expectations and actual results could differ materially from those discussed herein. Factors that could cause or contribute to the differences are discussed in Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results could differ materially from those predicted in these forward-looking statements, and the events anticipated in the forward-looking statements may not actually occur. Although we believe that the expectations reflected in these forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements. We are under no duty to update any of the forward-looking statements after the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K to conform these statements to actual results or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events, unless required by applicable laws or regulations.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues- For the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated revenues from continuing operations of approximately $14.29 million, compared to approximately $16.49 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $2.20 million. The year-over-year decrease was driven by a dispensary revenue decline of $5.98 million which was partially offset by cultivation and manufacturing revenue increases of which totaled $3.78 million. The dispensary revenue was hit by a customer traffic decline from COVID-19 and six combined months of store closures for our two Bay area dispensaries due to civil unrest.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin- Our gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $3.60 million, compared to a gross profit of approximately, $10.35 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $6.75 million. Our gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately 25.2%, compared to approximately 62.8% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Most of the gross profit decrease came about because of less year-over-year dispensary revenue as well as higher cost of sales in our cultivation and production operations.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses- Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were approximately $24.60 million, compared to approximately $36.68 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $12.08 million. In general the decrease was due to costs driven out of the company as we narrowed our focus onto a few key assets. The following areas were examples of this:(i) a $3.162 million decrease in salaries / payroll taxes, (ii) a $2.47 million decrease in option expense, (iii) a $1.57 million decrease in allowance for doubtful accounts, (iv) a $1.49 million decrease in advertising & promotion expense, (v) a $0.53 million decrease in insurance expense, (vi) a $0.49 million decrease in legal fees, (vii) a $0.47 million decrease in amortization expense, (viii) a $0.45 million decrease in accounting fees, and (ix) a $0.44 million decrease in consulting and other professional fees.
Other Operating Gain/Expense - Other operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were approximately $19.88 million, compared to Other expenses of $8.58 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase in $11.30 million.The 2020 activity was driven by goodwill impairment charges of $19.91 million.
Other Income / (Expense) - Other income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $27.08 million, compared to other expense of $9.24 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $36.32 million. The year-over-year improvement was due to (i) 2020 income driven by the mark-to-market of the company’s investment in Hydrofarm Holdings, a $29.04 million unrealized gain, and (ii) a $6.36 million reduction in interest expense.
Management will continue its efforts to lower operating expenses and increase revenue. We will continue to invest in further expanding our operations and a comprehensive marketing campaign with the goal of accelerating the education of potential clients and promoting our name and our products. Given that most of the operating expenses are fixed or have a quasi-fixed character, management expects that, as revenue increases, those expenses, as a percentage of revenue, will significantly decrease. Nevertheless, there can be no assurance that we will be able to increase our revenues in succeeding quarters.
Going Concern
We have incurred significant losses in prior periods. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred a net loss of $30.12 million and, as of that date, we had an accumulated deficit of $219.80 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred a net loss of $46.93 million and, as of that date, we had an accumulated deficit of $189.69 million. We expect to experience further significant net losses in 2021 and the foreseeable future. At December 31, 2020, we had a cash balance of approximately $0.89 million, compared to a cash balance of approximately $1.23 million at December 31, 2019. We have not been able to generate sufficient cash from operating activities to fund our ongoing operations. Since our inception, we have raised capital through private sales of common stock, and debt securities. Our future success is dependent upon our ability to achieve profitable operations and generate cash from operating activities. Management feels that our past and current efforts to trim cost and our recent marketing and promotional efforts to boost sales will lead to cash sustainability. There is no guarantee that we will be able to generate enough revenue and/or raise capital to support our operations.
We anticipate receiving approximately $18 million over the next fifteen months as compensation for asset sales. In addition, we own shares of Hydrofarm stock that come off lock-up on June 9, 2021, the current value of which is $60.75 million. We anticipate these cash in-flows and acquisitions of complementary businesses to allow for our operations to grow to cash sustainability.
Given the risks and uncertainties regarding the future of our business due to COVID-19 and regulatory uncertainty, as well as our historical lack of profitability, there is doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern for twelve months from the issuance of these financial statements. However, management’s planned operational and investment remedies have mitigated the doubt. The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, which contemplate our continuation as a going concern. For additional information, see Item 1A - “Risk Factors”in Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Sources and Uses of Cash
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $10.09 million, compared to approximately $12.51 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $2.42 million decrease in cash used was due to management’s efforts to conserve cash. Similar to 2019 when the company was waiting for the state of Nevada to approve our pending asset transfers, in 2020 management made every effort to conserve cash to persevere through the impact of COVID-19 and civil unrest.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $11.80 million, compared to $0.63 million for the year ended 2019, an increase of $11.17 million. This increase was driven by proceeds from sales of assets and collections on notes receivables.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $2.70 million, compared to $8.14 million for the prior year. This is a decrease of $5.44 million year-over-year. The cash provided by financing activities in 2020 was predominantly from issuance of notes payable. The cash provided by financing activities in fiscal 2019 was primarily due to $13.00 million proceeds from the issuance of notes payable and $4.50 million from the sale of Common Stock and warrants. The Company also had a cash outflow related to the purchase of $6.25 million related to the purchase of an unaffiliated third parties interest in MediFarm I, MediFarm II, and MediFarm I RE
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies
We disclose those accounting policies that we consider to be significant in determining the amounts to be utilized for communicating our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows in Note 2 - “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere herein. Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with these principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results are likely to differ from these estimates, but management does not believe such differences will materially affect our financial position or results of operations.
See Note 2 -“Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,”to our Financial Statements for further information on accounting policies that we believe to be critical, including our policies on:
Business Combinations
Revenue Recognition
Stock-Based Compensation
Notes Receivable
Goodwill
Long-Lived and Intangible Assets
Valuation of Inventory
Deferred Income Taxes
Fair Value Estimates
Recently Adopted and Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 2 - “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”to our Financial Statements for information regarding accounting standards adopted in 2019 and other new accounting standards that were issued but not effective as of December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that have a significant impact on the results that we report in our financial statements. A critical accounting estimate is defined as one that is both material to the presentation of our financial statements and requires management to make difficult, subjective, or complex judgments that could have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
Estimates and assumptions about future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions believed to be applicable and reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates may change as new events occur, as additional information is obtained and as our operating environment changes. Based on a critical assessment of our accounting policies and the underlying judgments and uncertainties affecting the application of those policies, management believes that our financial statements are fairly stated in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States and present a meaningful presentation of our financial condition and results of operations.
Our critical accounting estimates include:
·
Assumption as a going concern
·
Valuation of long-lived assets, including intangible assets and goodwill
·
Valuation of investments, including equity instruments
·
Valuation allowance for deferred tax assets
Below, we discuss this policy further, as well as the estimates and judgments involved. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Going Concern
Management assumes that the Company will continue as a going concern, which contemplates continuity of operations, realization of assets, and liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets, Including Intangible Assets and Goodwill
We carry a variety of long-lived assets on our balance sheet including property, plant and equipment, goodwill, and other intangibles. Impairment is the condition that exists when the carrying amount of a long-lived asset exceeds its fair value, and any impairment charge that we record reduces our operating income. Goodwill is the excess of the cost of an acquired entity over the net of the amounts assigned to assets acquired and liabilities assumed. We conduct impairment tests on goodwill annually as of September 30, or more frequently whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate an impairment may exist. We conduct impairment tests on long-lived assets, other than goodwill, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Long-lived assets other than goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, held and used by the Company are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. The Company evaluates recoverability of assets to be held and used and if the carrying value is not recoverable, management estimates the fair value of the asset and compares it to the carrying value. If the asset is considered to be impaired, the impairment loss is measured as the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its fair value. Management determines the asset’s fair value utilizing estimates such as management’s short-term and long-term forecast of operating performance, the remaining useful life and service potential of the asset.
We perform our annual trade name impairment assessment by comparing the estimated fair value of the trade name to the carrying value. We utilize the Relief from Royalty method, which utilizes estimates and assumptions that include management’s revenue forecast, royalty rates avoided, and a discount rate based on the Company’s estimated cost of equity. In selecting appropriate royalty and discount rates, comparable public companies and royalty transactions are examined. Selection of appropriate comparable companies and royalty transactions involves a significant amount of judgement.
We perform our annual goodwill impairment assessment for the Black Oak Gallery reporting unit by comparing the estimated fair value of the reporting unit to the carrying value. We utilized the Guideline Public Company valuation method, which evaluates the prices paid for publicly traded company equities as the basis to determine the fair value of the subject company. The analysis involves significant assumptions regarding the selection of comparable public companies, revenue multiple, and control premium. When performing tests for impairment in between annual tests, management may at times use alternative approaches to estimating the fair value of the Black Oak Gallery reporting unit. These approaches consider trends in the Company’s overall market capitalization and operating results.
Valuation of Equity Instruments
As of December 31, 2020, the Company owned 593,261 common shares of Hydrofarm, a public company trading on the Nasdaq Global Select Market under the ticker symbol “HYFM.” The Company’s investment in Hydrofarm is stated at fair value and is presented in the “Short term investments” line within the consolidated balance sheet. As the Hydrofarm shares held by the Company are restricted from sale for a period of 180 days from the date of Hydrofarm’s initial public offering, the fair value of the Company’s investment is estimated utilizing the market price of the common shares at the end of each reporting period, less a discount for lack of marketability. The discount for marketability was estimated upon consideration of volatility and the length of the lock-up period.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company held 296,630 warrants to purchase one share of Hydrofarm’s common stock, with an exercise price of $16.86 per share. As the underlying shares are restricted from sale for a period of 180 days from the date of Hydrofarm’s initial public offering, the fair value of the warrants are estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model less a discount for lack of marketability. The discount for lack of marketability is estimated upon consideration of the volatility of the stock price and the remaining length of the lock-up period.
Valuation Allowance for Deferred Tax Assets
Management assumes that the realization of the Company’s net deferred tax assets resulting from its net operating loss (“NOL”) carry-forwards for Federal income tax purposes that may be offset against future taxable income was not considered more likely than not and accordingly, the potential tax benefits of the net loss carry-forwards are offset by a full valuation allowance. Management made this assumption based on the Company’s historical losses and the general economic conditions impacting our industry.