Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a Private-to-Public Equity (PPE) company, also known as a blank check company or special purpose acquisition vehicle, incorporated in the State of Delaware and formed for the purpose of acquiring, engaging in a share exchange, share reconstruction and amalgamation with, purchasing all or substantially all of the assets of, or engaging in any other similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. We intend to effectuate our initial Business Combination using cash from the proceeds from the sale of units in our initial public offering (the “Offering”), the sale of the Private Placement Units to our Founders and the sale of the Private Underwriter Shares to one of our underwriters, both of which occurred simultaneously with the completion of the Offering, our common equity or any preferred equity that we may create in accordance with the terms of our charter documents, debt, or a combination of cash, common or preferred equity and debt. The units sold in the Offering each consisted of one share of Common Stock, one warrant to purchase one share of Common Stock, and one right to receive one-twentieth (1/20) of one share of Common Stock upon or consummation of our initial Business Combination. The Private Placement Units were substantially similar to the units sold in the Offering, but for certain differences in the warrants included in each of them. For clarity, the warrants included in the units are referred to herein as the “public warrants”, and the warrants included in the Private Placement Units are referred to herein as the “private warrants.”
The issuance of additional shares of Common Stock or the creation of one or more classes of preferred stock during our initial Business Combination:
•
may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in the offering who would not have pre-emption rights in respect of any such issue;
•
may subordinate the rights of holders of Common Stock if the rights, preferences, designations and limitations attaching to the preferred shares are senior to those afforded our shares of Common Stock;
•
could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of Common Stock are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
•
may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the share ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
•
may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our shares of Common Stock.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant indebtedness, it could result in:
•
default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after our initial Business Combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
•
acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
•
our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt is payable on demand;
•
our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if any document governing such debt contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
•
our inability to pay dividends on our shares of Common Stock;
•
using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our Common Stock if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
•
limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
•
increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
•
limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
We expect to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial Business Combination will be successful.
We had until December 10, 2020 to complete a Business Combination. On December 8, 2020, after approval by our stockholders of Extension Amendment No. 1 at our annual meeting of stockholders, we filed the Extension Amendment No. 1 to our current Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation to extend the date by which we had to consummate an initial Business Combination from December 10, 2020 to March 10, 2021. In connection with Extension Amendment No. 1, an aggregate 579,881 shares of the Company’s Common Stock were redeemed, and $5,857,340 was withdrawn out of the Trust Account to pay for such redemption leaving approximately $168.4 million remaining in our Trust Account as of December 31, 2020 to consummate a Business Combination.
On March 10, 2021, the Company held a special meeting of its stockholders (the “Special Meeting”). At the Special Meeting, the Company’s stockholders approved Extension Amendment No. 2. The certificate of amendment was filed with the Delaware Secretary of State and has an effective date of March 10, 2021. In connection with this Extension Amendment No. 2, an aggregate 1,852,804 shares of the Company’s Common Stock were redeemed, and $18,715,459 was withdrawn out of the Trust Account to pay for such redemption leaving approximately $149.6 million remaining in our Trust Account to consummate a Business Combination.
Results of Operations and Known Trends or Future Events
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. For the period from March 6, 2019 (date of inception) through December 31, 2020, our only activities have been organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Offering and to identify a target business for the Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and marketable securities held in the trust account at UBS Financial Services, Inc. in New York, New York with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee (the “Trust Account”), which was funded after the Offering to hold an amount of cash and marketable securities equal to that raised in the Offering. Due to the recent impact from the COVID-19 pandemic that started in March 2020, many investors sold U.S. treasuries to meet their investment objectives, including but not limited to, the purchase of depressed equities, the forced sale by losses on other positions, and the need to settle short-term debts. This created volatility in the financial markets and reduced return on investments in U.S. treasury bills. As a result, we shifted our investment portfolio held in the Trust Account from U.S. treasury bills to money market funds in May 2020. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $3,198,141, which consisted of operating expenses of $3,949,600 and a provision for income taxes of $271,087 partially offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $1,022,546.
For the period from March 6, 2019 (date of inception) through December 31, 2019, we had a net income of $360,451 which consisted of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $1,872,701, which was partially offset by operating expenses of $953,436 and a provision for income taxes of $558,814.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On June 10, 2019, we consummated the initial closing of the Offering with the delivery of 15,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $150,000,000. Simultaneously with the initial closing of the Offering, we consummated the initial closing of the Private Placement with the sale of 492,500 Private Placement Units at a price of $10.00 per unit and the sale of 100,000 Private Underwriter Shares at a price of $10.00 per share, generating aggregated gross proceeds of $5,925,000.
On June 13, 2019, in connection with the underwriters’ exercise in full of their option to purchase an additional 2,250,000 units solely to cover over-allotments, if any (the “over-allotment option”), we consummated the sale of an additional 2,250,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $22,500,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the sale of such additional units, the Company consummated the second closing of the Private Placement resulting in the sale of an additional 75,000 Private Placement Units at a price of $10.00 per unit and the sale of 20,000 Private Underwriter Shares at a price of $10.00 per share, generating aggregated gross proceeds of $950,000.
Following the initial and second closings of the Offering and the Private Placement, a total of $172,500,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $4,332,430 in offering related costs, including $3,450,000 of underwriting fees and $882,430 of other costs.
As of December 31, 2020, we held cash and marketable securities in the Trust Account of $168,384,949 (including $2,895,247 of interest income earned, less $1,152,958 withdrawn from the interest earned on the Trust Account to pay tax obligations and $5,857,340 on redemptions) in the Trust Account. The marketable securities consisted of money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act of 1940 which invest only in direct U.S. government obligations. Interest income earned from the funds held in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we withdrew $774,840 from the interest earned on the Trust Account to pay tax obligations.
As of December 31, 2019, we held cash and marketable securities in the Trust Account of $173,994,583 (including $1,872,701 of interest earned) in the Trust Account. The marketable securities consisted of U.S. treasury bills with a maturity of 180 days or less. Interest income earned from the funds held in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. For the period March 6, 2019 (date of inception) through December 31, 2019, we withdrew $378,118 from the interest earned on the Trust Account to pay tax obligations.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $2,064,391, consisting of a net loss of $3,198,141, interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $1,022,546, partially offset by changes in operating assets and liabilities of $2,156,296, including the increase in accrued liabilities of $2,153,000 and decreases in prepaid expenses, receivable from related party and other non-current assets of $132,797 and an increase in accounts payable of $52,135 partially offset by decreases in payable to related party and other current liabilities of $181,636.
For the period March 6, 2019 (date of inception) through December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $1,477,400, consisting of interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $1,872,701, partially offset by net income of $360,451 and changes in operating assets and liabilities of $34,850.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (which interest shall be net of taxes payable by us), to acquire a target business or businesses to complete our initial Business Combination and to pay our expenses relating thereto. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. We estimate our annual franchise tax obligations to be approximately $200,000. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the Trust Account. To the extent that our capital stock is used in whole or in part as consideration to effect our initial Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account as well as any other net proceeds not expended will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses. Such working capital funds could be used in a variety of ways including continuing or expanding the target business’ operations, for strategic acquisitions and for marketing, research and development of existing or new products. Such funds could also be used to repay any operating expenses or finders’ fees which we had incurred prior to the completion of our initial business combination if the funds available to us outside of the Trust Account were insufficient to cover such expenses.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had cash of $478,737 and $1,576,508, respectively, held outside the Trust Account. In December 2020, we raised additional funds to ensure the proceeds not held in the Trust Account will be sufficient to allow us to operate for at least 24 months from the closing date of the Offering, assuming that a Business Combination is not consummated during that time. Over this time period, we intend to use these funds primarily for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combinations.
If our estimates of the costs of undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating our initial Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to consummate our initial Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our initial Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. In order to finance operating and/or transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor, executive officers, directors, or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds. In the event that our initial Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units of the post-business combination entity at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the Private Placement Units.
Following our initial Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
On November 2, 2020, the Company filed a definitive proxy statement with the SEC, to invite the stockholders of the Company to attend the 2020 annual meeting Annual Meeting to be held on December 3, 2020. At the Annual Meeting, the stockholders voted on Extension Amendment No.1 to extend the date by which the Company must consummate a Business Combination from December 10, 2020 to March 10, 2021 (the date which is 21 months from the closing date of the IPO).
On March 10, 2021, the Company held a special meeting of its stockholders (the “Special Meeting”). At the Special Meeting, the Company’s stockholders approved Extension Amendment No. 2. The certificate of amendment was filed with the Delaware Secretary of State and has an effective date of March 10, 2021.
If the Company is unable to consummate its initial Business Combination by June 10, 2021, the Company shall (i) cease all operations except for the purposes of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible, but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares of Common Stock for a per share pro rata portion
of the Trust Account, including interest, but less taxes payable (less up to $100,000 of such net interest to pay dissolution expenses) and (iii) as promptly as possible following such redemption, dissolve and liquidate the balance of the Company’s net assets to its creditors and remaining stockholders, as part of its plan of dissolution and liquidation. The mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay our Sponsor a monthly fee of $20,000 for office space, administrative services and secretarial support. We began incurring these fees on June 6, 2019 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination or the liquidation of the Company.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Emerging Growth Company
Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. We have elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when an accounting standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, we, as an emerging growth company, will adopt the new or revised accounting standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard.
Net Loss Per Common Share
Net loss per share of Common Stock is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted-average number of shares of Common Stock outstanding for the period. We apply the two-class method in calculating the net loss per common share. Shares of Common Stock subject to possible redemption as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 have been excluded from the calculation of the basic net loss per share since such shares, if redeemed, only participate in their pro rata share of the Trust Account earnings. When calculating our diluted net loss per share, we have not considered the effect of (i) the incremental number of shares of Common Stock to settle warrants sold in the Offering and Private Placement, as calculated using the treasury stock method; (ii) the contingently issuable shares associated with the rights sold in the Offering and Private Placement to receive one-twentieth (1/20) of one share of Common Stock upon the consummation of our initial Business Combination, and (iii) the insider shares issued to the former Chief Financial Officer representing 5,000 shares of Common Stock underlying restricted stock awards for the period they were outstanding. Since we were in a net loss position during the periods after deducting net income
attributable to Common Stock subject to redemption, diluted net loss per common share is the same as basic net loss per common share for the periods presented as the inclusion of all potential common shares outstanding would have been anti-dilutive.
In accordance with the two-class method, our net income (loss) is adjusted for net income that is attributable to common stock subject to redemption, as these shares only participate in the income of the Trust Account and not our losses. Accordingly, net loss per common share, basic and diluted, is calculated as follows:
Common Stock subject to possible redemption
Common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Common Stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, Common Stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
We do not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.