Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in Item 1A: “Risk Factors.”
This section and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements may be identified by the use of forward-looking words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “may,” “will,” “continue,” “seek,” “estimate,” “intend,” “hope,” “predict,” “could,” “should,” “would,” “project,” “plan,” “expect” or the negative or plural of these words or similar expressions, although not all forward-looking statements contain these words. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and our actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the subsection entitled Item 1A: “Risk Factors” above, which are incorporated herein by reference. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Item 8: “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. All information presented herein is based on our fiscal calendar. Unless otherwise stated, references in this report to particular years or quarters refer to our fiscal years ended December 31 and the associated quarters of those fiscal years. We assume no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by law.
Overview
We provide cloud-based enterprise work management software. We define enterprise work management software as software applications that enable organizations to plan, manage and execute projects and work. Our family of applications enables users to manage their projects, professional workforce and IT investments, automate document-intensive business processes, and effectively engage with their customers, prospects, and community via the web and mobile technologies.
The continued growth of an information-based economy has given rise to a large and growing group of knowledge workers who operate in dynamic work environments as part of geographically dispersed and virtual teams. We believe that manual processes and legacy on- premise enterprise systems are insufficient to address the needs of the modern work environment. In order for knowledge workers to be successful, they need to interact with intuitive enterprise work systems in a collaborative way, including real-time access. Today, legacy processes and systems are being disrupted and replaced by cloud-based enterprise work management software that improves visibility, collaboration and productivity.
In response to these changes, we are providing organizations and their knowledge workers with software applications that better align resources with business objectives and increase visibility, governance, collaboration, quality of customer experience, and responsiveness to changes in the business environment. This results in increased work capacity, higher productivity, better execution, and greater levels of customer engagement. Our applications are easy-to-use, scalable, and offer real-time collaboration for knowledge workers distributed on a local or global scale. Our software applications address diverse enterprise work challenges and our customers currently use our applications in the following functional areas:
•Marketing. Digital marketing, e-commerce, and customer service teams use our applications to interact with consumers across multiple channels to acquire new customers, drive product and service utilization, resolve issues, and build brand loyalty. Our applications deliver value to CX-focused organizations across a variety of use cases including mobile messaging, mobile application marketing, VoC, email marketing, knowledge management and call center productivity. Our teams bring deep industry experience in orchestrating campaigns and interactions that consumers want and value.
•Sales. Sales teams employ our applications to drive growth through deeper customer engagement, reduced sales cycle times, and overall improved collaboration between sales, marketing, and other customer-facing functions. We offer applications that help organizations optimize their sales opportunity and account management processes, coordinate proposal and reference activities, collaborate on the creation and publication of digital content, and gain increased control over key sales and marketing workflows, activities, and budgets.
•Contact Center. Customer service and support environments use our applications to enable agents to resolve issues and engage customers. We offer applications that improve customer experience and reduce call volume and cycle times through customer self-service products and VoC technology that captures customer sentiment in real-time. Upland also offers products that improve call center agent productivity by providing more direct access to knowledge and to customer sentiment thereby improving both inbound call outcomes and proactive outbound success. Additional solutions help call center leadership to manage agent performance and measure real-time performance relative to call resolution and customer sentiment, improve performance through gamification, and gather agent feedback to keep employee engagement high.
•Project Management. Business leaders and PMOs use our applications to optimize project portfolios, balance capacity against demand, improve financial-based decision making, align execution of projects to strategy across large organizations, and manage the entire project delivery lifecycle. Our applications deliver value to project management across a variety of use cases including continuous improvement, enterprise IT, new product development, and services departments along with industry depth in higher education, public sector, and healthcare IT.
•Information Technology. IT departments use our applications to manage a variety of IT activities and resources across the enterprise. Our applications help information technology departments ensure they are delivering against the objectives of the business by helping them select and prioritize the right investments, gain greater control of resource demand and allocation, and track and report benefit realization. Our applications enable executives to gain better insight into IT spending to help prevent cost overruns and understand the nature of consumption.
•Business Operations. Multiple functional departments use our applications to streamline operations and accelerate business performance across their value chains. Upland solutions in this area range from supply chain collaboration and factory management, back office document and vendor management, to applications that improve sales responsiveness.
•Human Resources and Legal. HR, legal departments, and law firms use our applications to improve collaboration and operational control and streamline routine processes. We offer applications that automate document management and workflow including, contracts, records, and other documentation that require enhanced security and compliance requirements. Other applications support HR-specific workflows including onboarding, employee management, termination, HR support, and time and expense management.
We sell our software applications primarily through a direct sales organization comprised of inside sales and field sales personnel. In addition to our direct sales organization, we have an indirect sales organization, which sells to distributors and value-added resellers. We employ a land-and-expand go-to-market strategy. After we demonstrate the value of an initial application to a customer, our sales and account management teams work to expand the adoption of that initial application across the customer, as well as cross-sell additional applications to address other enterprise work management needs of the customer. Our customer success organization supports our direct sales efforts by managing the post-sale customer lifecycle.
Our subscription agreements are typically sold either on a per-seat basis or on a minimum contracted volume basis with overage fees billed in arrears, depending on the application being sold. We service customers ranging from large global corporations and government agencies to small- and medium-sized businesses. We have more than 10,000 customers with over 1,000,000 users across a broad range of industries, including financial services, consulting services, technology, manufacturing, media, telecommunications, government and political, non-profit, healthcare and life sciences, retail, and hospitality.
Through a series of acquisitions and integrations, we have established a diverse family of software applications under the Upland brand and in the product solution categories listed above, each of which addresses a specific enterprise work management need. Our revenue has grown from $98.0 million in 2017 to $291.8 million in 2020, representing a cumulative annual growth rate of 44%. During the year ended December 31, 2020 domestic revenue as a percent of total revenue increased to 74% compared to 70% during the year ended December 31, 2019. See Note 13 Revenue Recognition in the notes to consolidated financial statements for more information regarding our revenue as it relates to domestic and foreign operations.
Our operating results in a given period can fluctuate based on the mix of subscription and support, perpetual license and professional services revenue. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, our subscription and support revenue accounted for 95%, 92%, and 91%, respectively of our total revenue. Historically, we have sold certain of our applications under perpetual licenses, which also are paid in advance. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, our perpetual license revenue accounted for 1%, 3%, and 3% of our total revenue, respectively. The support agreements related to our perpetual licenses are one-year in duration and entitle the customer to support and unspecified upgrades. The revenue related to such support agreements is included as part of our subscription and support revenue. Professional services revenue consists of fees related to implementation, data extraction, integration and configuration and training on our applications. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, our professional services revenue accounted for 4%, 5%, and 6%, respectively.
To support continued growth, we intend to pursue acquisitions of complementary technologies, products and businesses. This will expand our product families, customer base, and market access, resulting in increased benefits of scale. We will prioritize acquisitions within our current enterprise solution categories as described in Item 1. Business herein. Consistent with our growth strategy, we have made a total of 26 acquisitions from February 2012 through December 31, 2020.
Acquisitions completed during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 include the following:
2020 Acquisitions
•Localytics - On February 6, 2020, the Company entered into an agreement to purchase the shares comprising the entire issued share capital of Char Software, Inc (dba Localytics), a Delaware corporation (“Localytics”), a provider of mobile app personalization and analytics solutions. Revenues recorded since the acquisition date through December 31, 2020 were approximately $16.3 million.
2019 Acquisitions
•Postup - On April 18, 2019, the Company completed its purchase of the shares comprising the entire issued share capital of Postup Holdings, LLC, a Texas limited liability company (“Postup Holdings”), and Postup Digital, LLC, a Texas limited liability company (“Postup Digital”), an Austin-based company providing email and audience development solutions for publishing & media brands.
•Kapost - On May 24, 2019, the Company completed of its purchase of the shares comprising the entire issued share capital of Daily Inches, Inc., d/b/a Kapost, a Delaware corporation (“Kapost”), a content operations platform provider for sales and marketing.
•Cimpl - On August 21, 2019, the Company completed its purchase of the shares comprising the entire issued share capital of Cimpl, Inc., a Canadian corporation (“Cimpl”), a cloud-based telecom expense management platform.
•InGenius - On October 1, 2019, the Company completed its purchase of the shares comprising the entire issued share capital of InGenius Software Inc., a Canadian corporation (“InGenius”), a Computer Telephony Integration (CTI) solution for enterprise contact centers.
•Altify - On October 4, 2019, the Company’s wholly owned subsidiary, PowerSteering Software Limited, a limited company incorporated under the laws of England and Wales (“PowerSteering UK”), entered into an agreement to purchase the shares comprising the entire issued share capital of Altify Ireland Limited, a private company limited by shares organized and existing under the laws of Ireland (“Altify”), a customer revenue optimization (CRO) cloud solution for sales and the extended revenue teams.
2018 Acquisitions
•Interfax - On March 21, 2018, the Company’s wholly owned subsidiary, PowerSteering Software Limited, a limited liability company organized and existing under the laws of England and Wales (“PowerSteering UK”), completed its purchase of the shares comprising the entire issued share capital of Interfax Communications Limited (“Interfax”), an Irish-based software company providing secured cloud-based messaging solutions, including enterprise cloud fax and secure document distribution. In connection with this acquisition, the Company also acquired certain assets related to Interfax’s business from a United States based reseller of Interfax’s products.
•RO Innovation - On June 27, 2018, the Company completed its purchase of RO Innovation, Inc. (“RO Innovation”), a cloud-based customer reference solution for creating, deploying, managing, and measuring customer reference and sales enablement content.
•Rant & Rave - On October 3, 2018, the Company’s wholly owned subsidiary, PowerSteering UK, completed its purchase of the shares comprising the entire issued share capital of Rapide Communication LTD, a private company limited by shares organized and existing under the laws of England and Wales doing business as Rant & Rave (“Rant & Rave”), a leading provider of cloud-based customer engagement solutions.
•Adestra - On December 12, 2018, the Company completed its purchase of Adestra Ltd. (“Adestra”), a leading provider of enterprise-grade email marketing, transaction and automation software.
COVID-19 Impact
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 a pandemic, which continues to spread throughout the U.S. and the world and has resulted in authorities implementing numerous measures to contain the virus, including travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, and business limitations and shutdowns. We cannot predict the extent to which the COVID-19 outbreak will impact our business or operating results, which is highly dependent on inherently uncertain future developments, including the severity of COVID-19 and the actions taken by governments and private businesses in relation to COVID-19 containment. As our software applications are offered as subscription-based services, the effect of the outbreak may not be fully reflected in our operating results until future periods, if at all. As of the date of this report, we do not yet know the extent of the negative impact on our ability to attract, serve, retain or upsell customers. Furthermore, existing and potential customers may choose to reduce or delay technology spending in response to the COVID-19 outbreak, or attempt to renegotiate contracts and obtain concessions, which may materially and negatively impact our operating results, financial condition and prospects.
As a result of the pandemic, Upland has taken certain measures to support the health and well-being of our employees, customers, partners and communities during this time of uncertainty. Prior to the wide-spread implementation of stay-at-home measures, approximately 60 percent of our employee and contractor workforce was already remote. This enabled us to quickly convert the entire company to remote work status to ensure the safety of our employees, while still allowing us to continue serving our customers without disruption. In addition, while we typically host virtual user conferences for our customers, we do not anticipate hosting any in person user group meetings for at least the first half of 2021.
As approximately 95% of our revenue is associated with recurring revenue, with minimal organic growth assumptions, the disruptions related to the pandemic did not have a material adverse impact on our financial results for the year ended December 31, 2020. While we have limited exposure to the industry verticals that have been hardest hit by the pandemic (including the travel, transportation, entertainment and retail industries) we have seen an impact to new bookings and churn which we attribute to COVID-19. The continued impacted to bookings and churn is uncertain. In 2020, the impact to new bookings and churn attributable to COVID-19 has been more than offset by strength in our cloud offerings that enable our customers to digitally transform their organizations at a time when they must adapt to remote work and digital engagement even more quickly and strong sales into political campaigns in the US, which will decrease in 2021. We expect that current cash and cash equivalent balances and cash flows generated from operations will be sufficient to meet our domestic and international working capital needs for at least the next 12 months.
During the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020 we paused our acquisition activity in order to gauge the overall economic impact of the pandemic and focus on evaluating our pipeline of opportunities. This resulted in a steady decrease in acquisition related expenses over this period. With acquisition activity picking up again in the first quarter of 2021, including the acquisition of Second Street in January 2021, these quarterly acquisition related expenses will increase in proportion to the size, timing and complexity of future acquisitions.
Key Metrics
In addition to the GAAP financial measures described below in “Components of Operating Results,” we regularly review the following key metrics to evaluate and identify trends in our business, measure our performance, prepare financial projections and make strategic decisions (in thousands of dollars, except %):
(1)Annualized recurring revenue value at year-end. The value as of December 31 equals the monthly value of our recurring revenue contracts measured as of December 31 multiplied by 12. This measure excludes the revenue value of uncontracted overage fees, on-demand service fees and certain divested and/or sunseted minor non-strategic customer contracts and related website management and analytics assets (collectively referred to as the “Sunset Assets”). Refer to Note 3, Acquisitions and Note 5, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets in our consolidated financial statements for further discussion.
(2)Annual net dollar retention rate. We define annual net dollar retention rate as of December 31 as the aggregate annualized recurring revenue value at December 31 from those customers that were also customers as of December 31 of the prior fiscal year, divided by the aggregate annualized recurring revenue value from all customers as of December 31 of the prior fiscal year. This measure excludes the revenue value of uncontracted overage fees, on-demand service fees and our Sunset Assets.
(3)Adjusted EBITDA. We monitor our Adjusted EBITDA to help us evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of our operations. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss), calculated in accordance with GAAP, plus depreciation and amortization expense, interest expense, net, other expense (income), net, loss on debt extinguishment, provision for income taxes, stock-based compensation expense, acquisition-related expenses, non-recurring litigation costs, and purchase accounting adjustments for deferred revenue.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA
The following table presents a reconciliation of net loss from continuing operations, the most comparable GAAP measure, to Adjusted EBITDA for each of the periods indicated (in thousands).
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to management, investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results for the following reasons:
•Adjusted EBITDA is widely used by investors and securities analysts to measure a company’s operating performance without regard to items that can vary substantially from company to company depending upon their financing, capital structures and the method by which assets were acquired;
•our management uses Adjusted EBITDA in conjunction with GAAP financial measures for planning purposes, in the preparation of our annual operating budget, as a measure of our operating performance, to assess the effectiveness of our business strategies and to communicate with our board of directors concerning our financial performance because Adjusted EBITDA eliminates the impact of items that we do not consider indicative of our core operating performance;
•Adjusted EBITDA provides more consistency and comparability with our past financial performance, facilitates period-to-period comparisons of our operations and also facilitates comparisons with other companies, many of which use similar non-GAAP financial measures to supplement their GAAP results; and
•Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to net loss or any other measure of financial performance calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
The use of Adjusted EBITDA as an analytical tool has limitations such as:
•depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, and the assets being depreciated or amortized, which contribute to the generation of revenue, will often have to be replaced in the future and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash requirements for such replacements; however, much of the depreciation and amortization currently reflected relates to amortization of acquired intangible assets as a result of business combination purchase accounting adjustments, which will not need to be replaced in the future;
•Adjusted EBITDA may not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs or contractual commitments;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the potentially dilutive impact of stock-based compensation;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest or tax payments that could reduce cash available for use; and,
•other companies, including companies in our industry, might calculate Adjusted EBITDA or similarly titled measures differently, which reduces their usefulness as comparative measures.
Because of these limitations, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA together with other financial performance measures, including various cash flow metrics, net loss and our other GAAP results.
Components of Operating Results
Revenue
Subscription and support revenue. We derive our subscription revenue from fees paid to us by our customers for use of our cloud-based applications. We recognize the revenue associated with subscription agreements ratably over the term of the agreement as the customer receives and consumes the benefits of the cloud services through the contract period. Our subscription agreements are typically one to three years.
Our support revenue consists of maintenance fees associated with our perpetual licenses and hosting fees paid to us by our customers. Typically, when purchasing a perpetual license, a customer also purchases maintenance for which we charge a fee, priced as a percentage of the perpetual license fee. Maintenance agreements include the right to support and unspecified upgrades. We recognize the revenue associated with maintenance ratably over the term of the contract. In limited instances, at the customer’s option, we may host the software purchased by a customer under a perpetual license on systems at our third-party data centers.
Perpetual license revenue. Perpetual license revenue reflects the revenue recognized from sales of perpetual licenses to new customers and additional perpetual licenses to existing customers. We generally recognize the license fee portion of the arrangement up-front at a point in time when the software is made available to the customer.
Professional services revenue. Professional services revenue consists of fees related to implementation, data extraction, integration and configuration and training on our applications. We generally recognize the revenue associated with these professional services over time as services are performed. Revenues for fixed price services are generally recognized over time applying input methods to estimate progress to completion. Revenues for consumption-based services are generally recognized as the services are performed.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of product revenue. Cost of product revenue consists primarily of personnel and related costs of our customer success and cloud operations teams, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, payroll taxes, stock-based compensation, and allocated overhead, as well as software license fees, hosting costs, Internet connectivity, and depreciation expenses directly related to delivering our applications. We expect that cost of revenues may increase in the future depending on the growth rate of our new customers and billings and our need to support the implementation, hosting and support of those new customers. We intend to continue to invest additional resources in expanding the delivery capability of our applications. As we add hosting infrastructure capacity and support personnel in advance of anticipated growth, our cost of product revenue will increase, and if such anticipated revenue growth does not occur, our product gross profit will be adversely affected both in terms of absolute dollars and as a percentage of total revenues in any particular quarterly or annual period. Our cost of product revenue is generally expensed as the costs are incurred.
Cost of professional services revenue. Cost of professional services revenue consists primarily of personnel and related costs, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, payroll taxes, stock-based compensation, and allocated overhead, as well as the costs of contracted third-party vendors and reimbursable expenses. As most of our personnel are employed on a full-time basis, our cost of professional services revenue is largely fixed in the short-term, while our professional services revenue may fluctuate, leading to fluctuations in professional services gross profit. We expect that cost of professional services as a percentage of total revenues could fluctuate from period to period depending on the growth of our professional services business, the timing of sales of applications, and any associated costs relating to the delivery of services. Our cost of professional services revenue is generally expensed as costs are incurred.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses are classified into five categories: sales and marketing, research and development, general and administrative, depreciation and amortization and acquisition-related expenses. For each category, other than depreciation and amortization, the largest expense component is personnel and related costs, which includes salaries, employee benefit costs, bonuses, commissions, stock-based compensation, and payroll taxes. Operating expenses also include allocated overhead costs for facilities, which are allocated to each department based on relative department headcount. Operating expenses are generally recognized as incurred.
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of personnel and related costs for our sales and marketing staff, including salaries, benefits, deferred commission amortization, bonuses, payroll taxes, stock-based compensation and allocated overhead, as well as costs of promotional events, corporate communications, online marketing, product marketing and other brand-building activities. Sales commissions earned by our sales force, and related payroll taxes, are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. Deferred commissions and other costs for a particular customer agreement for initial contracts are amortized over the expected life of the customer relationships while deferred commissions related to contract renewals are amortized over average renewal term. Sales commissions, and related payroll taxes, are earned when the initial customer contract is signed and upon any renewal as our obligation to pay a sales commission arises at these times. Sales and marketing expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of total revenues for a variety of reasons including due to the timing of such expenses, in any particular quarterly or annual period.
Research and development. Research and development expenses primarily consist of personnel and related costs of our research and development staff, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, payroll taxes, stock-based compensation, allocated overhead, and costs of certain third-party contractors. Research and development costs related to the development of our software applications are generally recognized as incurred. For example, we are parties to a technology services agreement pursuant to which we generally recognize expenses for services as they are received. See Note 16 Related Party Transactions, in the notes to consolidated financial statements for more information regarding how expenses under such agreement are recognized. We have devoted our product development efforts primarily to enhancing the functionality, and expanding the capabilities, of our applications. Investment tax credits are accounted for as a reduction of research and development costs. Credits are accrued in the year in which the research and development costs of the capital expenditures are incurred, provided that we are reasonably certain that the credits will be received. The investment tax credit must be examined and approved by the tax authorities, and it is possible that the amounts granted will differ from the amounts recorded.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses primarily consist of personnel and related costs for our executive, administrative, finance, information technology, legal, accounting and human resource staff, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, payroll taxes, stock-based compensation, allocated overhead, professional fees, and other corporate expenses. We have recently incurred, and expect to continue to incur, additional expenses as we grow our operations, including potentially higher legal, corporate insurance, accounting and auditing expenses, and the additional costs of enhancing and maintaining our internal control environment. General and administrative expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue, and overtime we expect that general and administrative expenses will decrease as a percent of revenue due to operational efficiencies.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expenses primarily consist of depreciation and amortization of acquired intangible assets as a result of business combination purchase accounting adjustments. The valuation of identifiable intangible assets reflects management’s estimates based on, among other factors, use of established valuation methods. Customer relationships are valued using an income approach, which estimates fair value based on the earnings and cash flow capacity of the subject asset and are amortized over a seven to ten-year period. The value of the trade name intangibles are determined using a relief from royalty method, which estimates fair value based on the value the owner of the asset receives from not having to pay a royalty to use the asset and are amortized over mostly a three-year period. Developed technology is valued using a cost-to-recreate approach and is amortized over a four- to nine-year period.
Acquisition-related expenses. Acquisition-related expenses are typically incurred for up to four quarters after each acquisition, with the majority of these costs being incurred within 6 to 9 months, to transform the acquired business into the Company's unified operating platform. These expenses can vary based on the size, timing and location of each acquisition. These acquisition-related expenses include transaction related expenses such as banker fees, legal and professional fees, insurance costs, and deal bonuses. These acquisition-related expenses also include transformational expenses such as severance, compensation for transitional personnel, office lease terminations, and vendor cancellations. If the Company ceased acquisition activity today, within a year these acquisition-related expenses would no longer be incurred.
Total Other Expense
Total other expense consists primarily of amortization of deferred financing costs over the term of the related loan facility, revaluation of contingent consideration, and interest expense on outstanding debt, including amortization of debt issuance costs. We participate in interest rate swap agreements for the purpose of reducing variability in interest rate payments the Company’s term loans. These interest rate swaps fix the Company's interest rate (including the hedge premium) at 5.4% for the term of the Credit Agreement. In addition, gains/losses on divested assets that meet the definition of a business under ASC 805-10 are included in Total other expense.
Income Taxes
Because we have not generated domestic net income in any period to date, we have recorded a full valuation allowance against our domestic net deferred tax assets, exclusive of tax deductible goodwill. We have historically not recorded any material provision for federal or state income taxes, other than deferred taxes related to tax deductible goodwill and current taxes in certain separate company filing states. The balance of the tax provision for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, outside of tax deductible goodwill and current taxes in separate filing states, is related to foreign income taxes, primarily operations of our Canadian, UK, and Ireland subsidiaries, and to the release of valuation allowances associated with acquisitions of domestic entities with deferred tax liabilities. Realization of any of our domestic deferred tax assets depends upon future earnings, the timing and amount of which are uncertain. Based on analysis of acquired net operating losses, utilization of our net operating losses will be subject to annual limitations due to the ownership change rules under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or the Code, and similar state provisions. In the event we have subsequent changes in ownership, the availability of net operating losses and research and development credit carryovers could be further limited.
Results of Operations
Consolidated Statements of Operations Data
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the specified periods, as well as our results of operations for the specified periods as a percentage of revenue. The period-to-period comparisons of results of operations are not necessarily indicative of results for future periods (dollars in thousands, except share and per share data).
(1)Includes stock-based compensation. See tables below for stock based compensation by operating expense line item.
(2)Includes depreciation and amortization of $10.2 million, $8.7 million, and $7.1 million in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
(3)See Note 8 Net Loss Per Share, in the notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this 10-K for a discussion and reconciliation of historical net loss attributable to common stockholders and weighted average shares outstanding for historical basic and diluted net loss per share calculations.
The following tables present stock-based compensation included in the respective line items in our Consolidated Statement of Operations:
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Revenue
Total revenue was $291.8 million in 2020, compared to $222.6 million in 2019, an increase of $69.2 million, or 31%. The acquisitions not fully in the comparative period contributed $58.9 million to the increase after the reduction of $7.8 million purchase accounting deferred revenue discount in 2020. Total Revenue related to Sunset Assets decreased by $4.0 million as a result of decreased sales and marketing focus on those Sunset Assets. Our organic business excludes acquisitions closed during or subsequent to the prior year comparable period and business operations related to Sunset Assets (the “Organic Business”). Therefore, total revenue for the Organic Business increased by $14.3 million. The increase in revenue from our Organic Business was primarily driven by an increase in mobile messaging usage from US election-year presidential campaigns.
Subscription and support revenue was $277.5 million in 2020, compared to $203.9 million in 2019, an increase of $73.6 million, or 36%. The acquisitions not fully in the comparative period contributed $57.3 million to the increase in subscription and support revenue after the reduction of $7.8 million purchase accounting deferred revenue discount in 2020. Subscription and support revenue related to our Sunset Assets decreased $3.7 million as a result of decreased sales and marketing focus on those Sunset Assets. Therefore, subscription and support revenue from our Organic Business increased by $20.0 million. The increase in subscription and support revenue from our Organic Business was primarily driven by an increase in mobile messaging usage from US election-year presidential campaigns.
Perpetual license revenue was $1.9 million in 2020, compared to $5.7 million in 2019, a decrease of $3.8 million, or 67%. The acquisitions we closed after January 1, 2019 contributed no perpetual license revenue. The entire decrease relates to our Organic Business, as we continue to focus on growth in subscription and support revenue.
Professional services revenue was $12.4 million in 2020, compared to $13.0 million in 2019, a decrease of $0.6 million, or 5%. The acquisitions not fully in the comparative period contributed to a $1.5 million increase in professional services revenue in 2020. Professional services revenue related to our Sunset Assets decreased by $0.3 million as a result of decreased sales and marketing focus on those Sunset Assets. Therefore, professional services revenue from our Organic Business decreased by $1.8 million due primarily to COVID-19 related travel impacts and a higher proportion of expansion bookings versus new bookings which tend to have more professional services associated with them.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Profit Margin
Cost of subscription and support revenue was $89.9 million in 2020, compared to $61.5 million in 2019, an increase of $28.4 million, or 46%. The acquisitions not fully in the comparative period contributed $17.6 million to the increase to cost of subscription and support revenue, primarily related to costs associated with the delivery of the Postup, Kapost, Cimpl, InGenius, Altify, and Localytics products. Cost of subscription and support revenue related to our Sunset Assets decreased $0.4 million primarily related to hosting and infrastructure costs. Therefore, cost of subscription and support revenue for our Organic Business increased by $11.2 million, primarily related to an increase in messaging costs related to an increase in mobile messaging usage from US election-year presidential campaigns.
Cost of professional services revenue was $8.6 million in 2020, compared to $7.7 million in 2019, an increase of $0.9 million, or 12%. The acquisitions not fully in the comparative period contributed $1.6 million to the increase to cost of professional services revenue, primarily related to an increase in personnel and related costs. Cost of professional services revenue related to our Sunset Assets decreased $0.2 million. Therefore, cost of professional services revenue for our Organic Business decreased by $0.5 million which corresponds with the reduction in professional services revenue as a result of COVID-19 related travel impacts.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing Expense
Sales and marketing expense was $46.1 million in 2020, compared to $35.2 million in 2019, an increase of $10.9 million, or 31%. The acquisitions not fully in the comparative period contributed $11.8 million to the increase in sales and marketing expense, primarily consisting of personnel and related costs in 2020. Sales and marketing expense related to our Sunset Assets decreased by $0.7 million primarily due to reductions in personnel costs. Therefore, sales and marketing expense for our Organic Business decreased by $0.2 million, primarily as a result of decreased travel and discretionary marketing expenses which were partially offset by a $1.0 million increase in personnel costs associated with additional headcount related to our new and ongoing go-to-market investments.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense was $39.0 million in 2020, compared to $29.0 million in 2019, an increase of $10.0 million, or 34%. The acquisitions not fully in the comparative period contributed $10.1 million to the increase in research and development expense primarily consisting of personnel and related costs. Research and development expense related to our Sunset Assets decreased by $0.2 million primarily due to reductions in personnel costs. Therefore, research and development costs for our Organic Business increased by $0.9 million primarily related to an increase in non-cash stock compensation expense and outsourced technology services costs.
Refundable tax credits were $1.2 million in 2020, compared to $0.4 million in 2019, an increase of $0.8 million. This increase was predominately driven by tax credits related to our newly acquired companies.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense was $68.1 million in 2020, compared to $48.1 million in 2019, an increase of $20.0 million, or 42%. An increase in general administrative expense of $6.9 million was due to the acquisitions not fully in the comparative period, which consisted primarily of personnel and related costs and administrative expenses. Therefore, general and administrative expense for our Organic Business increased by $13.1 million, which was driven primarily by increased non-cash stock compensation expense, and also includes investment in our new go-to-market leadership team and other personnel related expenses, and costs incurred related to the implementation of our new enterprise resource planning (“ERP”) system.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
Depreciation and amortization expense was $36.9 million in 2020, compared to $25.9 million in 2019, an increase of $11.0 million, or 43%. The acquisitions not fully in the comparative period increased depreciation and amortization expense by $11.5 million, primarily related to acquired intangible assets such as customer relationships, developed technology and tradenames. Therefore, depreciation and amortization expense for our Organic Business decreased by $0.5 million in the comparative periods due to assets becoming fully depreciated or amortized during the period.
Acquisition-related Expense
Acquisition-related expenses are one-time expenses typically incurred for up to four quarters after each acquisition, with the majority of these costs being incurred within 6 to 9 months, to transform the acquired business into the Company's unified operating platform. These expenses can vary based on the size, timing and location of each acquisition. These acquisition-related expenses include transaction related expenses such as banker fees, legal and professional fees, insurance costs, and deal bonuses. These acquisition-related expenses also include transformational expenses such as severance, compensation for transitional personnel, office lease terminations, and vendor cancellations. Generally, without new acquisition activity, acquisition related expenses decline in subsequent sequential quarters and are no longer incurred after the first anniversary of the last closed acquisition.
Acquisition related expense was $27.1 million in 2020, compared to $39.7 million for 2019, a decrease of $12.6 million, or 32%. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 transaction related expenses were $4.3 million and $11.3 million, respectively, and transformational expenses were $22.8 million and $28.4 million, respectively. Transformational and transaction costs decreased in 2020 as a result of the Company temporarily pausing its acquisition activity due to the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, we completed one acquisition in 2020 compared to 5 acquisitions in 2019. The transformational expenses in both the 2020 and 2019 were primarily related to temporary transitional personnel and related costs along with accelerated rent related expenses incurred in conjunction with the closures of offices of our acquired companies as we consolidate and integrate these acquisitions. These accelerated rent related expenses increased $3.5 million to $4.3 million during 2020 from $0.8 million during 2019.
Other Expense, net
Interest expense was $31.5 million in 2020, compared to $22.3 million for 2019, an increase of $9.2 million, or 41%. The increase is primarily attributable to increased average borrowing under our credit facility used to fund our acquisitions.
During 2019, we recorded a $2.3 million loss on debt extinguishment related to the successful completion of our new credit facility, which resulted in the write-off of the remaining deferred debt offering costs from our previous credit facility. See the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section herein for further discussion regarding our new credit facility.
Other expense was $0.1 million in 2020, compared to other expense of $3.2 million in 2019, a decrease of $3.1 million, or 97%. The difference in other expense is primarily due to a decrease in foreign currency exchange losses compared to 2019 and the 2019 non-cash loss of $2.0 million on divestiture of Sunset Assets which consisted primarily of non-cash expense for deferred sales commissions.
Benefit from Income Taxes
Benefit from income taxes was $4.2 million in 2020, compared to a benefit for income taxes of $6.8 million in 2019, a decrease in the benefit from income taxes of $2.6 million, or 38%. This decrease was due primarily to an decrease in deferred tax liabilities during the year in our foreign entities associated with the amortization of acquired intangibles and losses generated from continuing operations at certain UK and Canada entities, and decreased benefits recognized during the year attributable to the release of valuation allowances associated with acquisitions of domestic entities with deferred tax liabilities
that, upon acquisition, allow us to recognize certain deferred tax assets that had previously been offset by a valuation allowances.
Because we have not generated domestic net income in any period to date, we have recorded a full valuation allowance against our domestic net deferred tax assets, exclusive of any remaining tax deductible goodwill after application of indefinite life deferred tax assets. Realization of any of our domestic deferred tax assets depends upon future earnings, the timing and amount of which are uncertain. Based on analysis of acquired net operating losses, utilization of our net operating losses will be subject to annual limitations due to the ownership change rules under the Code and similar state provisions. Refer to Note 6. Income Taxes in the notes to consolidated financial statements for more information regarding our income taxes as they relate to foreign and domestic operations.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018
For a comparison of years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 refer to “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis” in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 filed on March 2, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through the raising of capital including sales of our common stock, cash from operating activities, borrowing under our credit facility, and the issuance of notes to sellers in some of our acquisitions. We believe that current cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operating activities, availability under our existing credit facility, as discussed below, and the ability to offer and sell securities pursuant to our registration statement, as discussed below, will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next twelve months. In addition, we intend to utilize the sources of capital available to us under our Credit Facility and registration statement to support our continued growth via acquisitions within our core enterprise solution suites of complementary technologies and businesses.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $250.0 million, $60.0 million of available borrowings under our Credit Facility, as discussed below, and $533.3 million of borrowings outstanding under our Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2019, we had cash and cash equivalents of $175.0 million, $60.0 million of available borrowings under our Credit Facility, and $538.7 million of borrowings outstanding under our Credit Facility. The $75.0 million increase in cash and cash equivalents from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 includes $130.1 million in net proceeds from our August 2020 secondary stock offering partially offset by a $67.7 million cash payment for an acquisition in February 2020. Our cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries was $15.3 million as of December 31, 2020. If these funds held by our foreign subsidiaries are needed for our domestic operations, we would be required to accrue and pay U.S. taxes to repatriate these funds to the U.S. However, our intent is to permanently reinvest these funds outside the U.S. and our current plans do not demonstrate a need to repatriate them to fund our domestic operations. We do not provide for federal income taxes on the undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had a working capital surplus of $196.1 million and $109.5 million, respectively.
Credit Facility
Our facility is comprised of $540.0 million in term loans and a $60.0 million revolving credit facility.
On August 6, 2019, we entered into a credit agreement (the “Credit Facility”) which provides for (i) a fully-drawn $350 million, 7 year, senior secured term loan B facility (the “Term Loan”) and (ii) a $60 million, 5 year, revolving credit facility (the “Revolver”) that was fully available as of December 31, 2020. The Credit Facility replaced our previous credit facility. All outstanding balances under our previous credit facility were paid off using proceeds from our current Credit Facility.
On November 26, 2019, the Company entered into a First Incremental Assumption Agreement (the “Incremental Assumption Agreement”) which provides for a term loan facility to be established under the Credit Agreement in an aggregate principal amount of $190 million (the “2019 Incremental Term Loan”) which is in addition to the existing $350 million term loans outstanding under the Credit Agreement and the $60 million Revolver under the Credit Agreement.
The Credit Facility has no financial covenants as long as less than 35% of the Revolver is drawn as of the last day of any fiscal quarter. The Credit Facility is secured by a security interest in substantially all of our assets and requires us to maintain certain financial covenants. The Credit Facility contains certain non-financial restrictive covenants that limit our ability to transfer or dispose of assets, merge with other companies or consummate certain changes of control, acquire other companies, pay dividends, incur additional indebtedness and liens, effect changes in management and enter into new businesses. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants under the Credit Facility. See Note 7. Debt for more information regarding our Credit Facility and outstanding debt as of December 31, 2020.
Registration Statement
On December 12, 2018, we filed a registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-228767) (the “2018 S-3”), to register Upland securities in an aggregate amount of up to $250.0 million for offerings from time to time. In connection with the filing of the Form S-3 we withdrew our previous registration statement filed on May 12, 2017. On May 13, 2019, we completed a registered underwritten public offering pursuant to the 2018 S-3 of 3,795,000 shares of the Company's $0.0001 par value common stock for an offering price to the public of $42.00 per share. This included the 495,000 shares issuable pursuant to a fully exercised option to purchase additional shares granted to the underwriters of the offering. The net proceeds of the offering of $151.1 million, net of issuance costs of $8.3 million, will be used for general business purposes, including the funding of future acquisitions.
On August 10, 2020, we filed a registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-243728) (the “2020 S-3”), which became effective automatically upon its filing and covers an unlimited amount of securities. The 2020 S-3 will remain effective through August 2023. On August 14, 2020, we completed a registered underwritten public offering pursuant to the 2020 S-3 of 3,500,000 shares of the Company's $0.0001 par value common stock for an offering price to the public of $34.00 per share. In addition, on August 27, 2020 we closed the sale of an additional 525,000 shares issuable pursuant to a fully exercised option to purchase additional shares granted to the underwriters of the offering. The total net proceeds of the offering, including shares issued pursuant to the fully exercised option, of $130.1 million, net of issuance costs of $6.8 million, will be used for general business purposes, including the funding of future acquisitions. There are no outstanding security offerings at this time.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities is significantly influenced by the amount of cash we invest in personnel and infrastructure to support the anticipated growth of our business. Included in net cash provided by operations are one-time acquisition related expenses incurred for up to four quarters after each acquisition to transact and transform the acquired business into the Company's unified operating platform. Additionally, operating cash flows includes the impact of earn-outs payments in excess of original purchase accounting estimates. Our working capital consists primarily of cash, receivables from customers, prepaid assets, unbilled professional services, deferred commissions, accounts payable, accrued compensation and other accrued expenses, acquisition related earnout and holdback liabilities, lease liabilities and deferred revenues. The volume of professional services rendered, the volume and timing of customer bookings and contract renewals, and the related timing of collections and renewals on those bookings, as well as the timing of spending commitments and payments of our accounts payable, accrued expenses, accrued payroll and related benefits, all affect these account balances.
Cash provided by operating activities was $35.6 million for 2020 compared to $12.1 million for 2019, an increase of $23.4 million. This increase in operating cash flow is generally attributable to the Company’s increased size and scale and a $12.6 million decrease in acquisition-related expenses in 2020 as a result of a slow down in acquisition related activity due to the COVID-19 pandemic. This year-over-year increase in operating cash flow is in spite of net working capital uses of cash of $2.3 million for 2020 compared to $2.7 million for 2019. Working capital sources of cash for 2020 included a $10.4 million decrease in accounts receivable and a $6.8 million increase in deferred revenue related to the timing of collections and billings. Working capital uses of cash for 2020 included a $8.6 million increase in prepaids and other related primarily to an increase in capitalized commissions, a $3.1 million decrease in accounts payable, and a $7.8 million decrease in accrued expenses, which is attributable primarily to the payment of acquisition related expenses accrued in 2019 and paid in 2020.
A substantial source of cash is invoicing for subscriptions and support fees in advance, which is recorded as deferred revenue, and is included on our consolidated balance sheet as a liability. Deferred revenue consists of the unearned portion of booked fees for our software subscriptions and support, which is amortized into revenue in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. We assess our liquidity, in part, through an analysis of new subscriptions invoiced, expected cash receipts on new and existing subscriptions, and our ongoing operating expense requirements.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Our primary investing activities have consisted of acquisitions of complementary technologies, products and businesses. As our business grows, we expect our primary investing activities to continue to further expand our family of software applications and infrastructure and support additional personnel.
For 2020, cash used in investing activities consisted of $67.7 million associated with the acquisition of Localytics which closed in February 2020, the purchases of property and equipment of $1.1 million, and the purchase of customer relationships of $0.2 million. Cash used in investing activities decreased $148.8 million in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily as a result of a pause in acquisition activity in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Our primary financing activities have consisted of capital raised to fund our acquisitions, proceeds from debt obligations incurred to finance our acquisitions, repayments of our debt obligations, and share based tax payment activity.
Cash provided by financing activities decreased $255.9 million in 2020 compared to 2019. During 2020, we received net proceeds from the issuance of common stock, including proceeds from the exercise of employee stock options, of $130.5 million compared to $151.6 million in 2019. During 2020, we made net payments on our notes payable balance of $5.7 million compared to a net increase in our notes payable balance of $242.1 million in 2019 as a result of the paydown of our previous credit facility and entry into our new expanded credit facility. During 2020, we paid $14.7 million in additional consideration to sellers of acquired businesses related to holdback and earnout payments compared to $16.7 million in 2019. During 2020, we paid $2.1 million in taxes on behalf of employees related to net share settlements of restricted stock vesting events which decreased from the $12.7 million in net share settlement payments in 2019 as a result of the election in 2020 to sell shares to cover employee taxes on stock compensation vestings. During 2020, we made principal payments of $0.1 million on finance leases compared to $0.5 million in 2019 as a result of certain finance leases expiring in 2020.
Contractual Payment Obligations
The following table summarizes our future contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(1)Consists of contractual principal payments on our Credit Facility. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” above for further discussion regarding our Credit Facility.
(2)Future interest on debt obligations is calculated using the interest rate effective as of December 31, 2020. We have entered into floating-to-fixed interest rate swap agreements to limit exposure to interest rate risk related to our debt. These interest rate swaps effectively converted the entire balance of the Company's $540 million term loans from variable interest payments to fixed interest rate payments, based on an annualized fixed rate of 5.4%, for the 7 year term of the debt. In conjunction with our new $350 million, 7 year, term credit facility and our $190 million 2019 Incremental Term Loan we entered into interest rate hedge instruments for the full 7 year term, effectively fixing our interest rate at 5.4%. However, the interest rate associated with our new $60 million, 5 year, undrawn revolving credit facility remains floating. See “