Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following in conjunction with the sections of this annual report entitled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Risk Factors,” “Summary Historical Consolidated Financial Data,” and “Description of Business,” and the historical consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this annual report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this annual report.
Overview
The Company’s consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of all subsidiaries in which the Company holds a controlling financial interest as of the financial statement date.
The consolidated financial statements for the year ended June 30, 2020 include the accounts of the Company, Trunano Labs, Inc., a Nevada corporation (for which the Company owns 79.4%), and its wholly-owned subsidiaries; Steam Distribution, LLC, a California limited liability company; One Hit Wonder, Inc., a California corporation; Havz, LLC, d/b/a Steam Wholesale, a California limited liability company, One Hit Wonder Holdings, LLC a California limited liability company, SWCH LLC a Delaware limited liability company; and Cresco Management, LLC, a California limited liability company. All intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. As of the date of this report, Trunano Labs, Inc. had no operations.
For the year ended June 30, 2021 the consolidated financial statements of Grove, Inc. include the accounts of the Company and its wholly-owned subsidiaries; Trunano Labs, Inc., a Nevada corporation, Steam Distribution, LLC, a California limited liability company; One Hit Wonder, Inc., a California corporation; Havz, LLC, d/b/a Steam Wholesale, a California limited liability company, One Hit Wonder Holdings, LLC a California corporation; SWCH LLC, a Delaware limited liability company; Cresco Management LLC, a California limited liability company, and Infusionz LLC, a Colorado limited liability company. All intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated as a result of the consolidation. As of the date of this report, Trunano Labs, Inc. had no operations.
On July 1, 2020, the Company purchased Infusionz LLC, a Colorado limited liability company.
On July 1, 2020, the noncontrolling shareholders of the Company’s subsidiary, Trunano Labs, Inc., converted 1,761,261 shares of Trunano Labs, Inc., stock, representing all the outstanding stock by minority interest holders, into 1,277,778 shares of the Company’s Common Stock. As of July 1, 2020, Trunano Labs, Inc. is a wholly owned subsidiary of Grove Inc.
Operating Segments
The Company’s financial reporting is organized into two segments: products and trade shows for revenue and cost of revenue. The Company’s internal reporting for product sales is organized into three channels of distribution: Grove, Inc. branded products, manufacturing of products to be sold under customers brands and white label products that are sold under customer brands. These product sales are aggregated and viewed by management as one reportable segment due to their similar economic characteristics, products, production, distribution processes and regulatory environment.
Key Factors Affecting Operating Results
Cyclicality and Seasonality
The business does not have seasonality; however, the Company currently only has one trade show, CBD.io, which is held in November each year. Because event revenue is recognized when a particular event is held, the Company experiences fluctuations in quarterly revenue based on the completion of the trade show event. The Company held the November 2019 trade show, however, due to the COVID-19 virus, the November 2020 CBD.io trade show was canceled and our growth strategy in this area has been delayed.
Key Components of Results of Operations
Results of Operations
Year Ended June 30, 2021, as compared to June 30, 2020:
The following summary of our results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements for the years ended June 30, 2021, and 2020, which are included herein.
Revenues increased by $16,682,165 or 225% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, compared with the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020. $4,134,464 was related to the acquisition of Infusionz LLC on July 1, 2020 and the remaining increase was related to CBD sales in the form of gummies, which has experienced significant growth in the recent months. Included in this growth has been the Company’s own branded products being sold. Infusionz LLC has a similar CBD product line and customer base as the Grove, Inc. This was offset by $1,253,847 decrease in trade show revenue since the show has been canceled during the 2021 fiscal year due to Covid 19. Management expects revenue to increase in the 2021 fiscal year, however, does not expect to have revenue from the annual CBD.io trade show as it has been postponed and management is uncertain when the trade show will be scheduled.
Cost of revenue increased by $7,353,226 or 152% compared with the prior fiscal year. $2,423,755 was related to the acquisition of Infusionz LLC on July 1, 2020, and the remaining amount was related to the increase in revenue. The gross margin improved by approximately 18.9% compared to the prior fiscal year. The primary reason for the gross margin improvement was the overall increase in revenue and the Company’s ability to purchase larger quantities of raw materials at lower prices.
Operating expenses increased by $3,063,872 or 41% compared with the prior fiscal year. $1,457,373 was related to the acquisition of Infusionz LLC on July 1, 2020. The additional increase was attributed to the significant growth in revenue and the requirement to add additional resources to support the current and future growth of the Company. The Company’s management is continuing to control operating expenses while also implementing management growth strategies.
Other expense (income), net increased by $815,938 or 149% compared with the prior fiscal year. During the year ended June 30, 2021, $403,277 was related to the gain on the SBA PPP loan extinguishment and $307,860 was related to the gain on the settlement of lease cancellation. The increases in other income were net of the increase in interest expense of $392,043, which was primarily attributable to the amortization of the beneficial conversion feature on the convertible notes of $342,813.
The Company had net income of $2,978,948 and incurred a net loss of $5,384,872 for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in the net loss is primarily related to the items noted above and a gain on the change in valuation allowance on deferred tax assets of $1,282,815.
Segment Information
The Company provides the following segments: (a) product segment and (b) trade show segment.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Working Capital
Cash Flows
At June 30, 2021, the Company had cash of $14,534,211 or an increase of $13,646,694 from June 30, 2020. The increase of cash used in operating activities is primarily related to the net income and the sale of the Company common stock.
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended June 30, 2021, and 2020 was $1,281,007 and $1,462,915, respectively. For the year ended June 30, 2020 the use of cash was primarily due to the net acquisition and sale of equipment. For the year ended June 30, 2021, cash of $62,122 was provided from the acquisition of Infusionz, Inc., $1,422,129 was used to purchase equipment and $79,000 from the sale of property and equipment.
Net cash flows provided by financing activities for the year ended June 30, 2021, was $11,988,395 compared to $2,817,746 for the year ended June 30, 2020. Proceeds from the sale of common stock and sale of the non-controlling interest during the year ended June 30, 2020 for $768,801 and the increase in issuance of notes payable of $2,048,945 compared to proceeds of $1,000,080 from the issuance of convertible notes payable and the proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $10,950,315, net of expenses and the issuance of preferred stock during the year ended June 30, 2021 were the primary reasons for the decrease.
During October of 2019, the Company entered into convertible promissory notes (the “October 2019 Notes”) for total proceeds of $1,500,000. The principal and interest of the October 2019 Notes are payable in full at the maturity date of April 2021, if not previously converted. The October 2019 Notes have an interest rate of 8%, total accrued interest is to be repaid at maturity, and are convertible into common stock if the Company enters an initial public offering arrangement which results in the Company’s common stock becoming listed or trading. The conversion rate was set at $5.00 which is equal to the price of the Company’s common stock sold in the prospectus. On June 29, 2021, the Company issued 348,309 shares of the Company’s common stock for the full payment of principal and interest of these loans.
On April 28, 2020, the Company entered a Paycheck Protection Program loan for $398,945 in connection with COVID-19. The loan and accrued interest amounted to $403,277 which was forgiven on June 11, 2021 and recognized as a gain on the extinguishment of debt.
On May 13, 2020, Infusionz entered a Paycheck Protection Program loan for $297,100 in connection with COVID-19. The is classified as a current liability on the balance sheet on June 30, 2021. The loan and accrued interest amounted to $300,995 and was forgiven on August 30, 2021.
On June 3, 2020, the Company entered a loan for $150,000 with the Small Business Administration. The promissory note as a fixed payment schedule commencing on June 3, 2021, consisting of principal and interest payments of $731 monthly. The balance of the principal of $150,000 and interest of $6,876 was paid on August 30, 2021 and classified as a current liability on the balance sheet at June 30, 2021.
During December 2020, the Company entered into a note agreement for total proceeds of $750,000 with the Chief Executive Officer of the Company, a related party. The principal and interest of the note is payable was repaid during the year ended June 30, 2021.
During the year ended June 30, 2021, the Company entered into convertible promissory notes (the “March 2021 Notes”) for total proceeds of $1,000,080. The term of the March 2021 Notes is two years and bear interest at a rate 8% per annum, compounded annually. The principal amount and accrued interest of the March 2021 Notes are automatically converted into capital stock of the company upon an initial public offering by the Company at a rate of seventy five percent of the initial public offering price of the shares of capital stock of the Company sold in the initial public offering. As of June 30, 2021, all of these notes have been converted to common stock.
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) surfaced. The spread of COVID-19 around the world has caused significant volatility in U.S. and international markets. There is significant uncertainty around the breadth and duration of business disruptions related to COVID-19, as well as its impact on the U.S. and international economies and, as such, the Company has transition to a combination of work from home and social distancing operations and there has been minimal impact to our internal operations from the transition. The Company is unable to determine if there will be a material future impact to its customers’ operations and ultimately an impact to the Company’s overall revenues.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on its financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to stockholders.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate these estimates, including those related to bad debts, intangible assets, and litigation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of certain assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We have identified below the accounting policies, related to what we believe are most critical to our business operations and are discussed throughout Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition or Plan of Operation where such policies affect our reported and expected financial results.
Use of Estimates - The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Significant estimates underlying the Company’s reported financial position and results of operations include the allowance for doubtful accounts, useful lives of property and equipment, impairment of long-lived assets, inventory valuation, fair value of stock-based compensation and valuation allowance on deferred tax assets.
Business Combinations -The Company accounts for its business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting. The cost of an acquisition is measured as the aggregate of the acquisition date fair values of the assets transferred and liabilities assumed by the Company to the seller’s cash consideration and equity instruments issued. Transaction costs directly attributable to the acquisition are expensed as incurred. The excess of (i) the total costs of acquisition over (ii) the fair value of the identifiable net assets of the acquiree is recorded as identifiable intangible assets and goodwill.
Goodwill - The Company evaluates its goodwill for possible impairment as prescribed by ASC 350-20-35, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350), Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment at least annually and when one or more triggering events or circumstances indicate that the goodwill might be impaired. Under this guidance, annual or interim goodwill impairment testing is performed by comparing the estimated fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount. An impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, not to exceed the carrying value of goodwill.
The Company performed its annual test as of June 30, 2021. No impairment charge was identified in connection with the annual goodwill impairment test
Revenue Recognition - The Company has adopted the new revenue recognition guidelines in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASC 606), commencing from the period under this report. The Company analyzes its contracts to assess that they are within the scope and in accordance with ASC 606. In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as the Company fulfills its obligations under each of its agreements, whether for goods and services or licensing, the Company performs the following steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations based on estimated selling prices; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies each performance obligation. The Company acts as a principal in its revenue transactions as the Company is the primary obligor in the transactions. Generally, the Company recognizes revenue for its products upon shipment to customers, provided no significant obligations remain and collection is probable.
Product Revenue - Most of the Company’s revenue contracts are from domestic sales and represent a single performance obligation related to the fulfillment of customer orders for the purchase of its products. Net sales reflect the transaction prices for these contracts based on the Company’s selling list price, which is then reduced by estimated costs for trade promotional programs, consumer incentives, and allowances and discounts used to incentivize sales growth and build brand awareness.
The Company recognizes revenue at the point in time that control of the ordered product is transferred to the customer, which is upon shipment to the customer or other customer-designated delivery point. Taxes collected from customers that are remitted to governmental agencies are accounted for on a net basis and not included as revenue.
The Company does not accept sales returns from wholesale customers unless the sales return was pre-approved prior to production and shipment. E-Commerce product returns must be completed within 45 days of the date of purchase. The Company does not accrue for estimated sales returns as historical sales returns have been minimal. The Company records deferred revenues when cash payments are received or due in advance of performance, including amounts which are refundable. Substantially all the deferred revenue as of June 30, 2020, was recognized as revenue in the year ended June 30, 2021.
Shipping and handling fees billed to customers are included in revenue. Shipping and handling fees associated with freight are generally included in cost of revenue.
Trade Show Revenue - A significant portion of the Company’s annual revenue is generated from the production of a single trade show. The revenue includes booth space sales, registration fees and sponsorship fees. The Company recognizes revenue upon completion of the CBD.IO trade show. Amounts invoiced prior to the completion of the trade show are recorded as deferred revenue in the consolidated Balance Sheets until the completion of the event. As of June 30, 2021, and 2020, the Company had no deferred revenue related to trade show business.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets - Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the book value of the asset may not be recoverable. The Company periodically evaluates whether events and circumstances have occurred that indicate possible impairment. When impairment indicators exist, the Company estimates the future undiscounted net cash flows of the related asset or asset group over the remaining life in measuring whether or not the asset values are recoverable. The Company did not recognize impairment on its long-lived assets during the years ended June 30, 2021, or 2020.
Stock Based Compensation - The Company recognizes all share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, as compensation expense in the financial statements based on their fair values. That expense will be recognized over the period during which an employee is required to provide services in exchange for the award, known as the requisite service period (usually the vesting period) or immediately if the share-based payments vest immediately.
Inventory - The Company reviews the inventory level of all products and raw materials quarterly. For most products that have been in the market for one year or greater, we consider inventory levels of greater than one year’s sales to be excess or other items that show slower than projected sales. Due to limited market penetration for our products, we have decided to write down 50% of the cost against certain raw materials and finished products. Products that are no longer part of the current product offering are considered obsolete. The potential for re-sale of slow-moving and obsolete inventories is based upon our assumptions about future demand and market conditions. The recorded cost of obsolete inventories is then reduced to zero and the slow-moving and obsolete inventory is written off and are recorded as charges to cost of goods sold. All adjustments for obsolete inventory establish a new cost basis for that inventory as we believe such reductions are permanent declines in the market price of our products. Generally, obsolete inventory is sold to companies that specialize in the liquidation, while we continue to market slow-moving inventories until they are sold or become obsolete. As obsolete or slow-moving inventory is sold or disposed of, we write it off.
Non-GAAP Measures (unaudited)
Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The Company discloses and uses the above-mentioned non-GAAP financial measures internally as a supplement to GAAP financial information to evaluate its operating performance, for financial planning purposes, to establish operational goals, for compensation plans, to measure debt service capability, for capital expenditure planning and to determine working capital needs and believes that these are useful financial measures also used by investors. Non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA is defined as GAAP net income or net loss before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) adjusted for the non-cash stock compensation and stock option expense, acquisition, integration & restructuring expenses, charges and gains or losses from extinguishment of debt and other non-cash items. Non-GAAP EBITDA and non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA are not terms defined by GAAP and, as a result, the Company’s measure of non-GAAP EBITDA and non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA might not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. Generally, a non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company’s performance, financial position, or cash flow that either excludes or includes amounts that are not normally included in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. The non-GAAP financial measures discussed above, however, should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for, or superior to net income or net loss as reported for GAAP on the Consolidated Statements of Operations, cash and cash flows on the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows or other measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP, and as reflected on the Company’s financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. These non-GAAP financial measures are not a substitute for or presented in lieu of financial measures provided by GAAP and all measures and disclosures of financial information pursuant to GAAP should be read to obtain a comprehensive and thorough understanding of the Company’s financial results. The reconciliations of non-GAAP EBITDA and non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA to GAAP operating income (loss) and/or GAAP net income (net loss) referred to in the highlights or elsewhere are provided in the schedules that are a part of this document.