Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (dollars in millions, except per share data and unless otherwise indicated)
COVID-19
As discussed in note 1 to our consolidated financial statements, the COVID-19 pandemic has significantly disrupted supply chains and businesses around the world. The extent and duration of the COVID-19 impact, on the operations and financial position of United Rentals, and on the global economy, is uncertain. See "Item 1. Business- Industry Overview and Economic Outlook" above for a discussion of market performance in 2020.
Prior to mid-March 2020, our performance was largely in line with expectations. In early-March, we initiated contingency planning ahead of the impact of COVID-19 on our end-markets. This planning has focused on five key work-streams that are the basis for our crisis response plan:
1.Ensuring the safety and well-being of our employees and customers: Above all else, we are committed to ensuring the health, safety and well-being of our employees and customers. We have implemented a variety of COVID-19 safety measures, including ensuring that branches have sufficient and adequate personal protection equipment. We have also implemented appropriate social distancing practices, and increased disinfecting of equipment and facilities.
2.Leveraging our competitive advantages to support the needs of customers: We have made modifications to enhance safety measures in our operating processes and protocols that support the needs of our customers. Additionally, our digital capabilities allow customers to perform fully contactless transactions.
3.Disciplined capital expenditures: We have a substantial degree of flexibility in managing our capital expenditures and fleet capacity. Net rental capital expenditures (purchases of rental equipment less the proceeds from sales of rental equipment) for 2020 decreased $1.198 billion, or 92 percent, year-over-year.
4.Controlling core operating expenses: A significant portion of our cash operating costs are variable in nature. Since March 2020, we have significantly reduced overtime and temporary labor primarily in response to the impact of COVID-19. Furthermore, we continue to leverage our current capacity to reduce the need for third-party delivery and repair services, and minimize other discretionary expenses across general and administrative areas.
5.Proactively managing the balance sheet with a focus on liquidity: We are focused on ensuring that we maintain ample liquidity to meet our business needs as the impact of COVID-19 evolves. As a result, our current $500 share repurchase program was paused in mid-March 2020. At December 31, 2020, our total liquidity was $3.073 billion, comprised of cash and cash equivalents, and availability under the ABL and accounts receivable securitization facilities. We have no note maturities until 2026.
The impact of COVID-19 on our business is discussed throughout this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.” As discussed below, the response plan above helped mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on our results.
Executive Overview
We are the largest equipment rental company in the world, with an integrated network of 1,165 rental locations in the U.S., Canada and Europe. In July 2018, we completed the acquisition of BakerCorp, which allowed for our entry into select European markets. Although the equipment rental industry is highly fragmented and diverse, we believe that we are well positioned to take advantage of this environment because, as a larger company, we have more extensive resources and certain competitive advantages. These include a fleet of rental equipment with a total original equipment cost (“OEC”) of $13.8 billion, and a North American branch network that operates in 49 U.S. states and every Canadian province, and serves 99 of the 100 largest metropolitan areas in the U.S. The BakerCorp acquisition discussed above added 11 European locations in France, Germany, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands to our branch network. Our size also gives us greater purchasing power, the ability to provide customers with a broader range of equipment and services, the ability to provide customers with equipment that is more consistently well-maintained and therefore more productive and reliable, and the ability to enhance the earning potential of our assets by transferring equipment among branches to satisfy customer needs.
We offer approximately 4,000 classes of equipment for rent to a diverse customer base that includes construction and industrial companies, manufacturers, utilities, municipalities, homeowners and government entities. Our revenues are derived from the following sources: equipment rentals, sales of rental equipment, sales of new equipment, contractor supplies sales and service and other revenues. In 2020, equipment rental revenues represented 84 percent of our total revenues.
For the past several years, we have executed a strategy focused on improving the profitability of our core equipment rental business through revenue growth, margin expansion and operational efficiencies. In particular, we have focused on customer segmentation, customer service differentiation, rate management, fleet management and operational efficiency.
We are currently managing the impact of COVID-19, as discussed above. Our general strategy focuses on profitability and return on invested capital, and, in particular, calls for:
•A consistently superior standard of service to customers, often provided through a single lead contact who can coordinate the cross-selling of the various services we offer throughout our network. We utilize a proprietary software application, Total Control®, which provides our key customers with a single in-house software application that enables them to monitor and manage all their equipment needs. Total Control® is a unique customer offering that enables us to develop strong, long-term relationships with our larger customers. Our digital capabilities, including our Total Control® platform, allow our sales teams to provide contactless end-to-end customer service;
•The further optimization of our customer mix and fleet mix, with a dual objective: to enhance our performance in serving our current customer base, and to focus on the accounts and customer types that are best suited to our strategy for profitable growth. We believe these efforts will lead to even better service of our target accounts, primarily large construction and industrial customers, as well as select local contractors. Our fleet team's analyses are aligned with these objectives to identify trends in equipment categories and define action plans that can generate improved returns;
•A continued focus on “Lean” management techniques, including kaizen processes focused on continuous improvement. We continue to implement Lean kaizen processes across our branch network, with the objectives of: reducing the cycle time associated with renting our equipment to customers; improving invoice accuracy and service quality; reducing the elapsed time for equipment pickup and delivery; and improving the effectiveness and efficiency of our repair and maintenance operations;
•The continued expansion of our trench, power and fluid solutions footprint, as well as our tools and onsite services offerings, and the cross-selling of these services throughout our network. We believe that the expansion of our trench, power and fluid solutions business, as well as our tools and onsite services offerings, will further position United Rentals as a single source provider of total jobsite solutions through our extensive product and service resources and technology offerings; and
•The pursuit of strategic acquisitions to continue to expand our core equipment rental business. Strategic acquisitions allow us to invest our capital to expand our business, further driving our ability to accomplish our strategic goals.
In 2021, based on our analyses of industry forecasts and macroeconomic indicators, we expect modest market recovery following the declines experienced in 2020, which included the pronounced impact of COVID-19. See "Item 1. Business- Industry Overview and Economic Outlook" above for a discussion of market performance in 2020. Specifically, we expect that North American industry equipment rental revenue will increase approximately 2 percent, with higher growth expected in Canada than the U.S.
As discussed below, fleet productivity is a comprehensive metric that reflects the combined impact of changes in rental rates, time utilization, and mix that contribute to the variance in owned equipment rental revenue. For the full year 2020:
•Equipment rentals decreased 10.3 percent year-over-year, including the impact of COVID-19 on volumes;
•Average OEC decreased 2.2 percent year-over-year;
•Fleet productivity decreased 6.9 percent, primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 since March, when rental volume declined in response to shelter-in-place orders and other market restrictions; and
•74 percent of equipment rental revenue was derived from key accounts, as compared to 72 percent in 2019. Key accounts are each managed by a single point of contact to enhance customer service.
Financial Overview
Prior to taking actions pertaining to our financial flexibility and liquidity, we considered the impact of COVID-19 on liquidity, and assessed our available sources and anticipated uses of cash, including, with respect to sources, cash generated from operations and from the sale of rental equipment. In 2020, we took the following actions to improve our financial flexibility and liquidity, and to position us to invest the necessary capital in our business:
•Issued $750 principal amount of 4 percent Senior Notes due 2030;
•Issued $1.1 billion principal amount of 3 7/8 percent Senior Notes due 2031;
•Redeemed all $800 principal amount of our 5 1/2 percent Senior Notes due 2025;
•Redeemed all $1.1 billion principal amount of our 6 1/2 percent Senior Notes due 2026;
•Redeemed all $750 principal amount of our 4 5/8 percent Senior Notes due 2025; and
•Amended and extended our accounts receivable securitization facility, including a reduction in the size of the facility from $975 to $800.
We have also used cash generated from operations to reduce borrowings under the ABL facility, and total debt has decreased $1.746 billion, or 15.3 percent, since December 31, 2019. As discussed above, disciplined management of capital expenditures and fleet capacity is a component of our COVID-19 response plan, and, in 2020, capital expenditures decreased significantly year-over-year. The decreased capital expenditures contributed to our ability to use proceeds from operations to reduce borrowings under the ABL facility. As of December 31, 2020, we had available liquidity of $3.073 billion, comprised of cash and cash equivalents, and availability under the ABL and accounts receivable securitization facilities.
Net income. Net income and diluted earnings per share for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020 are presented below.
Net income and diluted earnings per share for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020 include the after-tax impacts of the items below. The tax rates applied to the items below reflect the statutory rates in the applicable entity.
(1)This reflects transaction costs associated with the NES and Neff acquisitions that were completed in 2017, and the BakerCorp and BlueLine acquisitions that were completed in 2018. Merger related costs only include costs associated with major acquisitions that significantly impact our operations. For additional information, see "Results of Operations-Other costs/(income)-merger related costs" below.
(2)This reflects the amortization of the intangible assets acquired in the RSC, National Pump, NES, Neff, BakerCorp and BlueLine acquisitions.
(3)This reflects the impact of extending the useful lives of equipment acquired in the RSC, NES, Neff, BakerCorp and BlueLine acquisitions, net of the impact of additional depreciation associated with the fair value mark-up of such equipment.
(4)This reflects additional costs recorded in cost of rental equipment sales associated with the fair value mark-up of rental equipment acquired in the RSC, NES, Neff and BlueLine acquisitions that was subsequently sold.
(5)As discussed in note 5 to our consolidated financial statements, this primarily reflects severance costs and branch closure charges associated with our restructuring programs.
(6)This reflects write-offs of leasehold improvements and other fixed assets. As discussed in note 5 to our consolidated financial statements, the 2020 charges primarily reflect the discontinuation of certain equipment programs, and were not related to COVID-19.
(7)This primarily reflects the difference between the net carrying amount and the total purchase price of the redeemed notes. For additional information, see "Results of Operations-Other costs/(income)-Interest expense, net" below.
EBITDA GAAP Reconciliations. EBITDA represents the sum of net income, provision for income taxes, interest expense, net, depreciation of rental equipment and non-rental depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA represents EBITDA plus the sum of the merger related costs, restructuring charge, stock compensation expense, net, and the impact of the fair value mark-up of acquired fleet. These items are excluded from adjusted EBITDA internally when evaluating our operating performance and for strategic planning and forecasting purposes, and allow investors to make a more meaningful comparison between our core business operating results over different periods of time, as well as with those of other similar companies. The net income and adjusted EBITDA margins represent net income or adjusted EBITDA divided by total revenue. Management believes that EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA, when viewed with the Company’s results under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and the accompanying reconciliations, provide useful information about operating performance and period-over-period growth, and provide additional information that is useful for evaluating the operating performance of our core business without regard to potential distortions. Additionally, management believes that EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA help investors gain an understanding of the factors and trends affecting our ongoing cash earnings, from which capital investments are made and debt is serviced. However, EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA are not measures of financial performance or liquidity under GAAP and, accordingly, should not be considered as alternatives to net income or cash flow from operating activities as indicators of operating performance or liquidity.
The table below provides a reconciliation between net income and EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA:
The table below provides a reconciliation between net cash provided by operating activities and EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA:
_________________
(1)This reflects transaction costs associated with the NES and Neff acquisitions that were completed in 2017, and the BakerCorp and BlueLine acquisitions that were completed in 2018. Merger related costs only include costs associated with major acquisitions that significantly impact our operations. For additional information, see "Results of Operations-Other costs/(income)-merger related costs" below.
(2)As discussed in note 5 to our consolidated financial statements, this primarily reflects severance costs and branch closure charges associated with our restructuring programs.
(3)Represents non-cash, share-based payments associated with the granting of equity instruments.
(4)This reflects additional costs recorded in cost of rental equipment sales associated with the fair value mark-up of rental equipment acquired in the RSC, NES, Neff and BlueLine acquisitions that was subsequently sold.
(5)This primarily reflects the difference between the net carrying amount and the total purchase price of the redeemed notes. For additional information, see "Results of Operations-Other costs/(income)-Interest expense, net" below.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net income decreased $284, or 24.2 percent, and net income margin decreased 220 basis points to 10.4 percent. For the year ended December 31, 2020, adjusted EBITDA decreased $423, or 9.7 percent, and adjusted EBITDA margin decreased 50 basis points to 46.1 percent.
The year-over-year decrease in net income margin primarily reflected 1) decreased gross margin from equipment rentals and 2) increased interest expense, partially offset by lower year-over-year 3) income tax expense and 4) selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expense as a percentage of revenue. Equipment rentals gross margin decreased 220 basis points year-over-year, with 190 basis points of the margin decline due to an increase in depreciation expense as a percentage of revenue. Depreciation expense included a $30 asset impairment charge, which was not related to COVID-19, associated with the discontinuation of certain equipment programs. Excluding the impact of the asset impairment charge, depreciation expense decreased slightly from 2019, but increased as a percentage of revenue, primarily due to COVID-19. As noted above, COVID-19 began to impact our operations in March 2020, and, since then, equipment rentals have remained down year-over-year in response to shelter-in-place orders and other market restrictions. The remaining 30 basis point decline in equipment rentals gross margin was primarily due to the impact of COVID-19, partially offset by actions we have taken to manage operating costs, such as the reduction of overtime and temporary labor, and the leveraging of our current capacity to reduce the need for third-party delivery and repair services. See "Results of Operations-Gross Margin" below for further discussion of
equipment rentals gross margin. Interest expense, net increased $21 year-over-year. Interest expense, net for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 included debt redemption losses of $183 and $61, respectively. Excluding the impact of these losses, interest expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased primarily due to decreases in average debt and the average cost of debt. Year-over-year, the effective income tax rate was largely flat, but income tax expense decreased as a percentage of revenue. SG&A expense as a percentage of revenue decreased primarily due to significant reductions in professional fees and travel and entertainment expenses, which were implemented in response to COVID-19, partially offset by increases in salaries and stock compensation as a percentage of revenue. Total salary and stock compensation expense was largely flat year-over-year, generally reflecting normal variability, but increased as a percentage of revenue due in part to the COVID-19 impact on revenue.
The decrease in the adjusted EBITDA margin primarily reflects 1) lower margins from equipment rentals (excluding depreciation), sales of rental equipment (excluding the adjustment reflected in the table above for the impact of the fair value mark-up of acquired fleet) and service and other revenues and 2) changes in revenue mix, in particular an increase in the proportion of revenue from sales of rental equipment, partially offset by 3) the impact of decreased SG&A expense (excluding stock compensation). Equipment rentals margin (excluding depreciation) decreased 30 basis points primarily due to the impact of COVID-19, partially offset by actions we have taken to manage operating costs, such as the reduction of overtime and temporary labor, and the leveraging of our current capacity to reduce the need for third-party delivery and repair services. See "Results of Operations-Gross Margin" below for further discussion of equipment rentals gross margin. Gross margin from sales of rental equipment (excluding the adjustment reflected in the table above for the impact of the fair value mark-up of acquired fleet) decreased primarily due to changes in pricing and the mix of equipment sold. The decreased gross margin from service and other revenues reflected the impact of COVID-19, which resulted in reduced training revenue without a proportionate reduction in costs. SG&A expense (excluding stock compensation) as a percentage of revenue decreased primarily due to significant reductions in professional fees and travel and entertainment expenses, which were implemented in response to COVID-19, partially offset by an increase in salaries as a percentage of revenue. Salary expense was largely flat year-over-year, generally reflecting normal variability, but increased as a percentage of revenue due in part to the COVID-19 impact on revenue.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net income increased $78, or 7.1 percent, and net income margin decreased 100 basis points to 12.6 percent. For the year ended December 31, 2019, adjusted EBITDA increased $492, or 12.7 percent, and adjusted EBITDA margin decreased 140 basis points to 46.6 percent.
The year-over-year decrease in net income margin primarily reflected 1) decreased gross margin from equipment rentals and 2) increased interest expense, partially offset by lower year-over-year 3) income tax expense and 4) SG&A expense as a percentage of revenue. Equipment rentals gross margin decreased 240 basis points year-over-year, due primarily to the impact of the BlueLine and BakerCorp acquisitions and increased operating costs. The BlueLine and BakerCorp acquisitions were significant drivers of the 19.7 percent depreciation increase, which exceeded the equipment rentals increase of 14.8 percent. Operating costs were impacted by repair and repositioning initiatives that resulted in increased repairs and maintenance expense, which increased 22.4 percent (such increase includes the impact of both 1) the BlueLine and BakerCorp acquisitions and 2) the repair and repositioning initiatives). Net interest expense increased $167 year-over-year primarily due to the debt issued to fund the BakerCorp and BlueLine acquisitions and a $61 debt redemption loss. Our effective tax rate decreased 320 basis points year-over-year primarily due to federal tax credits and favorable changes in the state jurisdictional mix of income. The decrease in SG&A expense as a percentage of revenue primarily reflects a reduction in stock compensation as a percentage of revenue, and decreased bad debt expense. The reduced bad debt expense primarily reflects our adoption in 2019 of an updated lease accounting standard (see note 13 to the consolidated financial statements for further detail). This standard requires that we recognize doubtful accounts associated with lease revenues as a reduction to equipment rentals revenue (such amounts were recognized as SG&A expense prior to 2019).
As discussed above, we completed the acquisitions of BakerCorp and BlueLine in July 2018 and October 2018, respectively, and the adjusted EBITDA increase for 2019 includes the impact of these acquisitions. The decrease in the adjusted EBITDA margin primarily reflects the impact of the BakerCorp and BlueLine acquisitions.
Revenues. Revenues for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020 were as follows:
_________________
(1)Reflects the estimated impact of inflation on the revenue productivity of fleet based on OEC, which is recorded at cost.
(2)Reflects the combined impact of changes in rental rates, time utilization, and mix that contribute to the variance in owned equipment rental revenue. See note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of the different types of equipment rentals revenue. Rental rate changes are calculated based on the year-over-year variance in average contract rates, weighted by the prior period revenue mix. Time utilization is calculated by dividing the amount of time an asset is on rent by the amount of time the asset has been owned during the year. Mix includes the impact of changes in customer, fleet, geographic and segment mix.
(3)Reflects the combined impact of changes in the other types of equipment rentals revenue (see note 3 for further detail), excluding owned equipment rental revenue.
(4)We completed the acquisitions of BakerCorp and BlueLine in July 2018 and October 2018, respectively. The pro forma information includes the standalone, pre-acquisition results of BakerCorp and BlueLine. The pro forma components are not reflected above for 2020 versus 2019 because BakerCorp and BlueLine are fully reflected in our results for these periods.
Equipment rentals include our revenues from renting equipment, as well as revenue related to the fees we charge customers: for equipment delivery and pick-up; to protect the customer against liability for damage to our equipment while on rent; for fuel; and for environmental costs. Collectively, these "ancillary fees" represented approximately 13 percent of equipment rental revenue in 2020. Delivery and pick-up revenue, which represented approximately seven percent of equipment rental revenue in 2020, is the most significant ancillary revenue component. Sales of rental equipment represent our revenues from the sale of used rental equipment. Sales of new equipment represent our revenues from the sale of new equipment. Contractor supplies sales represent our sales of supplies utilized by contractors, which include construction consumables, tools, small equipment and safety supplies. Services and other revenues primarily represent our revenues earned from providing repair and maintenance services on our customers’ fleet (including parts sales). See note 3 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion of our revenue recognition accounting.
2020 total revenues of $8.5 billion decreased 8.8 percent compared with 2019. Equipment rentals and sales of rental equipment are our largest revenue types (together, they accounted for 94 percent of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020). Equipment rentals decreased 10.3 percent. COVID-19 began to impact our operations in March 2020. Through February 2020, equipment rentals were up slightly year-over-year. Since March, equipment rentals have decreased year-over-year, primarily due to the impact of COVID-19. Fleet productivity decreased 6.9 percent, primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 since March, when rental volume declined in response to shelter-in-place orders and other market restrictions.
Through February, fleet productivity was flat year-over-year and in line with expectations. Sales of rental equipment did not change materially year-over-year.
2019 total revenues of $9.4 billion increased 16.2 percent compared with 2018. Equipment rentals and sales of rental equipment are our largest revenue types (together, they accounted for 94 percent of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019). Equipment rentals increased 14.8 percent, primarily due to a 17.7 percent increase in average OEC, which includes the impact of the BakerCorp and BlueLine acquisitions. On a pro forma basis including the standalone, pre-acquisition results of BakerCorp and BlueLine, equipment rentals increased 4.1 percent, primarily due to a 4.9 percent increase in average OEC and a fleet productivity increase of 0.6 percent, partially offset by the impact of fleet inflation. Sales of rental equipment increased 25.2 percent primarily due to increased volume, which included the impact of the BlueLine acquisition, driven by a larger fleet size in a strong used equipment market.
Critical Accounting Policies
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP. A summary of our significant accounting policies is contained in note 2 to our consolidated financial statements. In applying many accounting principles, we make assumptions, estimates and/or judgments. These assumptions, estimates and/or judgments are often subjective and may change based on changing circumstances or changes in our analysis. Material changes in these assumptions, estimates and/or judgments have the potential to materially alter our results of operations. We have identified below our accounting policies that we believe could potentially produce materially different results if we were to change underlying assumptions, estimates and/or judgments. Although actual results may differ from those estimates, we believe the estimates are reasonable and appropriate.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts. We maintain allowances for doubtful accounts. These allowances reflect our estimate of the amount of our receivables that we will be unable to collect based on historical write-off experience and, as applicable, current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts that affect collectibility. Our allowance for doubtful accounts as of December 31, 2020 included an adjustment for the estimated impact of COVID-19 on future collectibility that was not material to our financial statements. Our estimate could require change based on changing circumstances, including changes in the economy or in the particular circumstances of individual customers. Accordingly, we may be required to increase or decrease our allowances. Trade receivables that have contractual maturities of one year or less are written-off when they are determined to be uncollectible based on the criteria necessary to qualify as a deduction for federal tax purposes. Write-offs of such receivables require management approval based on specified dollar thresholds. See note 3 to our consolidated financial statements for further detail.
Useful Lives and Salvage Values of Rental Equipment and Property and Equipment. We depreciate rental equipment and property and equipment over their estimated useful lives, after giving effect to an estimated salvage value which ranges from zero percent to 10 percent of cost. Rental equipment is depreciated whether or not it is out on rent.
The useful life of an asset is determined based on our estimate of the period over which the asset will generate revenues; such periods are periodically reviewed for reasonableness. In addition, the salvage value, which is also reviewed periodically for reasonableness, is determined based on our estimate of the minimum value we will realize from the asset after such period. We may be required to change these estimates based on changes in our industry or other changing circumstances. If these estimates change in the future, we may be required to recognize increased or decreased depreciation expense for these assets.
To the extent that the useful lives of all of our rental equipment were to increase or decrease by one year, we estimate that our annual depreciation expense would decrease or increase by approximately $174 or $226, respectively. If the estimated salvage values of all of our rental equipment were to increase or decrease by one percentage point, we estimate that our annual depreciation expense would change by approximately $18. Any change in depreciation expense as a result of a hypothetical change in either useful lives or salvage values would generally result in a proportional increase or decrease in the gross profit we would recognize upon the ultimate sale of the asset. To the extent that the useful lives of all of our depreciable property and equipment were to increase or decrease by one year, we estimate that our annual non-rental depreciation expense would decrease or increase by approximately $35 or $54, respectively.
Acquisition Accounting. We have made a number of acquisitions in the past and may continue to make acquisitions in the future. The assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded based on their respective fair values at the date of acquisition. Long-lived assets (principally rental equipment), goodwill and other intangible assets generally represent the largest components of our acquisitions. Rental equipment is valued utilizing either a cost, market or income approach, or a combination of certain of these methods, depending on the asset being valued and the availability of market or income data. The intangible assets that we have acquired are non-compete agreements, customer relationships and trade names and associated trademarks. The estimated fair values of these intangible assets reflect various assumptions about discount rates, revenue growth rates, operating margins, terminal values, useful lives and other prospective financial information. Goodwill is calculated as the excess of the cost of the acquired entity over the net of the fair value of the assets acquired and the liabilities
assumed. Non-compete agreements, customer relationships and trade names and associated trademarks are valued based on an excess earnings or income approach based on projected cash flows.
Determining the fair value of the assets and liabilities acquired is judgmental in nature and can involve the use of significant estimates and assumptions. The significant judgments include estimation of future cash flows, which is dependent on forecasts; estimation of the long-term rate of growth; estimation of the useful life over which cash flows will occur; and determination of a risk-adjusted weighted average cost of capital. When appropriate, our estimates of the fair values of assets and liabilities acquired include assistance from independent third-party appraisal firms. The judgments made in determining the estimated fair value assigned to the assets acquired, as well as the estimated life of the assets, can materially impact net income in periods subsequent to the acquisition through depreciation and amortization, and in certain instances through impairment charges, if the asset becomes impaired in the future. As discussed below, we regularly review for impairments.
When we make an acquisition, we also acquire other assets and assume liabilities. These other assets and liabilities typically include, but are not limited to, parts inventory, accounts receivable, accounts payable and other working capital items. Because of their short-term nature, the fair values of these other assets and liabilities generally approximate the book values on the acquired entities' balance sheets.
Evaluation of Goodwill Impairment. Goodwill is tested for impairment annually or more frequently if an event or circumstance indicates that an impairment loss may have been incurred. Application of the goodwill impairment test requires judgment, including: the identification of reporting units; assignment of assets and liabilities to reporting units; assignment of goodwill to reporting units; determination of the fair value of each reporting unit; and an assumption as to the form of the transaction in which the reporting unit would be acquired by a market participant (either a taxable or nontaxable transaction).
We estimate the fair value of our reporting units (which are our regions) using a combination of an income approach based on the present value of estimated future cash flows and a market approach based on market price data of shares of our Company and other corporations engaged in similar businesses as well as acquisition multiples paid in recent transactions. We believe this approach, which utilizes multiple valuation techniques, yields the most appropriate evidence of fair value.
As discussed in note 2 to our consolidated financial statements, in 2020, we adopted accounting guidance that eliminated the second step from the goodwill impairment test (this guidance did not have a significant impact on our financial statements). Prior guidance required utilizing a two-step process to review goodwill for impairment. A second step was required if there was an indication that an impairment may exist, and the second step required calculating the potential impairment by comparing the implied fair value of the reporting unit's goodwill (as if purchase accounting were performed on the testing date) with the carrying amount of the goodwill. We did not perform this second step for the goodwill impairment test conducted as of October 1, 2020 or 2019 (for 2020, because the adopted accounting guidance eliminated the second step, and, for 2019, because there was no indication that an impairment may have existed). The first step of the impairment test requires comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount. Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") guidance permits entities to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount.
Inherent in our preparation of cash flow projections are assumptions and estimates derived from a review of our operating results, business plans, expected growth rates, cost of capital and tax rates. We also make certain forecasts about future economic conditions, interest rates and other market data. Many of the factors used in assessing fair value are outside the control of management, and these assumptions and estimates may change in future periods. Changes in assumptions or estimates could materially affect the estimate of the fair value of a reporting unit, and therefore could affect the likelihood and amount of potential impairment. The following assumptions are significant to our income approach:
Business Projections- We make assumptions about the level of equipment rental activity in the marketplace and cost levels. These assumptions drive our planning assumptions for pricing and utilization and also represent key inputs for developing our cash flow projections. These projections are developed using our internal business plans over a ten-year planning period that are updated at least annually;
Long-term Growth Rates- Beyond the planning period, we also utilize an assumed long-term growth rate representing the expected rate at which a reporting unit's cash flow stream is projected to grow. These rates are used to calculate the terminal value of our reporting units, and are added to the cash flows projected during our ten-year planning period; and
Discount Rates- Each reporting unit's estimated future cash flows are discounted at a rate that is consistent with a weighted-average cost of capital that is likely to be expected by market participants. The weighted-average cost of capital is an estimate of the overall after-tax rate of return required by equity and debt holders of a business enterprise.
The market approach is one of the other methods used for estimating the fair value of our reporting units' business enterprise. This approach takes two forms: The first is based on the market value (market capitalization plus interest-bearing liabilities) and operating metrics (e.g., revenue and EBITDA) of companies engaged in the same or similar line of business. The second form is based on multiples paid in recent acquisitions of companies.
In connection with our goodwill impairment test that was conducted as of October 1, 2020, we bypassed the qualitative assessment for each reporting unit and quantitatively compared the fair values of our reporting units with their carrying amounts. We considered the impact of COVID-19 when performing the test, and it did not have a material impact on the test results. Our goodwill impairment testing as of this date indicated that all of our reporting units, excluding our Fluid Solutions Europe reporting unit, had estimated fair values which exceeded their respective carrying amounts by at least 42 percent. As discussed above, in July 2018, we completed the acquisition of BakerCorp. All of the assets in the Fluid Solutions Europe reporting unit were acquired in the BakerCorp acquisition. The estimated fair value of our Fluid Solutions Europe reporting unit exceeded its carrying amount by 22 percent. As all of the assets in the Fluid Solutions Europe reporting unit were recorded at fair value as of the July 2018 acquisition date, we expected the percentage by which the Fluid Solutions Europe reporting unit’s fair value exceeded its carrying value to be significantly less than the equivalent percentages determined for our other reporting units.
In connection with our goodwill impairment test that was conducted as of October 1, 2019, we bypassed the qualitative assessment for each reporting unit and proceeded directly to the first step of the goodwill impairment test. Our goodwill impairment testing as of this date indicated that all of our reporting units, excluding our Fluid Solutions Europe reporting unit, had estimated fair values which exceeded their respective carrying amounts by at least 32 percent. As discussed above, in July 2018, we completed the acquisition of BakerCorp. All of the assets in the Fluid Solutions Europe reporting unit were acquired in the BakerCorp acquisition. The estimated fair value of our Fluid Solutions Europe reporting unit exceeded its carrying amount by 12 percent. As all of the assets in the Fluid Solutions Europe reporting unit were recorded at fair value as of the July 2018 acquisition date, we expected the percentage by which the Fluid Solutions Europe reporting unit’s fair value exceeded its carrying value to be significantly less than the equivalent percentages determined for our other reporting units.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets (Excluding Goodwill). We review the recoverability of our rental equipment and property and equipment when events or changes in circumstances occur that indicate that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable. If there are such indications, we assess our ability to recover the carrying value of the assets from their expected future pre-tax cash flows (undiscounted and without interest charges). If the expected cash flows are less than the carrying value of the assets, an impairment loss is recognized for the difference between the estimated fair value and carrying value. We also conduct impairment reviews in connection with branch consolidations and other changes in our business. As discussed in note 5 to our consolidated financial statements, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded asset impairment charges of $36, which principally relate to the discontinuation of certain equipment programs, and were not related to COVID-19. We recognized immaterial asset impairment charges during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
In support of our review for indicators of impairment, we perform a review of all assets at the district level relative to district performance and conclude whether indicators of impairment exist associated with our long-lived assets, including rental equipment. We also specifically review the financial performance of our rental equipment. Such review includes an estimate of the future rental revenues from our rental assets based on current and expected utilization levels, the age of the assets and their remaining useful lives. Additionally, we estimate when the assets are expected to be removed or retired from our rental fleet as well as the expected proceeds to be realized upon disposition. Based on our most recently completed quarterly reviews, there were no indications of impairment associated with our rental equipment or property and equipment.
Income Taxes. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for certain future deductible or taxable temporary differences expected to be reported in our income tax returns. These deferred tax assets and liabilities are computed using the tax rates that are expected to apply in the periods when the related future deductible or taxable temporary difference is expected to be settled or realized. In the case of deferred tax assets, the future realization of the deferred tax benefits and carryforwards are determined with consideration to historical profitability, projected future taxable income, the expected timing of the reversals of existing temporary differences, and tax planning strategies. After consideration of all these factors, we recognize deferred tax assets when we believe that it is more likely than not that we will realize them. The most significant positive evidence that we consider in the recognition of deferred tax assets is the expected reversal of cumulative deferred tax liabilities resulting from book versus tax depreciation of our rental equipment fleet that is well in excess of the deferred tax assets.
We use a two-step approach for recognizing and measuring tax benefits taken or expected to be taken in a tax return regarding uncertainties in income tax positions. The first step is recognition: we determine whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes, based on the technical merits of the position. In evaluating whether a tax position has met the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, we presume that the position will be examined by the appropriate taxing authority with full knowledge of all relevant
information. The second step is measurement: a tax position that meets the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold is measured to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the financial statements. The tax position is measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement.
We are subject to ongoing tax examinations and assessments in various jurisdictions. Accordingly, accruals for tax contingencies are established based on the probable outcomes of such matters. Our ongoing assessments of the probable outcomes of the examinations and related tax accruals require judgment and could increase or decrease our effective tax rate as well as impact our operating results.
We have historically considered the undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries to be indefinitely reinvested, and, accordingly, no taxes were provided on such earnings prior to the fourth quarter of 2020. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we identified $135 of cash in our foreign operations in excess of near-term working capital needs, and determined that this amount could no longer be considered indefinitely reinvested. As a result, our prior assertion that all undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries should be considered indefinitely reinvested has changed, and, in the fourth quarter of 2020, we recorded the immaterial taxes on a distribution of the $135 of cash.
We continue to expect that the remaining balance of our undistributed foreign earnings will be indefinitely reinvested. If we determine that all or a portion of such foreign earnings are no longer indefinitely reinvested, we may be subject to additional foreign withholding taxes and U.S. state income taxes.
The Tax Act discussed above required a one-time transition tax for deemed repatriation of accumulated undistributed earnings of certain foreign investments, which we primarily recognized upon adoption of the Tax Act in 2017. As discussed in note 14 to the consolidated financial statements, we completed our accounting for the tax effects of enactment of the Tax Act in 2018.
Reserves for Claims. We are exposed to various claims relating to our business, including those for which we retain portions of the losses through the application of deductibles and self-insured retentions, which we sometimes refer to as “self-insurance.” These claims include (i) workers' compensation claims and (ii) claims by third parties for injury or property damage involving our equipment, vehicles or personnel. These types of claims may take a substantial amount of time to resolve and, accordingly, the ultimate liability associated with a particular claim may not be known for an extended period of time. Our methodology for developing self-insurance reserves is based on management estimates, which incorporate periodic actuarial valuations. Our estimation process considers, among other matters, the cost of known claims over time, cost inflation and incurred but not reported claims. These estimates may change based on, among other things, changes in our claims history or receipt of additional information relevant to assessing the claims. Further, these estimates may prove to be inaccurate due to factors such as adverse judicial determinations or settlements at higher than estimated amounts. Accordingly, we may be required to increase or decrease our reserve levels.
Results of Operations
As discussed in note 4 to our consolidated financial statements, our reportable segments are general rentals and trench, power and fluid solutions. The general rentals segment includes the rental of construction, aerial, industrial and homeowner equipment and related services and activities. The general rentals segment’s customers include construction and industrial companies, manufacturers, utilities, municipalities, homeowners and government entities. This segment operates throughout the United States and Canada. The trench, power and fluid solutions segment is comprised of: (i) the Trench Safety region, which rents trench safety equipment such as trench shields, aluminum hydraulic shoring systems, slide rails, crossing plates, construction lasers and line testing equipment for underground work, (ii) the Power and HVAC region, which rents power and HVAC equipment such as portable diesel generators, electrical distribution equipment, and temperature control equipment including heating and cooling equipment, and (iii) the Fluid Solutions and (iv) Fluid Solutions Europe regions, both of which rent equipment primarily used for fluid containment, transfer and treatment. The trench, power and fluid solutions segment’s customers include construction companies involved in infrastructure projects, municipalities and industrial companies. This segment operates throughout the United States and in Canada and Europe.
As discussed in note 4 to our consolidated financial statements, we aggregate our eleven geographic regions-Carolinas, Gulf South, Industrial (which serves the geographic Gulf region and has a strong industrial presence), Mid-Atlantic, Mid Central, Midwest, Northeast, Pacific West, South, Southeast and Western Canada-into our general rentals reporting segment. Historically, there have been variances in the levels of equipment rentals gross margins achieved by these regions. For the five year period ended December 31, 2020, three of our general rentals' regions had an equipment rentals gross margin that varied by between 10 percent and 25 percent from the equipment rentals gross margins of the aggregated general rentals' regions over the same period. For the five year period ended December 31, 2020, the general rentals' region with the lowest equipment rentals gross margin was Western Canada. The Western Canada region's equipment rentals gross margin of 30.9 percent for the five year period ended December 31, 2020 was 25 percent less than the equipment rentals gross margins of the aggregated general rentals' regions over the same period. The Western Canada region's equipment rentals gross margin was less than the
other general rentals' regions during this period primarily due to declines in the oil and gas business in the region. The rental industry is cyclical, and there historically have been regions with equipment rentals gross margins that varied by greater than 10 percent from the equipment rentals gross margins of the aggregated general rentals' regions, though the specific regions with margin variances of over 10 percent have fluctuated. We expect margin convergence going forward given the cyclical nature of the rental industry, and monitor the margin variances and confirm the expectation of future convergence on a quarterly basis. When monitoring for margin convergence, we include projected future results.
We similarly monitor the margin variances for the regions in the trench, power and fluid solutions segment. The trench, power and fluid solutions segment includes the locations acquired in the July 2018 BakerCorp acquisition. As such, there is not a long history of the acquired locations' rental margins included in the trench, power and fluid solutions segment. When monitoring for margin convergence, we include projected future results. We monitor the trench, power and fluid solutions segment margin variances and confirm the expectation of future convergence on a quarterly basis. The historic, pre-acquisition margins for the acquired BakerCorp locations are lower than the margins achieved at the other locations in the segment. We expect that the margins at the acquired locations will increase as we realize synergies following the acquisition, as a result of which, we expect future margin convergence.
We believe that the regions that are aggregated into our segments have similar economic characteristics, as each region is capital intensive, offers similar products to similar customers, uses similar methods to distribute its products, and is subject to similar competitive risks. The aggregation of our regions also reflects the management structure that we use for making operating decisions and assessing performance. Although we believe aggregating these regions into our reporting segments for segment reporting purposes is appropriate, to the extent that there are significant margin variances that do not converge, we may be required to disaggregate the regions into separate reporting segments. Any such disaggregation would have no impact on our consolidated results of operations.
These segments align our external segment reporting with how management evaluates business performance and allocates resources. We evaluate segment performance primarily based on segment equipment rentals gross profit. Our revenues, operating results, and financial condition fluctuate from quarter to quarter reflecting the seasonal rental patterns of our customers, with rental activity tending to be lower in the winter.
Revenues by segment were as follows:
Equipment rentals. 2020 equipment rentals of $7.1 billion decreased 10.3 percent. COVID-19 began to impact our operations in March 2020. Through February 2020, equipment rentals were up slightly year-over-year. Since March, equipment rentals have decreased year-over-year, primarily due to the impact of COVID-19. Fleet productivity decreased 6.9 percent, primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 since March, when rental volume declined in response to shelter-in-place orders and other market restrictions. Through February, fleet productivity was flat year-over-year and in line with expectations. Equipment rentals represented 84 percent of total revenues in 2020.
On a segment basis, equipment rentals represented 82 percent and 91 percent of total revenues for general rentals and trench, power and fluid solutions, respectively. General rentals equipment rentals decreased 11.8 percent as compared to 2019, primarily due to COVID-19. As noted above, COVID-19 began to impact our operations in March 2020, when rental volume declined in response to shelter-in-place orders and other market restrictions. Trench, power and fluid solutions equipment rentals decreased 5.3 percent as compared to 2019, primarily due to COVID-19, partially offset by a slight increase in average OEC.
2019 equipment rentals of $8.0 billion increased 14.8 percent, primarily due to a 17.7 percent increase in average OEC, which includes the impact of the BakerCorp and BlueLine acquisitions. On a pro forma basis including the standalone, pre-acquisition results of BakerCorp and BlueLine, equipment rentals increased 4.1 percent, primarily due to a 4.9 percent increase in average OEC and a fleet productivity increase of 0.6 percent, partially offset by the impact of inflation. Equipment rentals represented 85 percent of total revenues in 2019.
On a segment basis, equipment rentals represented 83 percent and 92 percent of total revenues for general rentals and trench, power and fluid solutions, respectively. General rentals equipment rentals increased 11.7 percent as compared to 2018, primarily reflecting a 15.4 percent increase in average OEC, which includes the impact of the BlueLine acquisition. On a pro forma basis including the standalone, pre-acquisition results of BlueLine, equipment rental revenue increased 1.8 percent year-over-year, primarily due to a 3.8 percent increase in average OEC, partially offset by the impact of fleet inflation. Trench, power and fluid solutions equipment rentals increased 26.8 percent as compared to 2018, primarily reflecting the impact of acquisitions, including BakerCorp, and cold starts. On a pro forma basis including the standalone, pre-acquisition results of BakerCorp, equipment rental revenue increased 12.8 percent year-over-year, primarily due to a 14.1 percent increase in average OEC, partially offset by the impact of fleet inflation. The pro forma increase in average OEC includes the impact of cold starts and acquisitions other than BakerCorp.
Sales of rental equipment. For the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020, sales of rental equipment represented approximately 9 percent of our total revenues. Our general rentals segment accounted for most of these sales. 2020 sales of rental equipment did not change materially from 2019. 2019 sales of rental equipment of $831 increased 25.2 percent from 2018 primarily reflecting increased volume, which included the impact of the BlueLine acquisition, driven by a larger fleet size in a strong used equipment market. Average OEC for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased 17.7 percent year-over-year.
Sales of new equipment. For the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020, sales of new equipment represented approximately 3 percent of our total revenues. Our general rentals segment accounted for most of these sales. 2020 sales of new equipment of $247 decreased 7.8 percent from 2019 primarily due to the impact of COVID-19. 2019 sales of new equipment of $268 increased 28.8 percent from 2018 primarily reflecting increased volume driven by broad-based demand.
Sales of contractor supplies. For the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020, sales of contractor supplies represented approximately 1 percent of our total revenues. Our general rentals segment accounted for most of these sales. 2020 sales of contractor supplies did not change materially from 2019, and 2019 sales of contractor supplies did not change materially from 2018.
Service and other revenues. For the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020, service and other revenues represented approximately 2 percent of our total revenues. Our general rentals segment accounted for most of these sales. 2020 service and other revenues did not change materially from 2019. 2019 service and other revenues of $184 increased 27.8 percent from 2018 primarily reflecting an increased emphasis on this line of business and the impact of the BlueLine acquisition.
Fourth Quarter 2020 Items. As discussed in note 12 to our consolidated financial statements, in the fourth quarter of 2020, we redeemed all of our 4 5/8 percent Senior Notes due 2025, using borrowings available under our ABL facility. Upon redemption, we recognized a loss of $24 in interest expense, net, reflecting the difference between the net carrying amount and the total purchase price of the redeemed notes.
Fourth Quarter 2019 Items. In the fourth quarter of 2019, we issued $750 aggregate principal amount of 3 7/8 percent Senior Secured Notes due 2027 and redeemed all of our 4 5/8 percent Senior Secured Notes. Upon redemption, we recognized a
loss of $29 in interest expense, net. The loss represented the difference between the net carrying amount and the total purchase price of the redeemed notes. In the fourth quarter of 2019, we also completed the $1.25 billion share repurchase program that commenced in July 2018.
Segment Equipment Rentals Gross Profit
Segment equipment rentals gross profit and gross margin for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020 were as follows:
General rentals. For the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020, general rentals accounted for 75 percent of our total equipment rentals gross profit. This contribution percentage is consistent with general rentals’ equipment rental revenue contribution over the same period. For the year ended December 31, 2020, general rentals’ equipment rentals gross profit decreased by $453, and equipment rentals gross margin decreased by 310 basis points, from 2019, with 240 basis points of the margin decline due to an increase in depreciation expense as a percentage of revenue. The increase in depreciation expense includes a $26 asset impairment charge, which was not related to COVID-19, associated with the discontinuation of certain equipment programs. Excluding the impact of the asset impairment charge, depreciation expense decreased slightly from 2019, but increased as a percentage of revenue, primarily due to COVID-19. As noted above, COVID-19 began to impact our operations in March 2020, and, since then, equipment rentals have remained down year-over-year in response to shelter-in-place orders and other market restrictions. The remaining 70 basis point decline in equipment rentals gross margin was primarily due to the impact of COVID-19, partially offset by the impact of actions we have taken to manage operating costs, such as the reduction of overtime and temporary labor, and the leveraging of our current capacity to reduce the need for third-party delivery and repair services.
General rentals’ equipment rentals gross profit in 2019 increased by $114, primarily due to increased equipment rentals, including the impact of the BlueLine acquisition. As discussed above, equipment rentals increased 11.7 percent as compared to 2018, primarily reflecting a 15.4 percent increase in average OEC. Equipment rentals gross margin decreased 250 basis points from 2018, due primarily to the impact of the BlueLine acquisition and increased operating costs. The BlueLine acquisition was a significant driver of the 17.7 percent depreciation increase, which exceeded the equipment rentals increase of 11.7 percent. Operating costs were impacted by repair and repositioning initiatives that resulted in increased repairs and maintenance expense, which increased 19.8 percent (such increase includes the impact of both the BlueLine acquisition and the repair and repositioning initiatives).
Trench, power and fluid solutions. For the year ended December 31, 2020, equipment rentals gross profit decreased by $35, and equipment rentals gross margin increased by 50 basis points from 2019. The increased gross margin primarily reflected decreases in certain operating costs, including delivery, repairs and labor, partially offset by increases in depreciation expense and certain fixed expenses, such as facility costs, as a percentage of revenue. As noted above, we have reduced overtime and temporary labor primarily in response to the impact of COVID-19, and have leveraged our current capacity to reduce the need for third-party delivery and repair services. Depreciation expense was largely flat year-over-year, but increased as a percentage of revenue, primarily due to COVID-19.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, equipment rentals gross profit increased by $130 and equipment rentals gross margin decreased 280 basis points from 2018. The increase in equipment rentals gross profit primarily reflects increased equipment rentals revenue on a larger fleet. Year-over-year, trench, power and fluid solutions equipment rentals increased 26.8 percent and average OEC increased 36.0 percent primarily due to the impact of acquisitions, including BakerCorp, and cold starts. On a pro forma basis including the standalone, pre-acquisition results of BakerCorp, equipment rental revenue increased
12.8 percent year-over-year, primarily due to a 14.1 percent increase in average OEC. The decrease in the equipment rentals gross margin was primarily due to the impact of acquisitions.
Gross Margin. Gross margins by revenue classification were as follows:
2020 gross margin of 37.3 percent decreased 190 basis points from 2019. Equipment rentals gross margin decreased 220 basis points year-over-year, with 190 basis points of the margin decline due to an increase in depreciation expense as a percentage of revenue. Depreciation expense included a $30 asset impairment charge, which was not related to COVID-19, associated with the discontinuation of certain equipment programs. Excluding the impact of the asset impairment charge, depreciation expense decreased slightly from 2019, but increased as a percentage of revenue, primarily due to COVID-19. As noted above, COVID-19 began to impact our operations in March 2020, and, since then, equipment rentals have remained down year-over-year in response to shelter-in-place orders and other market restrictions. The remaining 30 basis point decline in equipment rentals gross margin was primarily due to the impact of COVID-19, partially offset by the impact of actions we have taken to manage operating costs, such as the reduction of overtime and temporary labor, and the leveraging of our current capacity to reduce the need for third-party delivery and repair services. Gross margin from sales of rental equipment increased 100 basis points from 2019 primarily due to lower margin sales of fleet acquired in the BlueLine acquisition in 2019. The gross margin fluctuations from sales of new equipment, contractor supplies sales and service and other revenues generally reflect normal variability and, to varying degrees, the impact of COVID-19, and such revenue types did not account for a significant portion of total gross profit (gross profit for these revenue types represented 4 percent of total gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020). Gross margin from service and other revenues was particularly impacted by COVID-19, which resulted in reduced training revenue without a proportionate reduction in costs.
2019 gross margin of 39.2 percent decreased 260 basis points from 2018. Equipment rentals gross margin decreased 240 basis points year-over-year, due primarily to the impact of the BlueLine and BakerCorp acquisitions and increased operating costs. The BlueLine and BakerCorp acquisitions were significant drivers of the 19.7 percent depreciation increase, which exceeded the equipment rentals increase of 14.8 percent. Operating costs were impacted by repair and repositioning initiatives that resulted in increased repairs and maintenance expense, which increased 22.4 percent (such increase includes the impact of both 1) the BlueLine and BakerCorp acquisitions and 2) the repair and repositioning initiatives). On a pro forma basis including the standalone, pre-acquisition results of BakerCorp and BlueLine, equipment rentals increased 4.1 percent, primarily due to a 4.9 percent increase in average OEC and a fleet productivity increase of 0.6 percent, partially offset by the impact of inflation. Gross margin from sales of rental equipment decreased 420 basis points from 2018 primarily due to lower margin sales of fleet acquired in the BlueLine acquisition and changes in the mix of equipment sold and channel mix. The gross margin fluctuations from sales of new equipment, contractor supplies sales and service and other revenues generally reflect normal variability, and such margins did not have a significant impact on total gross margin (gross profit for these revenue types represented 4 percent of total gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2019).
Other costs/(income)
The table below includes the other costs/(income) in our consolidated statements of income, as well as key associated metrics, for the three years in the period ended December 31, 2020:
SG&A expense primarily includes sales force compensation, information technology costs, third party professional fees, management salaries, bad debt expense and clerical and administrative overhead. The decrease in SG&A expense as a percentage of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily reflects significant reductions in professional fees and travel and entertainment expenses, which were implemented in response to COVID-19, partially offset by increases in salaries and stock compensation as a percentage of revenue. Total salary and stock compensation expense was largely flat year-over-year, generally reflecting normal variability, but increased as a percentage of revenue due in part to the COVID-19 impact on revenue. The decrease in SG&A expense as a percentage of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily reflects a reduction in stock compensation as a percentage of revenue, and decreased bad debt expense. The reduced bad debt expense primarily reflects our adoption in 2019 of an updated lease accounting standard (see note 13 to the consolidated financial statements for further detail). This standard requires that we recognize doubtful accounts associated with lease revenues as a reduction to equipment rentals revenue (such amounts were recognized as SG&A expense prior to 2019).
The merger related costs reflect transaction costs associated with the NES and Neff acquisitions that were completed in 2017, and the BakerCorp and BlueLine acquisitions that were completed in 2018. We have made a number of acquisitions in the past and may continue to make acquisitions in the future. Merger related costs only include costs associated with major acquisitions that significantly impact our operations. The historic acquisitions that have included merger related costs are RSC, which had annual revenues of approximately $1.5 billion prior to the acquisition, National Pump, which had annual revenues of over $200 prior to the acquisition, NES, which had annual revenues of approximately $369 prior to the acquisition, Neff, which had annual revenues of approximately $413 prior to the acquisition, BakerCorp, which had annual revenues of approximately $295 prior to the acquisition, and BlueLine, which had annual revenues of approximately $786 prior to the acquisition.
The restructuring charges for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 primarily reflect severance costs and branch closure charges associated with our restructuring programs. See note 5 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Non-rental depreciation and amortization includes (i) the amortization of other intangible assets and (ii) depreciation expense associated with equipment that is not offered for rent (such as computers and office equipment) and amortization expense associated with leasehold improvements. Our other intangible assets consist of customer relationships, non-compete agreements and trade names and associated trademarks. The year-over-year increase in non-rental depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily reflects the impact of the BakerCorp and BlueLine acquisitions discussed above.
Interest expense, net for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 included aggregate debt redemption losses of $183 and $61, respectively. The debt redemption losses primarily reflect the difference between the net carrying amount and the total purchase price of the redeemed notes. Excluding the impact of these losses, interest expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by 17.2 percent year-over-year primarily due to decreases in average debt and the average cost of debt. Excluding the impact of the 2019 losses, interest expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased year-over-year primarily due to the impact of higher average debt. The year-over-year increase in average debt includes the impact of the debt used to finance the BakerCorp and BlueLine acquisitions discussed above.
A detailed reconciliation of the effective tax rates to the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate is included in note 14 to our consolidated financial statements.
In March 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act ("CARES Act”) was enacted. The CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions relating to net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credit
refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations, technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property and deferral of employer payroll taxes. The CARES Act did not materially impact our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020, although it will impact the timing of future cash payments for taxes. As of December 31, 2020, we have deferred employer payroll taxes of $54 under the CARES Act, with approximately half of the deferral due in each of 2021 and 2022.
Balance sheet. Accounts receivable, net decreased by $215, or 14.1 percent, from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 primarily due to decreased revenue, which included the impact of COVID-19. Prepaid expenses and other assets increased by $235, or 167.9 percent, from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, primarily due to deposits placed on rental equipment as of December 31, 2020, as discussed further in note 6 to our consolidated financial statements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources.
We manage our liquidity using internal cash management practices, which are subject to (i) the policies and cooperation of the financial institutions we utilize to maintain and provide cash management services, (ii) the terms and other requirements of the agreements to which we are a party and (iii) the statutes, regulations and practices of each of the local jurisdictions in which we operate. See "Financial Overview" above for a summary of the 2020 capital structure actions taken to improve our financial flexibility and liquidity.
Since 2012, we have repurchased a total of $3.7 billion of Holdings' common stock under five completed share repurchase programs. On January 28, 2020, our Board of Directors authorized a new $500 share repurchase program, which commenced in the first quarter of 2020 and was intended to run for 12 months. Through March 18, 2020, when the program was paused due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we repurchased $257 of common stock under the program. We are currently unable to estimate when, or if, the program will be restarted, and we expect to provide an update at a future date.
Our principal existing sources of cash are cash generated from operations and from the sale of rental equipment, and borrowings available under our ABL and accounts receivable securitization facilities. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $202. Cash equivalents at December 31, 2020 consist of direct obligations of financial institutions rated A or better. We believe that our existing sources of cash will be sufficient to support our existing operations over the next 12 months. The table below presents financial information associated with our principal sources of cash as of and for the year December 31, 2020:
___________________
(1)The outstanding amount of debt under the ABL facility and the average outstanding amount are less than the maximum outstanding amount primarily due to the use of proceeds (i) from the issuance of 4 percent Senior Notes discussed in note 12 to the consolidated financial statements and (ii) from operations to reduce borrowings under the facility. At the time of the 4 percent Senior Notes offering, we indicated our expectation that we would re-borrow an amount equal to the net proceeds from the offering, along with additional borrowings under the ABL facility, to redeem the $800 principal amount of our 5 1/2 percent Senior Notes due 2025 on or after July 15, 2020. Prior to redeeming the 5 1/2 percent Senior Notes due 2025, we considered the impact of COVID-19 on liquidity, and assessed our available sources and anticipated uses of cash, including, with respect to sources, cash generated from operations and from the sale of rental equipment. In August 2020, we redeemed the 5 1/2 percent Senior Notes due 2025. As discussed above, disciplined management of capital expenditures and fleet capacity is a component of our COVID-19 response plan, and, in 2020, capital expenditures
decreased significantly year-over-year. The decreased capital expenditures contributed to our ability to use proceeds from operations to reduce borrowings under the ABL facility.
We expect that our principal needs for cash relating to our operations over the next 12 months will be to fund (i) operating activities and working capital, (ii) the purchase of rental equipment and inventory items offered for sale, (iii) payments due under operating leases, (iv) debt service, (v) share repurchases and (vi) acquisitions. We plan to fund such cash requirements from our existing sources of cash. In addition, we may seek additional financing through the securitization of some of our real estate, the use of additional operating leases or other financing sources as market conditions permit. For information on the scheduled principal and interest payments coming due on our outstanding debt and on the payments coming due under our existing operating leases, see “Certain Information Concerning Contractual Obligations.”
To access the capital markets, we rely on credit rating agencies to assign ratings to our securities as an indicator of credit quality. Lower credit ratings generally result in higher borrowing costs and reduced access to debt capital markets. Credit ratings also affect the costs of derivative transactions, including interest rate and foreign currency derivative transactions. As a result, negative changes in our credit ratings could adversely impact our costs of funding. Our credit ratings as of January 25, 2021 were as follows:
A security rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities. There is no assurance that any rating will remain in effect for a given period of time or that any rating will not be revised or withdrawn by a rating agency in the future.
The amount of our future capital expenditures will depend on a number of factors, including general economic conditions and growth prospects. We expect that we will fund such expenditures from cash generated from operations, proceeds from the sale of rental and non-rental equipment and, if required, borrowings available under the ABL facility and accounts receivable securitization facility. Net rental capital expenditures (defined as purchases of rental equipment less the proceeds from sales of rental equipment) were $103 and $1.301 billion in 2020 and 2019, respectively. As discussed above, disciplined management of capital expenditures and fleet capacity is a component of our COVID-19 response plan, which contributed to the year-over-year decrease in net rental capital expenditures.
Loan Covenants and Compliance. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the covenants and other provisions of the ABL, accounts receivable securitization and term loan facilities and the senior notes. Any failure to be in compliance with any material provision or covenant of these agreements could have a material adverse effect on our liquidity and operations.
The only financial covenant that currently exists under the ABL facility is the fixed charge coverage ratio. Subject to certain limited exceptions specified in the ABL facility, the fixed charge coverage ratio covenant under the ABL facility will only apply in the future if specified availability under the ABL facility falls below 10 percent of the maximum revolver amount under the ABL facility. When certain conditions are met, cash and cash equivalents and borrowing base collateral in excess of the ABL facility size may be included when calculating specified availability under the ABL facility. As of December 31, 2020, specified availability under the ABL facility exceeded the required threshold and, as a result, this financial covenant was inapplicable. Under our accounts receivable securitization facility, we are required, among other things, to maintain certain financial tests relating to: (i) the default ratio, (ii) the delinquency ratio, (iii) the dilution ratio and (iv) days sales outstanding. The accounts receivable securitization facility also requires us to comply with the fixed charge coverage ratio under the ABL facility, to the extent the ratio is applicable under the ABL facility.
URNA’s payment capacity is restricted under the covenants in the ABL and term loan facilities and the indentures governing its outstanding indebtedness. Although this restricted capacity limits our ability to move operating cash flows to Holdings, because of certain intercompany arrangements, we do not expect any material adverse impact on Holdings’ ability to meet its cash obligations.
Sources and Uses of Cash. During 2020, we (i) generated cash from operating activities of $2.658 billion, which included $300 of cash outflow for refundable deposits on expected rental equipment purchases, as discussed further in note 6 to the consolidated financial statements, and (ii) generated cash from the sale of rental and non-rental equipment of $900. We used cash during this period principally to (i) purchase rental and non-rental equipment of $1.158 billion, (ii) make debt payments, net of proceeds, of $1.985 billion and (iii) purchase shares of our common stock for $286. During 2019, we (i) generated cash from operating activities of $3.024 billion and (ii) generated cash from the sale of rental and non-rental equipment of $868. We used cash during this period principally to (i) purchase rental and non-rental equipment of $2.350 billion, (ii) purchase other companies for $249, (iii) make debt payments, net of proceeds, of $418 and (iv) purchase shares of our common stock for $870.
Free Cash Flow GAAP Reconciliation
We define “free cash flow” as net cash provided by operating activities less purchases of, and plus proceeds from, equipment. The equipment purchases and proceeds are included in cash flows from investing activities. Management believes that free cash flow provides useful additional information concerning cash flow available to meet future debt service obligations and working capital requirements. However, free cash flow is not a measure of financial performance or liquidity under GAAP. Accordingly, free cash flow should not be considered an alternative to net income or cash flow from operating activities as an indicator of operating performance or liquidity. The table below provides a reconciliation between net cash provided by operating activities and free cash flow.
Free cash flow for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2.440 billion, an increase of $874 as compared to $1.566 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. Free cash flow increased primarily due to decreased net rental capital expenditures (purchases of rental equipment less the proceeds from sales of rental equipment), partially offset by reduced net cash provided by operating activities, which included the impact of a $300 cash outflow in 2020 for refundable deposits on expected rental equipment purchases, as discussed further in note 6 to the consolidated financial statements. Net rental capital expenditures decreased $1.198 billion, or 92 percent, year-over-year. As discussed above, disciplined management of capital expenditures and fleet capacity is a component of our COVID-19 response plan, which contributed to the year-over-year decrease in net rental capital expenditures. Free cash flow for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $1.566 billion, an increase of $295 as compared to $1.271 billion for the year ended December 31, 2018. Free cash flow increased primarily due to increased cash provided by operating activities and increased proceeds from sales of rental equipment. Net rental capital expenditures decreased $141, or 10 percent, year-over-year.
Certain Information Concerning Contractual Obligations. The table below provides certain information concerning the payments coming due under certain categories of our existing contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
_________________
(1) The payments due with respect to a period represent (i) in the case of debt and finance leases, the scheduled principal payments due in such period, and (ii) in the case of operating leases, the payments due in such period for non-cancelable operating leases with initial or remaining terms of one year or more. See note 12 to the consolidated financial statements for further debt information, and note 13 for further finance lease and operating lease information.
(2) Estimated interest payments have been calculated based on the principal amount of debt and the applicable interest rates as of December 31, 2020.
(3) These primarily represent service agreements with third parties to provide wireless and network services.
(4) As of December 31, 2020, we had outstanding advance purchase orders, which were negotiated in the ordinary course of business, with our equipment and inventory suppliers. These purchase orders can generally be cancelled by us without cancellation penalties. The equipment and inventory receipts from the suppliers pursuant to these purchase orders and the related payments to the suppliers are expected to be completed throughout 2021. The total above includes $300 for
refundable deposits on expected rental equipment purchases, as discussed further in note 6 to the consolidated financial statements. In 2020, due primarily to COVID-19, we canceled a significant portion of our purchase orders. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we entered into a significant amount of purchase commitments, which increased the obligations to levels that are consistent with historic obligations. The obligations above reflect our continuing assessment of the impact of COVID-19, which will also inform our future purchases.
(5) The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, which was enacted in December 2017, included a transition tax on unremitted foreign earnings and profits. We have elected to pay the transition tax amount payable of $55 over an eight-year period. The amount that we expect to pay as reflected in the table above represents the total we owe, net of an overpayment of federal taxes, which we are required to apply to the transition tax
(6) This information excludes $10 of unrecognized tax benefits. It is not possible to estimate the time period during which these unrecognized tax benefits may be paid to tax authorities. Additionally, we are exposed to various claims relating to our business, including those for which we retain portions of the losses through the application of deductibles and self-insured retentions, which we sometimes refer to as “self-insurance.” Our self-insurance reserves totaled $127 at December 31, 2020. Self-insurance liabilities are based on estimates and actuarial assumptions and can fluctuate in both amount and in timing of cash settlement because historical trends are not necessarily predictive of the future, and, accordingly, are not included in the table above.
Relationship between Holdings and URNA. Holdings is principally a holding company and primarily conducts its operations through its wholly owned subsidiary, URNA, and subsidiaries of URNA. Holdings licenses its tradename and other intangibles and provides certain services to URNA in connection with its operations. These services principally include: (i) senior management services; (ii) finance and tax-related services and support; (iii) information technology systems and support; (iv) acquisition-related services; (v) legal services; and (vi) human resource support. In addition, Holdings leases certain equipment and real property that are made available for use by URNA and its subsidiaries.
Information Regarding Guarantors of URNA Indebtedness
URNA is 100 percent owned by Holdings and has certain outstanding indebtedness that is guaranteed by both Holdings and, with the exception of its U.S. special purpose vehicle which holds receivable assets relating to the Company’s accounts receivable securitization facility (the “SPV”), all of URNA’s U.S. subsidiaries (the “guarantor subsidiaries”). Other than the guarantee by our Canadian subsidiary of URNA's indebtedness under the ABL facility, none of URNA’s indebtedness is guaranteed by URNA's foreign subsidiaries or the SPV (together, the “non-guarantor subsidiaries”). The receivable assets owned by the SPV have been sold or contributed by URNA to the SPV and are not available to satisfy the obligations of URNA or Holdings’ other subsidiaries. Holdings consolidates each of URNA and the guarantor subsidiaries in its consolidated financial statements. URNA and the guarantor subsidiaries are all 100 percent-owned and controlled by Holdings. Holdings’ guarantees of URNA’s indebtedness are full and unconditional, except that the guarantees may be automatically released and relieved upon satisfaction of the requirements for legal defeasance or covenant defeasance under the applicable indenture being met. The Holdings guarantees are also subject to subordination provisions (to the same extent that the obligations of the issuer under the relevant notes are subordinated to other debt of the issuer) and to a standard limitation which provides that the maximum amount guaranteed by Holdings will not exceed the maximum amount that can be guaranteed without making the guarantee void under fraudulent conveyance laws.
The guarantees of Holdings and the guarantor subsidiaries are made on a joint and several basis. The guarantees of the guarantor subsidiaries are not full and unconditional because a guarantor subsidiary can be automatically released and relieved of its obligations under certain circumstances, including sale of the guarantor subsidiary, the sale of all or substantially all of the guarantor subsidiary's assets, the requirements for legal defeasance or covenant defeasance under the applicable indenture being met, designating the guarantor subsidiary as an unrestricted subsidiary for purposes of the applicable covenants or the notes being rated investment grade by both Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services and Moody’s Investors Service, Inc., or, in certain circumstances, another rating agency selected by URNA. Like the Holdings guarantees, the guarantees of the guarantors subsidiaries are subject to subordination provisions (to the same extent that the obligations of the issuer under the relevant notes are subordinated to other debt of the issuer) and to a standard limitation which provides that the maximum amount guaranteed by each guarantor will not exceed the maximum amount that can be guaranteed without making the guarantee void under fraudulent conveyance laws.
All of the existing guarantees by Holdings and the guarantor subsidiaries rank equally in right of payment with all of the guarantors' existing and future senior indebtedness. The secured indebtedness of Holdings and the guarantor subsidiaries (including guarantees of URNA’s existing and future secured indebtedness) will rank effectively senior to guarantees of any unsecured indebtedness to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness. Future guarantees of subordinated indebtedness will rank junior to any existing and future senior indebtedness of the guarantors. The guarantees of URNA’s indebtedness are effectively junior to any indebtedness of our subsidiaries that are not guarantors, including our foreign subsidiaries. As of December 31, 2020, indebtedness of our non-guarantors included (i) $634 of outstanding borrowings by the
SPV in connection with the Company’s accounts receivable securitization facility, (ii) $5 of outstanding borrowings under the ABL facility by non-guarantor subsidiaries and (iii) $11 of finance leases of our non-guarantor subsidiaries.
Covenants in the ABL facility, accounts receivable securitization and term loan facilities, and the other agreements governing our debt, impose operating and financial restrictions on URNA, Holdings and the guarantor subsidiaries, including limitations on the ability to make share repurchases and dividend payments. As of December 31, 2020, the amount available for distribution under the most restrictive of these covenants was $1.060 billion. The Company’s total available capacity for making share repurchases and dividend payments includes the intercompany receivable balance of Holdings. As of December 31, 2020, our total available capacity for making share repurchases and dividend payments, which includes URNA’s capacity to make restricted payments and the intercompany receivable balance of Holdings, was $4.064 billion.
Based on our understanding of Rule 3-10 of Regulation S-X ("Rule 3-10"), we believe that Holdings’ guarantees of URNA indebtedness comply with the conditions set forth in Rule 3-10, which enable us to present summarized financial information for Holdings, URNA and the consolidated guarantor subsidiaries in accordance with Rule 13-01 of Regulation S-X. The summarized financial information excludes information regarding the non-guarantor subsidiaries. In accordance with Rule 3-10, separate financial statements of the guarantor subsidiaries have not been presented.
The summarized financial information of Holdings, URNA and the guarantor subsidiaries on a combined basis is as follows: