ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS AND OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and result of operations contains forward-looking statements and involves numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those described in the “Risk Factors” section of this Report. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “will,” “should,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “predict,” “potential” or “continue,” the negative of such terms or other comparable terminology. These statements are only predictions. Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements. Moreover, neither we, nor any other person, assume responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of the forward-looking statements. We are under no obligation to update any of the forward-looking statements after the filing of this Report to conform such statements to actual results or to changes in our expectations.
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations relates to the operations and financial condition reported in the financial statements of USA Equities Corp and its subsidiaries for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 and should be read in conjunction with such financial statements and related notes included in this report.
Overview
We are a medical device technology and software as a service (SaaS) company focused on enabling primary care physicians (PCP’s) to increase their revenues by providing them with relevant, value-based tools to evaluate and treat chronic disease through reimbursable procedures. In some cases, the products we will provide our physician clients will enable them to diagnose and treat patients with chronic diseases which they historically have referred to specialists, allowing them to enhance their practice revenue. As part of our mission, we are providing PCP’s with the software, training and devices necessary to allow them to treat their patients using value-based healthcare, informatics and algorithmic personalized medicine, including digital therapeutics which foster reimbursable behavior based remote patient monitoring, chronic care and preventive medicine.
In December 2019 we consummated a share exchange with the former stockholders of Medical Practice Income, Inc. (“MPI”) pursuant which we issued 2,172,600 shares of our common stock in exchange for all of the then issued and outstanding shares of common stock of MPI. As a result of this transaction, we became focused on value-based healthcare, informatics and algorithmic personalized medicine including digital therapeutics, behavior based remote patient monitoring, chronic care and preventive medicine.
The transaction with MPI was accounted for as a change in reporting entity between entities under common control, whereby a change in reporting entity requires retrospective combination of the entities for all periods as if the combination had been in effect since inception of common control in accordance with ASC 250-10-45-21. Except where the context requires otherwise, references herein to “we”, “us”, “our” and the “Company” are reference to USA Equities, Inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, inclusive of MPI.
We introduced our QHSLab, Software as a Service (SaaS) platform which MPI was developing at the time of the share exchange, to 159 medical practices in June 2020 on a free test use basis. Through September, physicians in these practices provided 374 allergy patients with a QHSLab-generated allergen immunotherapy prescription, generating an estimated $664,608 in revenue for these physicians’ practices
In October 2020, we entered into an exclusive distribution agreement (the “Distribution Agreement”) whereby MedScience Research Group, Inc. (“MedScience”), granted us an exclusive right to distribute its allergy diagnostic and allergen immunotherapy systems named AllergiEnd® and related components (the “Products”) for sale to non-allergy specialist physicians. The Agreement has a term of ten years and automatically renews for successive five-year terms, unless either party terminates the Agreement at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the then-current term. The Agreement requires the Company to meet annual minimum purchase requirements and MedScience may terminate the Agreement if the Company fails to satisfy the minimum purchase threshold for any year.
Pursuant to the terms of the Distribution Agreement, MedScience is responsible for providing all branding, logos, and marketing materials and we will process all sales made to PCPs and are responsible for delivering all products sold to PCPs. We began selling AllergiEnd® products during the fourth quarter of 2020.
In November, building on the capabilities of our QHSLab, we began shipping AllergiEnd® diagnostic related products and immunotherapy treatments to PCPs in response to their requests based upon courses of treatment recommended for their patients by QHSLab. Our revenue in the fourth quarter was $124,532 as a result of these sales.
Based on the success of PCPs using our QHSLab allergy diagnostics combined with the products licensed from MedScience, we intend to increase our revenues by charging physicians a monthly subscription fee for the use of QHSLab and soliciting additional PCPs to increase their revenues by using our proven revenue generating QHSLab and AllergiEnd® line of products. We also plan to introduce additional point of care diagnostic and treatments, and digital medicine programs that PCPs can use and prescribe in their practices. In all cases, PCPs will be paid under existing government and private insurance programs, based upon analyses conducted utilizing QHSLab.
Recent Market Conditions
During March 2020, a global pandemic was declared by the World Health Organization related to the rapidly growing outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”). The pandemic has significantly impacted economic conditions in the United States and throughout the world.
The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is highly uncertain and we do not yet know the full extent of potential impacts on our business, financing or global economy as a whole. However, these effects could have a material impact on our liquidity, capital resources and operations.
COVID-19 has accelerated both the healthcare provider and patient acceptance of virtual care technologies. Many patients are now open to telemedicine, which is excellent, but it’s not the complete solution, as it still requires a physician’s direct involvement. Regulators and insurance companies recognize what health care technologists have been saying for nearly 15 years, which is that most chronic conditions are better managed with more frequent and short encounters than infrequent visits. Health insurers are beginning to recognize that AI enabled digital medicine technologies such as those provided through QHSLab can provide the necessary encounters to foster patient compliance in between visits to a physician.
Our ability to operate profitably is determined by our ability to generate revenues from the licensing of our QHSLab and the sale of diagnostic and treatment and the provision of services through our QHSLab. Currently, we are generating revenues from the sale of AllergiEnd® diagnostic related products and immunotherapy treatments. Our ability to generate a profit from these sales is determined by our ability to increase the number of physicians using these products. We will be constantly upgrading QHSLab in an effort to increase the number of products sold based upon the services it can provide and to be able to charge a fee for its use.
While our revenues are largely determined by the volume of product delivered and the prices at which such products are sold, our costs are determined by a number of factors. The principal factors impacting our costs are the cost of improvements to QHSLab, the costs of products sold to PCPs, marketing expenses to recruit new PCPs and introduce new products and financing costs. As our business grows, these costs should be spread over a wider base of PCPs leading to a reduction in costs per sale, helping to increase our gross margin.
Results of Operations during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
During the fourth quarter of 2020 we began to sell the AllergiEnd® Products and recorded revenues of $124,532. In the second quarter of 2020, we distributed our QHSLab to 159 medical practices on a free test use basis. Prior to these activities, we were engaged primarily in research and development activities from which we derived no revenues. In 2020, we incurred a net loss of $327,388 as our expenses consisting of general and administrative expenses of $131,767, research and development of $98,290, marketing of $95,141, loss on extinguishment of debt of $21,299, cost of revenue of $74,439 and interest expenses of $30,984 exceeded our revenue of $124,532. This compared to a net loss in 2019 of $166,516 due to expenses consisting of general and administrative expenses of $53,870, research and development of $100,230 and interest expenses of $12,416 in the absence of any revenues.
Our general and administrative expenses increased by $77,897 during the year 2020 as compared to the prior year mainly due to increased expenses associated with operating as a public company. With our initial revenues occurring in 2020, we also started incurring marketing expenses with $95,141 and cost of revenue of $74,439 during 2020, both were $0 in 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On December 31, 2020, we had $297,863 of total assets consisting of $94,342 of cash, $60,522 of accounts receivable, $99,701 of inventory, $11,598 related to the prepayment of service contracts and $31,700 of capitalized software development costs. We had total current liabilities of $214,620 consisting of $159,620 in accounts payable and accrued expenses and $55,000 in a convertible note payable. Our long-term liabilities of $691,569 consisted of seven convertible notes in the aggregate principal amount of $554,704 along with accrued interest of $115,566 and premium of $21,299. As of December 31, 2020, we had total liabilities of $906,189.
On December 31, 2019, we had $26,340 of total assets consisting of $23,590 of cash and $2,750 of prepayments for annual services contracts. We had total current liabilities of $20,942 consisting entirely of accounts payable and accrued expenses. Our long-term liabilities of $435,189 consisted of four convertible notes in the aggregate principal amount of $341,688 along with accrued interest of $93,501. As of December 31, 2019, we had $456,131 in total liabilities.
The increases in accounts receivable, inventory and accounts payable primarily relate to our sales of AllergiEnd® Products.
We used cash of $165,564 and $134,838 in operations during 2020 and 2019, respectively. We financed our negative cash flows during 2020 and 2019, primarily through related party borrowings as a result of which we owed $508,271, including principal and accrued interest, to our major shareholder as of December 31, 2020. There is no assurance that any of our related parties will continue to provide such capital as may be necessary to continue our business or, if such funds are provided, that the agreed upon terms of any advance will be favorable to us.
Plan of Operation and Funding
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. We had an accumulated deficit of $1,748,719 at December 31, 2020, generated net losses of $327,388 and $166,516 in 2020 and 2019, respectively, and used cash of $165,564 and $134,838 in operations in 2020 and 2019. Although we began to generate revenue during the fourth quarter of 2020, we anticipate that we will continue to generate negative cash flow for the immediate future. These factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for a reasonable period of time. Our continuation as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to obtain necessary equity or debt financing and ultimately from generating revenues and positive cash flow to continue operations. The condensed consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
We expect that working capital requirements will continue to be funded through a combination of our existing funds and further issuances of securities. Our working capital requirements are expected to increase in line with the growth of our business, as we incur marketing expenses and the cost of building an inventory. Existing working capital, further advances and debt instruments, and anticipated cash flow are expected to be adequate to fund our operations over the next twelve months. We have no lines of credit or other bank financing arrangements. Generally, we have financed operations to date through the proceeds of the private placement of equity and debt instruments and advances from our principal shareholder. In connection with our business plan, management anticipates additional increases in operating expenses and capital expenditures relating to: (i) developmental expenses associated with a start-up business and (ii) marketing expenses. We intend to finance these expenses by raising additional capital. Additional issuances of equity or convertible debt securities will result in dilution to our current shareholders. Further, such securities might have rights, preferences or privileges senior to our common stock. Additional financing may not be available upon acceptable terms, or at all. If adequate funds are not available or are not available on acceptable terms, we may not be able to take advantage of prospective new business endeavors or opportunities, which could significantly and materially restrict our business operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K promulgated under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we did not have any contractual obligations requiring disclosure.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report.