Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” and other parts of this Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements, within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements provide current expectations of future events based on certain assumptions and include any statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact. Forward-looking statements can also be identified by words such as “future,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “predicts,” “will,” “would,” “could,” “can,” “may,” and similar terms. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and our actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K under the heading “Risk Factors,” which are included herein. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. All information presented herein is based on our fiscal calendar. Unless otherwise stated, references to particular years or quarters refer to our fiscal years ended in April and the associated quarters of those fiscal years. We assume no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason, except as required by law.
Overview
U.S. Gold Corp., formerly known as Dataram Corporation (the “Company”), was originally incorporated in the State of New Jersey in 1967 and was subsequently re-incorporated under the laws of the State of Nevada in 2016. Effective June 26, 2017, the Company changed its legal name to U.S. Gold Corp. from Dataram Corporation. On May 23, 2017, the Company merged with Gold King Corp. (“Gold King”), in a transaction treated as a reverse acquisition and recapitalization, and the business of Gold King became the business of the Company. We are a gold and precious metals exploration company pursuing exploration and development properties. We own certain mining leases and other mineral rights comprising the CK Gold Project in Wyoming, the Keystone and Maggie Creek Projects in Nevada and the Challis Gold project in Idaho. None of our properties contain proven and probable reserves under SEC Industry Guide 7, and all of our activities on all of our properties are exploratory in nature.
On March 17, 2020, we filed a certificate of amendment to our Articles of Incorporation with the Secretary of State of Nevada in order to effectuate a reverse stock split of our issued and outstanding common stock per share on a one for ten basis, effective as of 5:00 p.m. (Eastern Time) on March 19, 2020. All share and per share values of our common stock for all periods presented in the accompanying consolidated financial statements are retroactively restated for the effect of the reverse stock splits.
Summary of Activities for the Year ended April 30, 2021
During the year ended April 30, 2021, we focused primarily on moving our CK Gold Project in Wyoming towards a Pre-Feasibility study (PFS), enhancing our understanding of the Keystone Project deposit, planning an exploration drilling program on our Maggie Creek Project, closing the acquisition of Northern Panther Resource Corporation and analyzing the historic geological data on the Challis Gold Project in Idaho and completing equity financings.
An overview of certain significant events follows:
CK Gold Project, Wyoming
● Multiple exploration and development programs were carried out during the year ending April 30, 2021 to advance the CK Gold Project towards a Pre-Feasibility Study (PFS) level study. These are more fully described under our Property section above.
Keystone Project, Cortez Trend, Nevada
● On May 20, 2020, we announced a proposed 2020 Keystone exploration program, subject to us obtaining additional financing.
● On August 25, 2020, we announced the publication of a technical report on the Keystone project by the Geological Society of Nevada.
● On May 19, 2021, we received Bureau of Land Management (BLM) approval for an additional 50 acres of disturbance under our effective Plan of Operations (POO) for Keystone. We advanced the required reclamation bond. We also announced potential interest in the Keystone project from various industry partners for potential joint venture opportunities.
Maggie Creek Project, Carlin Trend, Nevada
● On October 28, 2020, we announced an exploration update for Maggie Creek.
● On April 7, 2021, we announced new targets for a Maggie Creek exploration drilling program.
● On June 30, 2021, we announced the successful completion of our Maggie Creek 2021 contractual exploration program, drilling 2 holes for a total of 4,440 feet (1,353 meters). With these 2 holes, we satisfied our 2021 contractual exploration commitments at Maggie Creek and plan to review the results for future potential exploration programs.
Challis Gold Project, Idaho
● On May 26, 2021, we announced an exploration and operational update for our Challis Gold Project in Idaho. Highlights included:
- We continue towards the completion of a Plan of Operations as the next phase of exploration;
- We are planning to engage in mapping, geochemical and geophysical surveys in the second half of 2021; and
- Potential strategic joint-venture partners have expressed interest in our Challis Gold project
Sales of Preferred Units & Common Shares to raise a total of $14.5 million in cash
On August 10, 2020, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”) with Gold King Acquisition Corp., a wholly owned subsidiary of U.S. Gold Corp. (“Acquisition Corp.”), Northern Panther Resources Corporation (“Northern Panther” or “NPRC”) and the Stockholder Representative named therein, pursuant to which Acquisition Corp. merged with and into NPRC, with NPRC surviving as our wholly-owned subsidiary (such transaction, the “Merger”).
At the closing of the Merger, which occurred on August 11, 2020, the outstanding shares of common stock of NPRC outstanding immediately prior to the Merger were converted into and represent the right to receive (i) 581,053 shares of our common stock, par value $0.001 per share, and (ii) 106,894 shares of our Series H Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.001 per share (the “Series H Preferred Stock” and, together with the common stock, the “Merger Consideration”), which Series H Preferred Stock converts into common stock on a 1 for 10 basis at the option of the holder.
The common stock issued pursuant to the Merger Agreement as part of the Merger Consideration was sold as “restricted stock” subject to the six-month minimum hold period under Rule 144 under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). In addition, pursuant to certain leak-out agreements (the “Leak-Out Agreements”) entered into concurrently with the execution of the Merger Agreement by and between the stockholders of NPRC and us, the shares of common stock issued pursuant to the Merger Agreement, including shares issued upon conversion of the Series H Convertible Preferred Stock, are subject to a leak-out provision limiting future share sales of our common stock held by the holders of such shares to no more than 10% of the daily trading volume.
The Merger Agreement included customary representations and warranties of the Company, Acquisition Corp. and NPRC. In connection with the Merger, Luke Norman Consulting Ltd. received a finder’s fee equal to the quotient of (a) 5% of the purchase value for the Merger and (b) the 30-day Volume Weighted Average Price (“VWAP”) of a share of our common stock as reported on the Nasdaq Capital Market prior to the execution Merger Agreement, which was paid in 82,500 shares restricted common stock on the closing date of the Merger.
In connection with the Merger, on August 10, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “SPA”) with certain investors (the “Purchasers”), pursuant to which we sold to the Purchasers in a private placement (i) an aggregate of 921,666 shares of our Series I Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.001 per share (the “Series I Preferred Stock”) and (ii) warrants to purchase an aggregate of 921,666 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $6.00 per share (the “Warrants”) for aggregate consideration of $5,530,004.
The Series I Preferred Stock has substantially the same terms as the Series H Preferred Stock, except that each share of Series I Preferred Stock is convertible into one share of common stock. The Warrants are exercisable in whole or in part at any time, from time to time following the initial exercise date, terminate five years following the issuance, and are subject to an exchange cap. The sale of the Series I Preferred Stock and Warrants under the SPA closed on August 11, 2020.
The Warrants and the shares of the Company’s Common Stock issuable upon the exercise of the Warrants, the conversion of the Series H Preferred Stock, and the conversion of the Series I Preferred Stock are not being registered under the Securities Act and were offered pursuant to and in reliance on the exemption provided in Section 4(a)(2) under the Securities Act and Rule 506(b) promulgated thereunder.
On February 1, 2021, we completed a registered direct offering (“the Offering”) with certain institutional and accredited investors (the “Purchasers”), pursuant to which we sold (i) in the Offering an aggregate of 914,136 shares of common stock of the Company, at an offering price of $10.54 per share and (ii) in a concurrent private placement warrants to purchase an aggregate of 457,068 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $14.50 per share, for net proceeds from the Offering of approximately $9.0 million after deducting financial advisory fees and offering expenses.
Pursuant to the terms of the Offering, the warrants are exercisable six months following the date of issuance and terminate five years following the initial exercise date. A holder of such warrant does not have the right to exercise any portion of its warrants if the holder, together with its affiliates, would beneficially own in excess of 4.99% (or 9.99% at the election of the holder prior to the date of issuance) of the number of shares of common stock outstanding immediately after giving effect to such exercise (the “Beneficial Ownership Limitation”); provided, however, that upon 61 days’ prior notice to the Company, the holder may increase the Beneficial Ownership Limitation, provided that in no event shall the Beneficial Ownership Limitation exceed 9.99%.
Shareholder Meeting, Appointment of Directors & Corporate Matters
On August 13, 2020, we announced the appointment of Mr. George Bee as our President.
On November 9, 2020, we held our annual meeting of stockholders. At that meeting, among other matters, shareholders approved a new Equity Incentive Plan, approved our audit firm, and elected two new board members.
Effective November 9, 2020, our Board of Directors appointed Mr. George Bee, Mr. Robert Schafer and Ms. Tara Gilfillan to the Board of Directors to fill the vacancies created by the resignation of prior Directors. Mr. Bee, Mr. Schafer and Ms. Gilfillan bring a wealth of senior financial knowledge and mining industry senior level executive experience to us, which includes experience with mining companies, mine development and financing mining operations.
On November 9, 2020, we appointed George Bee as our President and Chief Executive Officer. Mr. Edward Karr continued to serve on the Board as Executive Chairman
On January 6, 2021, our Board of Directors appointed Mr. Michael Waldkirch to the Board of Directors as we increased the size of our board from five to six members.
On March 19, 2021, we and Edward Karr, the Company’s Executive Chairman, agreed by mutual understanding that Mr. Karr’s employment as an officer and employee, and his service as a member of the board of directors, of the Company would terminate, effective as of March 19, 2021 (the “Separation Date”). In connection with Mr. Karr’s departure, we entered into a General Release and Severance Agreement with Mr. Karr, as amended (the “Separation Agreement”), pursuant to which Mr. Karr agreed to provide certain transition services to us through the Separation Date. Pursuant to the Separation Agreement, Mr. Karr was entitled to receive any equity awards granted to Mr. Karr by us pursuant to our 2014 Equity Incentive Plan (the “2014 Plan”), 2017 Equity Incentive Plan (the “2017 Plan”), or 2020 Equity Incentive Plan (the “2020 Plan”, and the 2014 Plan, 2017 Plan, and 2020 Plan are collectively referred to herein as, the “Equity Plans”) during the term of Mr. Karr’s employment shall be 100% vested and retained by Mr. Karr, notwithstanding any terms in an award agreement or plan document regarding forfeiture of such awards under the Equity Plans upon termination of employment (provided that the foregoing shall not in any way extend the awards beyond their original term), other than the restricted stock units (the “2019 RSUs”) granted to Mr. Karr pursuant to that certain Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement, dated September 18, 2019, by and between Mr. Karr and us (the “Award Agreement”), which remain outstanding pursuant to the terms of the 2020 Plan and the Award Agreement.
Pursuant to the Separation Agreement, Mr. Karr agreed to a general release of claims in favor of us. Upon effectiveness of the Separation Agreement, the employment agreement, effective December 4, 2020, between us and Mr. Karr will automatically terminate; provided, however, that certain provisions, including customary confidentiality, noncompete and non-solicitation provisions, will remain in full force and effect.
Effective immediately following Mr. Karr’s departure from the Company, the size of the board of directors has been set at five and the board of directors has appointed George Bee, our Chief Executive Officer and President, as our Chairman.
On July 19, 2021, we appointed Kevin Francis as our Vice President - Exploration and Technical Services.
Results of Operations
The Years Ended April 30, 2021 and 2020
Net Revenues
We are an exploration stage company and accordingly we generated no revenues for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020.
Operating Expenses
Total operating expenses for the year ended April 30, 2021 as compared to the year ended April 30, 2020, were approximately $12.4 million and $5.7 million, respectively. The approximate $6.7 million increase in operating expenses for the year ended April 30, 2021, as compared to April 30, 2020, is comprised of (i) an increase in compensation expense of approximately $1,968,000 primarily due to increase in compensation related to total bonuses of $600,000 paid in common stock and $112,500 paid in cash, stock-based compensation from the accelerated vesting of certain stock options and restricted stock units and the hiring of additional executive management in August and September 2020, (ii) an increase of approximately $2,741,000 in exploration expenses on our mineral properties due to an increase in exploration activities in our CK Gold property, (iii) an increase in professional and consulting fees of approximately $1,704,000 primarily due to increases in stock-based consulting fees of approximately $645,000, legal fees of approximately $238,000 primarily due to services related to the NPRC merger and general corporate matters, accounting fees of approximately $50,000, and general strategic, investor relations, and permitting consulting services of $771,000, and (iv) an increase in general and administrative expenses of approximately $286,000 due primarily to increases in public company expenses related to the Annual Meeting, abandonment expense related to the Gold Bar Mineral properties, insurance, advertising and office expenses.
Pre-tax Loss from Operations
We reported pre-tax losses from operations of approximately $12.4 million and $5.7 million for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Benefit from Income Taxes
For the year ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, benefit from income taxes was $0 and $438,145, respectively. During the year ended April 30, 2020, we recognized a tax benefit from our alternative minimum tax credit carryforward which was refundable under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 in the United States, of which we received $219,073 during the year ended April 30, 2020 and the remaining $219,072 during the year ended April 30, 2021.
Net Loss
As a result of the operating expense and other expense discussed above, we reported a net loss of approximately $12.4 million for the year ended April 30, 2021 as compared to a net loss of approximately $5.2 million for the year ended April 30, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table summarizes total current assets, liabilities and working capital at April 30, 2021 compared to April 30, 2020:
As of April 30, 2021, we had working capital of $13,456,727 as compared to working capital of $3,023,907 as of April 30, 2020, an increase of $10,432,820. During the year ended April 30, 2021, we received a total of approximately $17.0 million proceeds from the sale of an aggregate of 921,666 shares of our Series I Convertible Preferred Stock and warrants to purchase an aggregate of 921,666 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $6.00 per share for approximately $5.5 million, exercise of stock warrants for approximately $2.5 million and the sale of 914,136 shares of common stock for approximately $9.0 million in the Offering. These were the primary sources of cash to fund operations. Additionally, we received approximately $2.5 million in cash as a part of the acquisition of NPRC in August 2020. We used the proceeds primarily to fund operations during the fiscal year 2021 and to increase cash reserves.
We cannot be certain that additional funding will be available on acceptable terms, or at all. To the extent that we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders may experience significant dilution. Any debt financing, if available, may involve restrictive covenants that impact our ability to conduct business. If we are unable to raise additional capital when required, or on acceptable terms, we may have to delay, scale back or discontinue our exploration activities or programs.
We are obligated to file annual, quarterly, and current reports with the SEC pursuant to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). In addition, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (“Sarbanes-Oxley”) and the rules subsequently implemented by the SEC and the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board impose various requirements on public companies. We expect to spend between $150,000 and $200,000 in legal and accounting expenses annually to comply with our reporting obligations and Sarbanes-Oxley. These costs could affect profitability and our results of operations.
At April 30, 2021, we had working capital of approximately $13.5 million. We had approximately $619,000 outstanding in current liabilities and a cash balance of approximately $13.6 million. For the fiscal years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, we incurred losses in the amounts of approximately $12.4 million and $5.2 million, respectively. We believe that our existing resources will be sufficient to fund our planned operations for 9 to 12 months. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including potential acquisitions, changes in exploration programs and related studies and other operating strategies. We continue to assess the impact of COVID-19, which may adversely affect our ability to obtain additional future capital.
The audit opinion and notes that accompany our consolidated financial statements for the year ended April 30, 2021 disclose a ‘going concern’ qualification to our ability to continue in business. The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared under the assumption that we will continue as a going concern. We have incurred losses since our inception. We do not have sufficient cash to fund all of our planned operations and exploration and meet all of our obligations for the next 12 months without deferring payment on certain current liabilities and/or raising additional funds. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a period at least a year from when these financial statements are made available. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern. If the going concern basis were not appropriate for these financial statements, adjustments would be necessary in the carrying value of assets and liabilities, the reported expenses and the balance sheet classifications used.
Financing Transactions
Cash flows from financing activities continued to provide the primary source of our liquidity. We are anticipating raising additional capital but there can be no assurance that it will be able to do so or if the terms will be favorable. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded assets or the amounts of and classification of liabilities that might be necessary in the event we cannot continue in existence.
Management has determined that additional capital will be required in the form of equity or debt securities. There are no assurances that management will be able to raise capital on terms acceptable to us. If we are unable to obtain sufficient amounts of additional capital, we may be required to reduce the scope of our planned exploration activities, which could harm our business, financial condition and operating results. If we obtain additional funds by selling any of our equity securities or by issuing common stock to pay current or future obligations, the percentage ownership of our stockholders will be reduced, stockholders may experience additional dilution, or the equity securities may have rights preferences or privileges senior to the common stock. If adequate funds are not available to us when needed on satisfactory terms, we may be required to cease operating or otherwise modify our business strategy.
Summary Cash flows for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020:
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities totaled approximately $8.6 million and $3.9 million for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Net loss for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020 totaled approximately $12.4 million and $5.2 million. Additionally, we expensed approximately $3.6 million in stock-based compensation for options and shares issued to employees and consultants during the year ended April 30, 2021 as compared to approximately $1.3 million during the year ended April 30, 2020 primarily due to stock-based compensation related to bonuses to our CEO and former COO and stock-based consulting fee paid to a consultant related to the NPRC merger. Net changes of approximately $57,000 in operating assets and liabilities are primarily due to net increases in prepaid expenses and other assets of approximately $151,000, reclamation of bond deposits of approximately $363,000, and net of increases of approximately $353,000 in accounts payable to trade vendors and related parties offset by decrease in income tax receivable of approximately $219,000.
Cash Provided by Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities totaled approximately $2,457,000 and $159,000 for the year ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, primarily due to cash received in connection with share exchange agreements of $2.5 million offset by purchase of property and equipment of approximately $43,000 for the year ended April 30, 2021 as compared to $159,000 primarily due to the net proceeds received from the share exchange agreement the year ended April 30, 2020.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities totaled approximately $17.0 million and $4.3 million, net of issuance costs, for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, primarily due to proceeds from the issuance of Series I Preferred Stock and warrants in August 2020 for approximately $5.5 million, proceeds from exercise of stock warrants for approximately $2.5 million and the registered direct sale of common stock and warrants in February 2021 for approximately $9.0 million for the year ended April 30, 2021 as compared with net cash provided by financing activities of approximately $2.4 million from the issuance of preferred stock and warrants and approximately $1.9 million from the issuance of common stock for the year ended April 30, 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have, and do not have any present plans to implement, any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Management believes the following critical accounting policies affect the significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the financial statements.
Use of Estimates and Assumptions
In preparing the consolidated financial statements, management is required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the balance sheet, and revenues and expenses for the period then ended. Actual results may differ significantly from those estimates. Significant estimates made by management include, but are not limited to valuation of mineral rights, stock-based compensation, the assumptions used to fair value of common stock issued and options granted, asset retirement obligations, and the valuation of deferred tax assets and liabilities.
Stock-Based Compensation
Share-based compensation is accounted for based on the requirements of ASC 718, “Compensation-Stock Compensation” (“ASC 718”), which requires recognition in the financial statements of the cost of employee and director services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments over the period the employee or director is required to perform the services in exchange for the award (presumptively, the vesting period). ASC 718 also requires measurement of the cost of employee and director services received in exchange for an award based on the grant-date fair value of the award. Pursuant to ASC 505, “Equity-Equity Based Payments to Non-Employees” (“ASC 505-50”), for share-based payments to consultants and other third parties, compensation expense is determined at the measurement date, which is the grant date. Until the measurement date is reached, the total amount of compensation expense remains uncertain.
ASU 2018-07 applies to all share-based payment transactions in which the grantor acquires goods and services to be used or consumed in its own operations by issuing share-based payment awards. ASU 2018-07 also clarifies that Topic 718 does not apply to share-based payments used to effectively provide (1) financing to the issuer or (2) awards granted in conjunction with selling goods or services to customers as part of a contract accounted for under ASC 606. ASU 2018-07 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted, but no earlier than adoption of ASC 606. We chose to early adopt ASU 2018-07 in July 2018. The adoption of this standard did not have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
Mineral Rights
Costs of lease, exploration, carrying and retaining unproven mineral lease properties are expensed as incurred. We expense all mineral exploration costs as incurred as we are still in the exploration stage. If we identify proven and probable reserves in our investigation of our properties and upon development of a plan for operating a mine, we would enter the development stage and capitalize future costs until production is established.
When a property reaches the production stage, the related capitalized costs are amortized on a units-of-production basis over the proven and probable reserves following the commencement of production. We assess the carrying costs of the capitalized mineral properties for impairment under ASC 360-10, “Impairment of long-lived assets”, and evaluates its carrying value under ASC 930-360, “Extractive Activities - Mining”, annually. An impairment is recognized when the sum of the expected undiscounted future cash flows is less than the carrying amount of the mineral properties. Impairment losses, if any, are measured as the excess of the carrying amount of the mineral properties over its estimated fair value.
ASC 930-805, “Extractive Activities-Mining: Business Combinations” (“ASC 930-805”), states that mineral rights consist of the legal right to explore, extract, and retain at least a portion of the benefits from mineral deposits. Mining assets include mineral rights. Acquired mineral rights are considered tangible assets under ASC 930-805. ASC 930-805 requires that mineral rights be recognized at fair value as of the acquisition date. As a result, the direct costs to acquire mineral rights are initially capitalized as tangible assets. Mineral rights include costs associated with acquiring patented and unpatented mining claims.