Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this discussion to USD Partners, USDP, the Partnership, we, our, us or like terms refer to USD Partners and the following subsidiaries, collectively: Casper Crude to Rail LLC, CCR Pipeline LLC, Stroud Crude Terminal LLC, SCT Pipeline LLC, San Antonio Rail Terminal LLC, USD Logistics Operations GP LLC, USD Logistics Operations LP, USD Rail LP, USD Rail Canada ULC, USD Rail International S.A.R.L., USD Terminals Canada ULC, USD Terminals International S.A.R.L. and West Colton Rail Terminal LLC. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors included elsewhere in this report.
We denote amounts denominated in Canadian dollars with “C$” immediately prior to the stated amount.
Overview and Recent Developments
We are a fee-based, growth-oriented master limited partnership formed by our sponsor, USD, to acquire, develop and operate midstream infrastructure and complementary logistics solutions for crude oil, biofuels and other energy-related products. We generate substantially all of our operating cash flows from multi-year, take-or-pay contracts with primarily investment grade customers, including major integrated oil companies, refiners and marketers. Our network of crude oil terminals facilitates the transportation of heavy crude oil from Western Canada to key demand centers across North America. Our operations include railcar loading and unloading, storage and blending in onsite tanks, inbound and outbound pipeline connectivity, truck transloading, as well as other related logistics services. We also provide our customers with leased railcars and fleet services to facilitate the transportation of liquid hydrocarbons and biofuels by rail.
We generally do not take ownership of the products that we handle nor do we receive any payments from our customers based on the value of such products. We may on occasion enter into buy-sell arrangements in which we take temporary title to commodities while in our terminals. We expect any such arrangements to be at fixed prices where we do not take any exposure to changes in commodity prices.
We believe rail will continue as an important transportation option for energy producers, refiners and marketers due to its unique advantages relative to other transportation means. Specifically, rail transportation of energy-related products provides flexible access to key demand centers on a relatively low fixed-cost basis with faster physical delivery, while preserving the specific quality of customer products over long distances.
USDG, a wholly-owned subsidiary of USD, and the sole owner of our general partner, is engaged in designing, developing, owning, and managing large-scale multi-modal logistics centers and energy-related infrastructure across North America. USDG’s solutions create flexible market access for customers in significant growth areas and key demand centers, including Western Canada, the U.S. Gulf Coast and Mexico. Among other projects, USDG is currently pursuing the development of a premier energy logistics terminal on the Houston Ship Channel with capacity for substantial tank storage, multiple docks (including barge and deepwater), inbound and outbound pipeline connectivity, as well as a rail terminal with unit train capabilities. USDG completed an expansion project in January 2019 at the Partnership’s Hardisty Terminal, referred to herein as Hardisty South, which added one and one-half 120-railcar unit trains of transloading capacity per day, or approximately 112,500 barrels per day, or bpd.
USD, along with its partner, Gibson, is also pursuing long-term solutions to transport heavier grades of crude oil produced in Western Canada through the construction of a Diluent Recovery Unit, or DRU, at the Hardisty terminal. Construction of the project has commenced and USD expects that the DRU will be placed into service late in the second quarter or early in the third quarter of 2021. USD has secured the necessary financing, obtained all material permits and entered into fixed-price construction contracts regarding the construction of the project. USD’s patented DRU technology separates the diluent that has been added to the raw bitumen in the production process
which meets two important market needs - it returns the recovered diluent for reuse in the Alberta market, reducing delivered costs for diluent, and it creates DRUbit™, a proprietary heavy Canadian crude oil specifically designed for rail transportation. DRUbit™ is crude oil or bitumen that has been returned to a more concentrated, viscous state that is classified as a non-hazardous, non-flammable commodity when transported by rail in Canada and the United States. DRUbit™ is a market access solution that will help satisfy demand for heavy Canadian crude oil on the U.S. Gulf Coast and in other markets at a cost that is economically competitive to the crude oil that is transported by pipeline. In addition, USD is constructing a new destination terminal in Port Arthur, Texas for the DRUbit™ that will be transloaded at our Hardisty origination terminal. Please refer to Part 1. Item 1A. Risk Factors-Our contracts subject us to renewal risks for a discussion of certain risks associated with these projects.
Market Update
Substantially all of our operating cash flows are generated from take-or-pay contracts and, as a result, are not directly related to actual throughput volumes at our crude oil terminals. Throughput volumes at our terminals are primarily influenced by the difference in price between Western Canadian Select, or WCS, and other grades of crude oil, commonly referred to as spreads, rather than absolute price levels. WCS spreads are influenced by several market factors, including the availability of supplies relative to the level of demand from refiners and other end users, the price and availability of alternative grades of crude oil, the availability of takeaway capacity, as well as transportation costs from supply areas to demand centers.
COVID-19 and Crude Oil Pricing Environment Update
The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely affected the global economy, disrupted global supply chains and created significant volatility in the financial markets. In addition, the pandemic has resulted in travel restrictions, business closures and the institution of quarantining and other restrictions on movement worldwide. As a result, there have been significant reductions in demand for, and fluctuations in the prices of, crude oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids. In addition, in March 2020, members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and other oil producing countries including Russia, or OPEC+, failed to agree on oil production levels, which led to a substantial decline in oil prices and an increasingly volatile market. In March and April 2020, domestic oil and natural gas producers announced dramatic reductions or curtailments of their development programs, as well as plans to shut-in production. In April 2020, even though OPEC+ announced that it had reached an agreement to cut production by 9.7 million barrels per day, or Mmbpd, oil prices did not meaningfully increase. As concerns about domestic oil storage capacity being fully subscribed in May 2020 grew, on April 20, 2020, WTI oil futures priced at historic lows.
These events negatively impacted our customers and thereby limited our ability to grow our business during 2020. For example, as a result of the overall downturn in the crude market and the decline in the demand for petroleum products, in March 2020, we tested the goodwill associated with our Casper terminal for impairment, which resulted in an impairment loss. Declining demand for petroleum products could lead to delays or reductions of expected throughput levels and changes in expectations for current contracts in place at the Casper terminal. Refer to Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 9. Goodwill and Intangible Assets of this Report for further discussion of the impairment loss at the Casper terminal.
While the severity of the government-imposed restrictions in different regions and changes to consumer behavior have continued to evolve during the course of the pandemic, some economies started to reopen in the latter half of 2020. However, certain jurisdictions that began re-opening have returned to restrictions in light of increased numbers of new COVID-19 cases and new strains of the virus. Beginning in December 2020, several COVID-19 vaccines have received approval and have begun to be made available around the world. The timing of when the vaccines will be available for a majority of the world population remains uncertain, as there are several logistical and supply challenge issues that will have to be addressed. As such, there still remains considerable uncertainty about the ultimate impact and duration of the pandemic and its effects on the global economy.
Despite these uncertainties, recent efforts to reopen the economy have continued to lead to marginal increases in the demand for crude oil and petroleum products. As a result, crude oil prices have fully recovered and stabilized at pre-pandemic levels, as compared to the lower price levels that were present at the end of the first quarter and
during the second quarter of 2020. As a result, as of the beginning of July 2020, producers in Canada and the U.S. started to bring back the temporary shut-in production from the first quarter of 2020, with mostly all of this production coming back online in Canada towards the end of 2020. Additionally, OPEC+ agreed in July 2020 to taper oil production cuts, which scaled back production cuts from 9.7 Mmbpd to 7.7 Mmbpd between August 2020 and January 2021. In January 2021, OPEC+ announced that it would increase production by 500,000 bpd, which would adjust the production reduction from 7.7 Mmbpd to 7.2 Mmbpd. This is consistent with what OPEC+ previously announced for January 2021 production. We believe that if the increases in demand for oil and natural gas continue, production levels will continue to trend higher during 2021. If demand and prices increase, the need for crude by rail export capacity from our terminals is also expected to increase. However, there still remains significant uncertainty given the unprecedented and evolving nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the extent of any increases in demand and price levels are difficult to predict.
The broader implications of COVID-19 and lower oil and natural gas prices on our results of operations and overall financial performance remain uncertain. We have implemented protocols and procedures designed to manage risk associated with the direct impact of COVID-19 on our operations. We have not experienced material disruptions to our operations or material increase in our cash expenses. Currently, we expect to have sufficient liquidity to operate our business and remain in compliance with the financial covenants under our credit agreement for at least the next twelve months following the filing of this report and we do not expect our customers to terminate existing contracts. However, if the pandemic continues for a further extended period of time and/or oil prices decrease to relatively low levels, these conditions may have an adverse effect on the Company’s results of future operations, financial position, and liquidity. Given the unprecedented and evolving nature of the COVID-19 pandemic and the state of the commodity markets, we continue to actively monitor their impact on our operations and financial condition. Refer to Item 1A. Risk Factors in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of certain risks relating to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Given the uncertainty in the energy industry, as a proactive measure to strengthen our financial position and redeploy certain free cash flow to de-lever, the board of directors of our general partner elected in the first quarter of 2020 to reduce the quarterly distribution per unit declared by 70% as compared to the distribution for the fourth quarter of 2019. As a result, during the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020, we made net repayments towards reducing the outstanding balance of our Revolving Credit Facility totaling $27 million. Refer to Liquidity and Capital Resources-Cash Requirement-Distributions for further discussion.
Impact of Current Market Events
The amount by which the West Texas Intermediate, or WTI, price of crude oil exceeds the WCS price of crude oil, referred to as the WCS to WTI spread, is a driver of activity at our Hardisty terminal. The WCS to WTI spread was between $8-$15 per barrel during the fourth quarter of 2020 and averaged approximately $14 during the month of December 2020, which was slightly wider than the previous narrower spread levels experienced earlier in 2020. This wider spread was a result of production in Canada trending upwards towards levels that existed prior to the COVID-19 pandemic as discussed above. Consistent with the increase in supply, the demand for additional export capacity by customers of our Hardisty terminal in turn increased and as a result we experienced an increase in the average daily throughput during the fourth quarter of 2020 as compared to lower levels that existed in the second and third quarters at the Hardisty terminal. Going forward, we expect producers will continue to increase crude oil supply. Future WCS to WTI spreads recently published by Bloomberg for 2022 through 2024 average approximately $15 per barrel and reach approximately $17 per barrel towards the end of 2024. Given the current market conditions, as stated above, and as pipeline uncertainty remains, supply is expected to continue to be higher than pipeline takeaway capacity and as a result, the WCS to WTI spread should continue to support the need for a crude by rail egress solution. As this occurs, crude by rail volumes from Western Canada to the United States are expected to further increase during 2021. In January 2021, the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers, or CAPP, announced that they are forecasting more than a $3 billion dollar increase in planned upstream oil and gas spending as compared to 2020 levels. Based on this forecasted increase in spending by producers in Canada and the forecasted WCS to WTI spread levels, we expect that throughput volumes at our Hardisty terminal will continue to trend upwards throughout 2021, from the low levels that existed during the second and third quarters of 2020.
Consistent with crude oil production in Canada trending towards levels that existed prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, in the fourth quarter of 2020, apportionment levels (representing the percentage of barrels nominated that were not shipped due to pipeline capacity constraints) on the primary heavy crude oil pipelines from Western Canada to the U.S. increased to an average of 22% and have continued to increase to approximately 53% in February 2021. Heavy Canadian crude oil supply levels have also increased due to winter pipeline specification changes, as required pipeline blending ratios are higher in the winter months. As such, apportionment is also expected to continue to increase due to this factor and as supply increases and lack of available pipeline takeaway capacity remains. Crude oil inventory levels increased by approximately 30% during the fourth quarter of 2020 as compared to levels at the end of the third quarter 2020, consistent with the increases in supply and apportionment levels previously discussed. Given the expectation of increases in supply and higher apportionment levels, we expect that inventory levels will continue to increase in the first quarter of 2021. There still remains significant uncertainty given the unprecedented and evolving nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the extent and duration of any increases in apportionment or inventory levels are difficult to predict, if such increases occur at all.
Another factor that may contribute to the use of rail to export crude oil from Canada to the U.S. is the significant regulatory and legal obstacles that pipeline projects and existing pipelines experience in the U.S. For example, in March 2020, the government of Alberta announced that it had reached an agreement to make a $1.5 billion equity investment in the Keystone XL crude oil pipeline project in 2020 followed by a $6 billion loan guarantee in 2021 in order to enable the completion of the project by 2023. However, in January 2021, the new U.S. President issued an executive action that revoked the permit for the Keystone XL pipeline. Additionally, the anticipated in-service date of Enbridge’s Line 3 Replacement project to upgrade and expand an existing pipeline delivering Western Canadian crude to U.S. markets has been delayed to the fourth quarter of 2021 and could face potential legal disputes. Current pipeline operators are also facing legal challenges to keep their pipelines in operation. The Dakota Access Pipeline is in the middle of a legal dispute to determine whether the pipeline can continue to operate without a key easement, although the pipeline can operate until a decision is made by federal courts. Enbridge’s Line 5 is also in jeopardy of being shut down as Michigan’s Governor has demanded that the pipeline be shut down by May 12, 2021. The Governor has revoked a 1953 Michigan easement that allowed Line 5 to pass through the bottom of the Straits of Mackinac. As environmental, regulatory and political challenges to increase pipeline export capacity remain, crude by rail exports will remain a valuable egress solution.
When producers in Western Canada bring back production, in the event relative WCS to WTI differentials make it economic to export crude oil, we expect demand for and utilization of our rail terminals to increase. This continues to remain uncertain and difficult to predict. In the long-term, we expect demand for rail capacity at our terminals to continue to increase over the next several years and potentially longer if proposed pipeline developments do not meet currently planned timelines and regulatory or other challenges to pipeline projects persist. Our Hardisty and Casper terminals, with established capacity and scalable designs, are well-positioned as strategic outlets to meet takeaway needs as Western Canadian crude oil supplies continue to exceed available pipeline takeaway capacity. Also, as discussed in more detail below, USD is pursuing long-term solutions to transport heavier grades of crude oil produced in Western Canada through the construction of the DRU at the Hardisty terminal. Additionally, we believe our Stroud Terminal provides an advantageous rail destination for Western Canadian crude oil given the optionality provided by its connectivity to the Cushing hub and multiple refining centers across the United States. Rail also generally provides a greater ability to preserve the specific quality of a customer’s product relative to pipelines, providing value to a producer or refiner. We expect these advantages, including our origin-to-destination capabilities, to continue to result in long-term contract extensions and expansion opportunities across our terminal network.
Alberta Government Update
Over the course of 2019 and part of 2020, the Alberta Government imposed limits on production of crude oil and bitumen. These limits were originally applicable through 2020. However, in late October 2020, the Alberta Government announced that it will not set production limits as of December 2020, however it will extend its regulatory authority to curtail oil production through December 2021. The Alberta Government has stated that it will closely monitor production, inventories, pipeline capacity and rail shipments. The Alberta Government could put production limits back in place, particularly if forecasts show storage inventories approaching maximum capacity.
Growth Opportunities for our Operations
We apply a disciplined approach to pursuing our growth strategy, which may include organic growth initiatives as well as acquisitions of energy-related logistics assets. Potential acquisitions may include assets developed by our sponsor or by third-party logistics providers. We believe these represent attractive opportunities to leverage our established and scalable network footprint to enhance and extend our currently-contracted cash flows.
USD is currently pursuing several development projects related to long-term solutions to transport heavier grades of crude oil produced in Western Canada, as well as projects related to the storage and the transportation of liquid hydrocarbons and biofuels. As the role of biofuels continues to expand in the clean energy transition, we and USD are committed to offering new capabilities and services across growing demand in clean fuels to include ethanol, renewable diesel and biodiesel. These development projects are expected to be supported by multi-year, take-or-pay agreements with strategic customers which would generate stable and predictable cash flows, as discussed in further detail below.
Opportunities Related to USD’s Diluent Recovery Unit Project
In December 2019, USD and Gibson jointly announced an agreement to construct and operate a diluent recovery unit, or DRU, near Hardisty, Alberta, Canada. A subsidiary of ConocoPhillips has contracted to process 50,000 barrels per day of inlet bitumen blend through the DRU to be shipped by Canadian Pacific Railway and Kansas City Southern Railway Company to the Port Arthur Terminal, or PAT, to be constructed by USD, on the U.S. Gulf Coast. Construction of the DRU and PAT have commenced and USD expects they will be placed into service late in the second quarter or early in the third quarter of 2021. USD and Gibson are currently in commercial discussions with other potential producer and refiner customers to secure additional long-term, take-or-pay agreements to support future expansions of capacity at the DRU.
USD’s patented DRU process is designed to separate the diluent that is added to raw bitumen in the production process in order to meet two important market needs - it returns the recovered diluent for reuse in the Alberta market, reducing delivered costs for diluent, and it creates DRUbit™, a proprietary heavy Canadian crude oil specifically designed for rail transportation. DRUbit™ is crude oil or bitumen that has been returned to a more concentrated, viscous state that is classified as a non-hazardous, non-flammable commodity when transported by rail in Canada and the U.S. DRUbit™ is a market access solution designed to satisfy demand for heavy Canadian crude oil on the U.S. Gulf Coast and in other markets at a cost that is economically competitive to the diluted bitumen crude oil that is transported by pipeline today.
Management believes that the successful completion of USD’s Hardisty DRU project will enhance the sustainability and quality of the Partnership’s cash flows by significantly increasing the average tenor of terminalling services agreements at our Hardisty Terminal. For example, upon successful completion of the Hardisty DRU project and construction of the Port Arthur destination terminal described below, the average remaining terms of our three terminalling services agreements with ConocoPhillips at the Hardisty Terminal will extend from less than 3 years to over 10 years (through mid-2031). We expect that future customers of the Hardisty DRU project will enter into similar long-term, more sustainable commitments for terminalling services at the Partnership’s Hardisty Terminal. USD’s interest in the Hardisty DRU project would also be available for possible acquisition by the Partnership, and would be subject to the Partnership’s right of first offer on USD’s assets pursuant to the Omnibus Agreement between USD and the Partnership, which extends through October 15, 2021.
As mentioned, USD is constructing a new destination terminal in Port Arthur, Texas for the DRUbit™ that will be transloaded at our Hardisty Terminal. USD’s Port Arthur Terminal, or PAT, will have the capability for rail unloading, barge dock loading and unloading, tank storage and blending and will be pipeline connected to Phillips 66’s Beaumont Terminal, providing customers access to a large network of refining and marine facilities. The facility will be set up to handle DRUbit™, Dilbit and a heavy Canadian conventional barrel and manage the blending of DRUbit™ into a marketable product for shippers. The marine and pipeline delivery options for blended products at the terminal will allow customers to enhance market flexibility and take advantage of cost advantaged delivery options. PAT will be served by the Kansas City Southern railroad and sits on exclusive rail infrastructure, providing seamless scheduling, operations, and communications resulting in ratable and reliable service. Within the
233-acre terminal footprint, there is ample waterfront and upland acreage that allows PAT expansion capabilities to accommodate any foreseeable demand.
We believe the PAT project is well positioned in a market poised for growth. The Port Arthur market is home to over 1.6 million barrels of refining capacity per the EIA and a growing petrochemical market. With ExxonMobil’s 250,000 barrel per day refinery expansion expected to be in service in 2023, and Motiva’s acquisition of the Flint Hills ethane cracker dovetailing into planned downstream expansions into the petrochemical market, Port Arthur’s heavily utilized midstream infrastructure can expect liquid volumes to increase.
Within the Port Arthur market, PAT will be well positioned to take advantage of these opportunities and other organic growth projects. Pipeline connectivity to the hub of Port Arthur’s liquids business provides an advantage through reduced costs to deliver crude locally relative to a barge alternative and will extend the market reach for customers of PAT. Customers of PAT will be able to deliver barrels by pipeline and water into Louisiana markets when the terminal goes into service. It is expected that customers of PAT will also be able to deliver into Houston in the future, as a pipeline connection project is currently under construction and is expected to be placed into service by 2022. USD’s Port Arthur Terminal would also be available for possible acquisition by the Partnership, and would be subject to the Partnership’s right of first offer on USD’s assets pursuant to the Omnibus Agreement between USD and the Partnership, which extends through October 15, 2021.
The timing and commencement of the DRU and Port Arthur projects will impact the amount of volume commitments at the Stroud Terminal. Upon the commencement of the DRU and Port Arthur projects prior to June 30, 2022, we expect the customer to elect to reduce the volume commitments at the Stroud Terminal attributable to the Partnership (and move commitments to the DRU) by one-third of the current commitment through June 30, 2022, at which point the agreement will terminate and there will be no renewal period. We also expect the customer to elect to fully terminate the volume commitments attributable to USDM. If the DRU and Port Arthur projects have not commenced prior to June 30, 2022, on a net basis after giving effect to the USDM volumes that will be assigned to the Partnership, the volume commitments at the Stroud Terminal attributable to the Partnership will remain the same and extend through June 30, 2024. Approximately one-third of the volume commitments attributable to USDM will also extend through June 30, 2024 and the remaining volume commitments attributable to USDM will terminate on June 30, 2022. Management believes that the lower utilization at the Stroud Terminal as a result of successful completion of the DRU project will be short-term in nature and will allow the Partnership the opportunity to offer terminalling services to other customers in need of access to the numerous markets connected to the Cushing oil hub.
Other Opportunities Related to Our Crude Oil Terminal Network
Western Canadian crude oil production is projected to increase throughout the next decade, driven primarily by developments in Alberta’s oil sands region. Additionally, certain end users, including refineries across North America, have made substantial investments in recent years in order to efficiently process heavy grades of crude oil, such as those from Western Canada. Additions to pipeline takeaway capacity from Western Canada to key demand centers in the United States are not expected to keep pace with forecasted production growth. As such, demand for rail takeaway out of Western Canada is expected to increase over the next several years and potentially longer if currently planned timelines are not met. Our strategically-located crude oil terminal network, with established capacity and scalable design, is well-positioned to meet these growing takeaway needs.
Hardisty Terminal
We have renewed and extended 100% of the capacity at our Hardisty Terminal through mid-2022, with approximately 73% extended through mid-2023 with customers under multi-year take-or-pay agreements. As previously discussed, upon the successful commencement of USD’s DRU and Port Arthur projects discussed above, approximately 32% of the Hardisty Terminal’s capacity will be automatically extended through mid-2031. We remain focused on renewing and extending our Hardisty agreements that expire in mid-2022 and mid-2023 on a multi-year take-or-pay basis. Additionally, if USD and Gibson are successful in securing an additional customer at the DRU, the capacity associated with such commitment will likely be contracted for transloading at the Hardisty Terminal on a long-term basis.
USDG, pursuant to its development rights at the Hardisty Terminal, completed the Hardisty South expansion (“Hardisty South”) in early 2019. The existing Hardisty Terminal, which is owned by us, has designed capacity for two unit trains per day, or approximately 150,000 barrels per day. Hardisty South, which is owned by USDG, added one and one-half unit trains per day, or approximately 112,500 barrels per day, of takeaway capacity to the terminal by modifying the existing loading rack and building additional infrastructure and trackage. We believe Hardisty South could present an attractive future acquisition opportunity for the Partnership pursuant to our existing right of first offer, should USDG propose to sell or transfer the asset before October 15, 2021.
Stroud Terminal
Our Stroud Terminal is a crude oil destination terminal in Stroud, Oklahoma, which we use to facilitate rail-to-pipeline shipments of crude oil from our Hardisty Terminal to the crude oil storage hub located in Cushing, Oklahoma. Our Stroud Terminal is the only rail facility connected to the Cushing storage hub, which provides for strategic and competitive advantages. The benchmark price in the domestic spot market for U.S. crude oil known as West Texas Intermediate, or WTI, is set at the Cushing hub. According to the EIA, the Cushing storage hub has approximately 76 million barrels of working storage capacity. There is also an expansive pipeline infrastructure that connects into and out of the Cushing hub. Because of the vast connectivity that Cushing offers, crude oil that is delivered into Cushing can then be delivered to either local refineries or it can be shipped to other markets such as the United States Gulf Coast, which is the largest refinery complex in the U.S. As such, we believe our Stroud Terminal provides an advantageous rail destination for Western Canadian crude oil given the optionality provided by its connectivity to the Cushing hub and multiple refining centers across the United States.
Approximately 50% of the Stroud Terminal’s current capacity is contracted under a multi-year, take-or-pay terminal services agreement between the Partnership and ConocoPhillips.
USDM has contracted the other 50% of the Stroud Terminal’s current capacity pursuant to the Marketing Services Agreement, or MSA, that was established at the time of the acquisition of the Stroud Terminal. Per the MSA, we granted USDM the right to market the capacity at the Stroud Terminal in excess of the capacity of our initial customer in exchange for a nominal per barrel fee. If the DRU project is not completed by June 30, 2022, then, pursuant to the MSA, certain commitment volumes at the Stroud Terminal attributable to USDM will be assigned to the Partnership, as discussed above.
Our sponsor is also evaluating a potential expansion of the Stroud Terminal to meet incremental customer demand, which could include the unloading of both WCS or DRUbit™. If pursued and successful, these efforts could provide us with cash flows incremental to those provided by our currently-contracted capacity. Additionally, any such development project would be wholly-owned by USDG and would be subject to our existing right of first offer, should USDG propose to sell or transfer the asset.
Casper Terminal
Our Casper Terminal currently includes approximately 100,000 bpd of loading capacity and 900,000 barrels of tank storage capacity. The Casper Terminal receives inbound crude oil primarily through our dedicated direct pipeline connection from Enbridge’s Express pipeline, which is subsequently loaded onto unit or manifest trains.
The Casper Terminal executed an agreement with a multi-national, investment grade customer for an initial three-year term that commenced on September 1, 2018. The agreement contains take-or-pay terms for terminalling and storage services in connection with one storage tank, as well as fees associated with actual throughput volumes and other services. Pursuant to this agreement and to supplement rail loading options from the terminal, we constructed an outbound pipeline connection from the Casper Terminal to the nearby Platte Terminal located at the termination point of the Express pipeline, which was placed into service during December 2019. Upon the completion of the outbound pipeline in December 2019, the Partnership entered into a second terminalling services agreement that contains the same terms as the first agreement, but in connection with a separate storage tank with the customer. This second agreement expires in December 2022.
In December 2019, an existing customer of our Casper Terminal extended its terminalling services agreement that was to expire December 31, 2019, for an additional two years. This agreement was subsequently transferred to a third party marketing company in 2020. The agreement contains take-or-pay terms for storage services and variable fees associated with actual throughput volumes and other services.
In July 2019, Enbridge announced a program to increase the capacity of the Express pipeline by up to an additional 50,000 bpd with the use of drag reducing agent, or DRA, and additional pump stations. In late July 2020, Enbridge announced that it had placed 25,000 bpd of the additional capacity on its Express pipeline into service and plans to place the additional 25,000 bpd into service during 2021, which was extended from the previously expected in-service date of sometime during the first half of 2020. We anticipate that some of the additional volumes resulting from the increased capacity on the Express pipeline could be delivered to our Casper Terminal, as we believe outbound pipeline connections from the Express pipeline and nearby terminals are at or near full capacity.
Opportunities Related to Our Sponsor’s Texas Deepwater Development on U.S. Gulf Coast
In October 2015, our sponsor entered into a joint venture to develop a premier U.S. Gulf Coast logistics terminal on a 988-acre parcel of property on the Houston Ship Channel. Its strategic location is uniquely positioned to provide customers with flexible market access to key demand centers, both domestic and abroad. Preliminary master planning efforts suggest that the property footprint is capable of supporting up to twelve million barrels of storage capacity, multiple docks (including barge and deep water), inbound and outbound pipeline connectivity, and a rail terminal with capacity to unload multiple unit trains per day. The property is in proximity to substantially all major inbound and outbound pipelines and can be directly accessed by multiple Class 1 railroads.
In August 2019, our Sponsor’s Texas Deepwater development joint venture and Equilon Enterprises LLC d/b/a Shell Oil Products US, or SOPUS, completed a project to retrofit and refurbish the Deer Park Rail Terminal, or DPRT, on the Houston Ship Channel. The DPRT has the capability of loading up to 48 railcars per day, or approximately 33,000 barrels of refined products per day. The terminal is also capable of providing additional value-added services, including the ability of adding lubricity additives and red dye. The facility is equipped with two operational tanks with 50,000 barrels of total storage capacity, which will service the railcar loading rack at the terminal with direct pipeline connectivity to the Deer Park Refinery and the Colex Products Terminal. While the initial focus will be on loading diesel into railcars initially destined to Mexico and the Permian Basin, there may be a potential to further expand the DPRT by adding incremental storage capacity and rail loading capabilities to handle additional refined products.
According to the February 2021 short-term outlook published by the EIA, worldwide fuel consumption is estimated to have decreased by approximately 8.9 Mmbpd in 2020 compared to 2019 due to the COVID-19 pandemic and restrictions on economic activity. The EIA projects that worldwide fuel consumption will increase by 5.4 Mmbpd by 2021 compared to 2020, based on the expectation that global markets will start to recover. Recent industry developments highlight the Gulf Coast’s strategic importance within global energy markets and its ability to meet growing demand. Since the ban on exports of crude oil was lifted in 2015, exports of crude oil and petroleum products from PADD III on the Gulf Coast have increased from approximately 3.5 million bpd to approximately 7.1 million bpd in 2019, which represented approximately 84% of the total crude oil and petroleum products exported out of the U.S. during 2019. The EIA’s Annual Energy Outlook published in February 2021 in its base case forecasts that in the long-term the U.S. is expected to remain a net exporter of crude oil and petroleum products. The U.S. continues to be an integral part of global oil markets and a significant source of supply, despite uncertainty surrounding post-pandemic expectations for oil and natural gas demand. Our sponsor’s Texas Deepwater development will continue to pursue projects that position the terminal to take advantage of this macro trend, and participate heavily in export markets.
Our sponsor expects that these industry dynamics will contribute to growing demand for storage, staging, blending, export and other logistics services along the Gulf Coast, including at its Houston Ship Channel property. Accordingly, our sponsor is actively engaged in commercial negotiations with potential customers to provide export solutions for crude oil, refined products, petrochemicals and natural gas liquids. Any such development project would be wholly-owned by USD and its joint venture partner, and USD’s interest in the Texas Deepwater development joint venture would be subject to our existing right of first offer should USD propose to sell or transfer
its ownership. If successfully commercialized and developed, and subsequently acquired by us, the Texas Deepwater development represents a meaningful opportunity to add complementary logistics assets that diversify our current network and have the potential to add additional high-quality take-or-pay agreements with terms beyond those related to our existing network.
Right of First Offer
In connection with our IPO, we entered into the Omnibus Agreement with USD and USDG, pursuant to which we were granted a right of first offer on any midstream infrastructure assets that they may develop, construct, or acquire for a period of seven years after the closing of our IPO, or until October 15, 2021. Additional information about the Omnibus Agreement and the right of first offer are included in Note 13. Transactions with Related Parties of our consolidated financial statements at Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We cannot assure you that USD will be able to develop or construct, or that we or USD will be able to acquire, any additional midstream infrastructure projects. Among other things, the ability of USD to further develop the Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal, or any other project, and our ability to acquire such projects, will depend upon USD’s and our ability to raise additional equity and debt financing. We are under no obligation to make any offer, and USD and USDG are under no obligation to accept any offer we make, with respect to any asset subject to our right of first offer. Additionally, the approval of Energy Capital Partners is required for the sale of any assets by USD or its subsidiaries, including us (other than sales in the ordinary course of business), acquisitions of securities of other entities that exceed specified materiality thresholds and any material unbudgeted expenditures or deviations from our approved budgets. Energy Capital Partners may make these decisions free of any duty to us and our unitholders. This approval would be required for the potential acquisition by us of any projects to expand the Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal, as well as any other projects or assets that USD may develop or acquire in the future or any third-party acquisition we may pursue independently or jointly with USD. Energy Capital Partners is under no obligation to approve any such transaction. Please refer to the discussion under Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance-Special Approval Rights of Energy Capital Partners regarding the rights of Energy Capital Partners. If we are unable to acquire any projects to expand the Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal from USD, these expansion projects, once completed, may compete directly with our existing business for future throughput volumes, which may impact our ability to enter into new terminal services agreements, including with our existing customers, following the termination of our existing agreements, or the terms thereof, and our ability to compete for future spot volumes. Furthermore, cyclical changes in the demand for crude oil and other liquid hydrocarbons may cause USD, or us, to further re-evaluate any future expansion projects, including expansion of the Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal.
How We Generate Revenue
We conduct our business through two distinct reporting segments: Terminalling services and Fleet services. We have established these reporting segments as strategic business units to facilitate the achievement of our long-term objectives, to assist in resource allocation decisions and to assess operational performance.
Terminalling Services
The Terminalling services segment includes a network of strategically-located terminals that provide customers with railcar loading and/or unloading capacity, as well as related logistics services, for crude oil and biofuels. Substantially all of our cash flows are generated under multi-year, take-or-pay terminal services agreements that include minimum monthly commitment fees. We generally have no direct commodity price exposure, although fluctuating commodity prices could indirectly influence our activities and results of operations over the long term. We may on occasion enter into buy-sell arrangements in which we take temporary title to commodities while in our terminals. We expect any such agreements to be at fixed prices where we do not take commodity price exposure.
Hardisty Terminal Services Agreements. We have terminal services agreements with four high-quality, primarily investment grade counterparties or their subsidiaries: Cenovus Energy, Gibson, Suncor Energy, and ConocoPhillips. Substantially all of the terminalling capacity at our Hardisty Terminal is contracted under multi-
year, take-or-pay terminal services agreements subject to inflation-based escalators with a volume-weighted average remaining contract life of 2.5 years as of December 31, 2020. Assuming the successful completion of USD’s DRU project, as previously discussed, which will automatically extend approximately 32% of the Hardisty Terminal’s capacity through mid-2031, the volume-weighted average remaining contract life of our Hardisty Terminal increases to approximately 7.5 years as of December 31, 2020. All of our counterparties are obligated to pay a minimum monthly commitment fee for the capacity to load an allotted number of unit trains, representing a specified number of barrels per month. If a customer loads fewer unit trains than its allotted amount in any given month, that customer will receive a credit for up to12 months. This credit may be used to offset fees on throughput volumes in excess of the customer’s minimum monthly commitments in future periods to the extent capacity is available for the excess volume. We will receive a per-barrel fee on any volumes handled in excess of the customers’ allowed amount, to the extent the additional volume is not subject to the credit discussed above. If a force majeure event occurs, a customer’s obligation to pay us may be suspended, in which case the length of the contract term will be extended by the same duration as the force majeure event.
Stroud Terminal Services Agreements. Concurrent with our acquisition of the Stroud Terminal, we entered into a multi-year, take-or-pay terminalling services agreement with ConocoPhillips for the use of approximately 50% of the available capacity at the Stroud Terminal. The term of the initial agreement concluded on June 30, 2020 and was extended through June 2024, which is subject to certain early termination rights depending on the commencement of our Sponsor’s DRU project, as previously discussed. Our customer is obligated to pay a minimum monthly commitment fee and can load an allotted number of barrels per month. If our customer loads fewer barrels than its allotted amount in any given month, the customer receives a credit for up to 12 months. This credit may be used to offset fees on throughput volumes in excess of our customer’s minimum monthly commitments in future periods to the extent capacity is available for the excess volume. We will receive a per-barrel fee on any volumes handled in excess of our customer’s allotted amount, to the extent the additional volume is not subject to the credit discussed above.
We also entered into the MSA with USDM, as discussed above, whereby we granted USDM the right to market the capacity at the Stroud Terminal in excess of the capacity of our initial customer in exchange for a nominal per barrel fee. Upon expiration of our contract with the initial Stroud customer in June 2020, the same marketing rights now apply to all throughput at the Stroud Terminal in excess of the throughput necessary for the Stroud Terminal to generate Adjusted EBITDA that is at least equal to the average monthly Adjusted EBITDA derived from the initial Stroud customer during the 12 months prior to expiration.
Casper Terminal Services Agreements. Our Casper Terminal includes terminalling services agreements with a high quality, investment grade multi-national customer and with a marketer customer. The multi-year agreements with these customers contain take-or-pay terms for terminalling and storage services and variable fees associated with actual throughput volumes and other services.
Additionally, we may on occasion utilize our available storage and throughput capacity to support our customers’ spot activity through buy-sell agreements that generate cash flows in addition to those provided by our multi-year agreements, and have also entered into a short-term agreement to facilitate spot transactions on behalf of USDM. We are actively pursuing term agreements with these spot customers.
West Colton Terminal Services Agreements. Our West Colton Terminal is supported by a terminal services agreement with a subsidiary of an investment grade company pursuant to which we are paid fixed fees per gallon of ethanol transloaded at the terminal. The West Colton Terminal services agreement has been in place since July 2009 and is terminable at any time by either party upon 150 days’ notice.
Fleet Services
We provide our customers with leased railcars and fleet services related to the transportation of liquid hydrocarbons and biofuels by rail on multi-year, take-or-pay terms under master fleet services agreements for initial periods ranging from five to nine years. We do not own any railcars. As of December 31, 2020, our railcar fleet consisted of 1,432 railcars, which we leased from various railcar manufacturers and financial entities, including 1,058 C&I railcars. We have assigned certain payment and performance obligations under the leases and master fleet
service agreements for 1,232 of the railcars to other parties, but we have retained certain rights and obligations with respect to the servicing of these railcars. Substantially all of our current railcar fleet is dedicated to customers of our Hardisty Terminal. Our master fleet services agreements have a weighted-average remaining contract life of 1.5 years as of December 31, 2020. At the end of June 2020, leases on 250 railcars were assigned directly to our customers. Additionally, effective February 1, 2021, leases on 999 railcars were assigned directly to one of our customers. The agreements on an additional 233 railcars expired at the end of February 2021. We do not expect the assignments or expirations to have a material impact on our business, cash flows or results of operations.
Under the master fleet services agreements, we provide customers with railcar-specific fleet services, which may include, among other things, the provision of relevant administrative and billing services, the repairs and maintenance of railcars in accordance with standard industry practice and applicable law, the management and tracking of the movement of railcars, the regulatory and administrative reporting and compliance as required in connection with the movement of railcars, and the negotiation for and sourcing of railcars. Our customers typically pay us and our assignees monthly fees per railcar for these services, which include a component for fleet services.
Historically, we contracted with railroads on behalf of some of our customers to arrange for the movement of railcars from our terminals to the destinations selected by our customers. We were the contracting party with the railroads for those shipments and were responsible to the railroads for the related fees charged by the railroads, for which we were reimbursed by our customers. Both the fees charged by the railroads to us and the reimbursement of these fees by our customers are included in our consolidated statements of operations in the revenues and operating costs line items entitled “Freight and other reimbursables.”
Also, we have historically assisted our customers with procuring railcars to facilitate their use of our terminalling services. Our wholly-owned subsidiary USD Rail LP has historically entered into leases with third-party manufacturers of railcars and financial firms, which it has then leased to customers. Although we expect to continue to assist our customers in obtaining railcars for their use transporting crude oil to or from our terminals, we do not intend to continue to act as an intermediary between railcar lessors and our customers as our existing lease agreements expire, are otherwise terminated, or are assigned to our existing customers. Should market conditions change, we could potentially act as an intermediary with railcar lessors on behalf of our customers again in the future.
How We Evaluate Our Operations
Our management uses a variety of financial and operating metrics to evaluate our operations. When we evaluate our consolidated operations and related liquidity, we consider these metrics to be significant factors in assessing our ability to generate cash and pay distributions and include: (i) Adjusted EBITDA and DCF; (ii) operating costs; and (iii) volumes. We define Adjusted EBITDA and DCF below. When evaluating our operations at the segment level, we evaluate using Segment Adjusted EBITDA. Refer to Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 15. Segment Reporting.
Adjusted EBITDA and Distributable Cash Flow
We define Adjusted EBITDA as “Net cash provided by operating activities” adjusted for changes in working capital items, interest, income taxes, foreign currency transaction gains and losses, and other items which do not affect the underlying cash flows produced by our businesses. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP, supplemental financial measure used by management and external users of our financial statements, such as investors and commercial banks, to assess:
•our liquidity and the ability of our business to produce sufficient cash flows to make distributions to our unitholders; and
•our ability to incur and service debt and fund capital expenditures.
We define Distributable Cash Flow, or DCF, as Adjusted EBITDA less net cash paid for interest, income taxes and maintenance capital expenditures. DCF does not reflect changes in working capital balances. DCF is a non-GAAP, supplemental financial measure used by management and by external users of our financial statements, such as investors and commercial banks, to assess:
•the amount of cash available for making distributions to our unitholders;
•the excess cash flows being retained for use in enhancing our existing business; and
•the sustainability of our current distribution rate per unit.
We believe that the presentation of Adjusted EBITDA and DCF in this report provides information that enhances an investor’s understanding of our ability to generate cash for payment of distributions and other purposes. The GAAP measure most directly comparable to Adjusted EBITDA and DCF is “Net cash provided by operating activities.” Adjusted EBITDA and DCF should not be considered alternatives to “Net cash provided by operating activities” or any other measure of liquidity presented in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA and DCF exclude some, but not all, items that affect “Net cash provided by operating activities,” and these measures may vary among other companies. As a result, Adjusted EBITDA and DCF may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of Net cash provided by operating activities, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, to Adjusted EBITDA and DCF:
(1) Represents foreign exchange transaction amounts associated with activities between our U.S. and Canadian subsidiaries.
(2) Represents the change in non-cash contract assets and liabilities associated with revenue recognized at blended rates based on tiered rate structures in certain of our customer contracts and deferred revenue associated with deficiency credits that are expected to be used in the future prior to their expiration. Amounts presented are net of the corresponding prepaid Gibson pipeline fee that will be recognized as expense concurrently with the recognition of revenue.
(3) Includes the net effect of tax refunds of $480 thousand received in the third quarter of 2020 associated with carrying back U.S. net operating losses incurred during 2020 and prior periods allowed for by the provisions of the CARES Act.
Operating Costs
Our operating costs are comprised primarily of subcontracted rail services, pipeline fees, repairs and maintenance expenses, materials and supplies, utility costs, insurance premiums and lease costs for facilities and equipment. In addition, our operating expenses include the cost of leasing railcars from third-party railcar suppliers and the shipping fees charged by railroads, which costs are generally passed through to our customers. We expect our expenses to remain relatively stable, but they may fluctuate from period to period depending on the mix of
activities performed during a period and the timing of these expenditures. We expect to incur additional operating costs, including subcontracted rail services and pipeline fees, when we handle additional volumes at our terminals.
Our management seeks to maximize the profitability of our operations by effectively managing both our operating and maintenance expenses. As our terminal facilities and related equipment age, we expect to incur regular maintenance expenditures to maintain the operating capabilities of our facilities and equipment in compliance with sound business practices, our contractual relationships and regulatory requirements for operating these assets. We record these maintenance and other expenses associated with operating our assets in “Operating and maintenance” costs in our consolidated statements of operations.
Volumes
The amount of Terminalling services revenue we generate depends on minimum customer commitment fees and the throughput volume that we handle at our terminals in excess of those minimum commitments. These volumes are primarily affected by the supply of and demand for crude oil, refined products and biofuels in the markets served directly or indirectly by our assets. Additionally, these volumes are affected by the spreads between the benchmark prices for these products, which are influenced by, among other things, the available takeaway capacity in those markets. Although customers at our terminals have committed to minimum monthly fees under their terminal services agreements with us, which will generate the majority of our Terminalling services revenue, our results of operations will also be affected by:
•our customers’ utilization of our terminals in excess of their minimum monthly volume commitments;
•our ability to identify and execute accretive acquisitions and commercialize organic expansion projects to capture incremental volumes; and
•our ability to renew contracts with existing customers, enter into contracts with new customers, increase customer commitments and throughput volumes at our terminals, and provide additional ancillary services at those terminals.
General Trends and Outlook
In addition to the discussion provided below, refer also to the Market Update section included in Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis, Overview and Recent Developments.
Hardisty and Stroud Terminals Customer Contract Renewals
During 2019, we successfully re-contracted the remaining available capacity of our Hardisty Terminal with multi-year take-or-pay agreements with investment grade customers. To date, we have renewed and extended 100% of the capacity at our Hardisty Terminal through mid-2022, with approximately 73% extended through mid-2023 with customers under multi-year take-or-pay agreements. Upon the successful completion of USD’s DRU project previously discussed, approximately 32% of the Hardisty Terminal’s capacity will be automatically extended through mid-2031. Certain of our terminalling services agreements at our Hardisty terminal that expire in mid-2023 include a tiered rate structure that includes rate decreases that occur annually on July 1st of each year throughout the term of the agreement. Additionally, due to the significantly longer contract tenor of the terminalling services agreements associated with the DRU volumes, contracted rates on an annual basis will be lower as compared to historical, shorter-term, agreements, but support a higher net present value to the Partnership and a more predictable cash flow profile. We remain focused on renewing, extending or replacing our agreements at Hardisty that expire in mid-2022 and mid-2023 with new, multi-year take or pay commitments, including, if USD and Gibson are successful in securing additional customers at the DRU, on a long-term basis similar to the existing DRU customer. In addition, we successfully re-contracted the capacity at our Stroud Terminal that was set to expire in June 2020 with a term that extends through June 2024. However, upon the successful completion of USD’s DRU project, our Stroud customer will have the right to terminate a portion of this agreement immediately and the remainder in June 2022, as previously discussed. Management believes that the lower utilization at the Stroud Terminal as a result of successful completion of the DRU project will be short-term in nature, and will allow the Partnership the opportunity to offer terminalling services to other customers that may be in need of access to the numerous markets connected to the Cushing oil hub.
Potential Impact of Hardisty and Stroud Deficiency Credit Usage by Our Customers
As previously discussed, customers of our Hardisty and Stroud terminals are obligated to pay a minimum monthly commitment fee for the capacity to load an allotted number of unit trains, representing a specified number of barrels per month. If a customer loads fewer unit trains than its allotted amount in any given month, that customer will receive a credit for up to 12 months, also referred to as a deficiency credit. This credit may be used to offset fees on throughput volumes in excess of the customer’s minimum monthly commitments in future periods to the extent capacity is available for the excess volume. As of late January 2021, based on current circumstances and conversations with our customers, we reasonably expect that customers of our Hardisty and Stroud terminals plan to use some of their accrued deficiency credits during 2021. As such, we will be required to defer the recognition of the revenue associated with the expected usage of the deficiency credits during 2021 until either the deficiency credit has been used or the likelihood of the credit’s usage has been deemed remote. Additionally, we could incur incremental costs associated with loading the additional trains for our customers if they do use their accrued deficiency credits, but such costs are not expected to be material.
Casper Terminal Customer Contract Renewals and Expirations
Our last legacy terminalling services agreement at our Casper Terminal expired at the end of August 2019 and was not renewed or extended. We continue to seek other opportunities to enhance the utilization and profitability of the Casper Terminal with other producers, refiners and marketers of crude oil. The revenue provided by the current agreements at our Casper Terminal, certain of which contain take-or-pay terms for storage services and variable fees associated with actual throughput volumes and other services, may be less predictable than the revenue historically provided by the legacy contracts, which were based on minimum volume commitments. We have not yet entered into arrangements to replace all of the revenue previously provided by the legacy contracts at the Casper Terminal.
In July 2019, Enbridge Inc. announced a program to increase the capacity of the Express pipeline by up to an additional 50,000 bpd with the use of DRA and pump stations. We anticipate that some of the additional volumes resulting from the increased capacity on the Express pipeline could be delivered to our Casper Terminal, as we believe outbound pipeline connections from the Express pipeline and nearby terminals are at or near full capacity. Our ability to secure additional commercial opportunities and replace the revenue previously generated under the expired contracts may be limited until Enbridge successfully completes its DRA project. In late July 2020, Enbridge announced that it has placed 25,000 bpd of the additional capacity on its Express pipeline into service and plans to place the additional 25,000 bpd into service sometime in 2021. For a discussion of the risks associated with our ability to renew, extend or replace customer contracts, see Item 1A. Risk Factors-Our contracts subject us to renewal risks.
Factors That May Impact Future Results of Operations
Demand for Rail Transportation of Crude Oil and Biofuels
High-growth crude oil production areas in North America are often located at significant distances from refining centers, creating constantly evolving regional imbalances, which require the expedited development of flexible and sustainable transportation solutions. The extensive existing rail network, combined with rail transportation’s relatively low capital and fixed costs compared to other transportation alternatives, has strategically positioned rail as a long-term transportation solution for growing and evolving energy infrastructure needs. In the event that additional pipeline capacity is constructed, or crude oil production decreases significantly, demand for transportation of crude oil by rail may be adversely impacted. Please also refer to the Market Update section included in Part II Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis, Overview and Recent Developments.
Changes in environmental and gasoline blending regulations may affect the use of ethanol in the market for transportation fuel. Due to corrosion concerns unique to biofuels, such as ethanol, the long-haul transportation of biofuels via multi-product pipelines is less efficient and less economical than rail. Rail also helps aggregate fragmented ethanol production across the country. In the event that dedicated pipelines are constructed, or additional technologies are developed to allow for more economical transportation of biofuels on multi-product pipelines, demand for transportation of biofuels by rail may be affected.
Supply and Demand for Crude Oil and Refined Products
The volume of crude oil and biofuels that we handle at our terminals and the number of railcars for which we provide and perform railcar-specific fleet services ultimately depends on refining and blending margins. Refining and blending margins are dependent mostly upon the price of crude oil or other refinery feedstocks and the price of refined products. These prices are affected by numerous factors beyond our control, including the global supply and demand for crude oil and gasoline and other refined products. The supply of crude oil will depend on numerous factors, including commodity pricing, improvements in extractive technology, environmental regulation and other factors. We believe that our Adjusted EBITDA and DCF will not be affected in the near term due to our multi-year, take-or-pay terminal services agreements. However, our ability to grow through expansion or acquisitions and our ability to renew or extend our terminalling services agreements could be affected by a long-term reduction in supply or demand.
Customer Contracts
Our business is subject to the risk that we may not be able to renew, extend or replace our customer contracts as their terms expire. During 2019, we renewed and extended multiple terminalling services agreements at the Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal with existing customers for terms that are generally improved from the original agreements. Additionally, although all legacy contracts at our Casper Terminal terminated, we have partially replaced these agreements with arrangements that we have negotiated with new customers. While the legacy contracts provided for minimum volume commitments, the new agreements provide for committed storage fees and variable fees associated with actual throughput volumes. With regards to the terminalling service agreement at our Stroud Terminal, our Stroud customer will have the right to terminate a portion of their agreement immediately and the remainder in June 2022, upon the successful completion of USD’s DRU project, as previously discussed. Management believes that the lower utilization at the Stroud Terminal as a result of successful completion of the DRU project will be short-term in nature, and will allow the Partnership the opportunity to offer terminalling services to other customers that may be in need of access to the numerous markets connected to the Cushing oil hub. Refer to the discussion above under the heading General Trends and Outlook for information regarding customer contract renewals and expirations and changes in fee structures. For a discussion of the risks associated with our ability to renew, extend or replace customer contracts, see Item 1A. Risk Factors-Our contracts subject us to renewal risks.
Regulatory Environment
Our operations are subject to federal, state, and local laws and regulations relating to the protection of health and the environment, including laws and regulations that govern the handling of liquid hydrocarbons and biofuels. Additionally, we are subject to regulations governing railcar design and evolving regulations pertaining to the shipment of liquid hydrocarbons and biofuels by rail as discussed in greater detail in Item 1. Business-Impact of Regulation. Similar to other industry participants, compliance with existing environmental laws and regulations, as well as those that may be added in the future, could increase our overall cost of doing business. Such costs, include the costs we incur to construct, maintain, operate and upgrade equipment and facilities, or the costs of our customers, which may reduce the attractiveness of rail transportation. Our master fleet services agreements generally obligate our customers to pay for modifications and other required repairs to our leased and managed railcar fleet. However, we cannot assure that we will be able to successfully pass all such regulatory costs on to our customers. While changes in these laws and regulations could indirectly affect our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows, we believe that consumers of our services place additional value on utilizing established and reputable third-party providers to satisfy their rail terminalling and logistics needs, which may allow us to increase market share relative to customer-owned operations or smaller operators that lack an established track record of safety and regulatory compliance.
Acquisition Opportunities
We plan to continue to pursue strategic acquisitions of energy-related logistics assets from both USD and third parties that will provide attractive returns to our unitholders, including facilities that provide for storage and transportation of liquid hydrocarbons and biofuels. We intend to leverage our industry relationships and market
knowledge to successfully execute on such opportunities, which we may pursue independently or jointly with USD. We have entered into the Omnibus Agreement with USD and USDG, pursuant to which USDG has granted us a right of first offer on any midstream infrastructure assets that they may develop, construct, or acquire until October 15, 2021, seven years after the closing of our IPO. Additional information regarding our growth opportunities is discussed in Growth Opportunities for our Operations and information regarding the Omnibus Agreement is presented in Note 13. Transactions with Related Parties-Omnibus Agreement of Item 8. Financial Statement and Supplementary Data. We cannot assure you that USD will be able to develop or construct, or that we or USD will be able to acquire, any other midstream infrastructure projects, including any projects to expand the Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal. Among other things, the ability of USD to further develop the Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal, or any other project, and our ability to acquire such projects, will depend upon USD’s and our ability to raise additional equity and debt financing. We are under no obligation to make any offer, and USD and USDG are under no obligation to accept any offer we make, with respect to any asset subject to our right of first offer. Additionally, the approval of Energy Capital Partners is required for the sale of any assets by USD or its subsidiaries, including us (other than sales in the ordinary course of business), acquisitions of securities of other entities that exceed specified materiality thresholds and any material unbudgeted expenditures or deviations from our approved budget. Energy Capital Partners may make these decisions free of any duty to us and our unitholders. This approval would be required for the potential acquisition by us of any projects to expand the Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal, as well as any other projects or assets that USD may develop or acquire in the future or any third-party acquisition we may pursue independently or jointly with USD. Energy Capital Partners is under no obligation to approve any such transaction. Additional discussion of the special approval rights of Energy Capital Partners is included in Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance-Special Approval Rights of Energy Capital Partners. If we are unable to acquire any projects to expand the Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal from USD, which USD retained the right to develop and operate, these projects may compete directly with our current terminal assets for future throughput volumes. As a result, our ability to enter into new terminal services agreements, or to renew such agreements with our existing customers, following the termination of our existing agreements or the terms thereof and our ability to compete for future spot volumes could be affected. Furthermore, cyclical changes in the demand for crude oil and other liquid hydrocarbons may cause USD or us to reevaluate any future expansion projects, including any projects to expand the Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal. Lastly, if we do not make acquisitions on economically beneficial terms, our future growth will be limited, and the acquisitions we do make may reduce, rather than increase, our results of operations and cash flows.
Interest Rate Environment
The interest rates available in U.S. and international credit markets remain near historic lows. This could affect our future ability to access the credit markets to fund our future growth. Additionally, as with other yield-oriented securities, our unit price could be affected by the level of our cash distributions and the associated implied distribution yield. Therefore, changes in interest rates, either positive or negative, may affect the yield requirements of investors who invest in our units, and, as such, a rising interest rate environment could have an adverse impact on our unit price and our ability to issue additional equity, or increase the cost of issuing equity. However, we expect that our cost of capital would remain competitive, as our competitors would face similar circumstances. We have entered into an interest rate swap contract to partially mitigate our exposure to interest rate fluctuations on our variable rate debt. The swap contract establishes a fixed LIBOR value for our debt of 0.84%. Refer to Note 18. Derivative Financial Instruments of Item 8. Financial Statement and Supplementary Data in this Report for more information on our interest rate swap.
Unit Based Compensation
We incur unit based compensation expenses associated with the Phantom Units granted to directors, officers and employees of our sponsor pursuant to the A/R LTIP. We recognize the expense associated with the outstanding Phantom Units ratably over its requisite service period. For more information related to our A/R LTIP including total compensation expense not yet recognized refer to Note 20. Unit Based Compensation of Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report.
Factors Affecting the Comparability of Our Financial Results
The comparability of our current financial results in relation to prior periods are affected by the factors described below.
Casper Terminal Customer Contract Expirations and Goodwill Impairment
Our last legacy terminalling services agreement at our Casper Terminal expired at the end of August 2019 and was not renewed or extended. The expired agreement contributed $9.3 million to our “Terminalling Services” revenue and $6.5 million of Adjusted EBITDA during the twelve months preceding the expiration of the agreement. Additionally, a legacy customer of our Casper Terminal, whose terminal services agreement with us expired in October 2018, extended until December 2018, and did not renew. The expired agreement contributed $7.3 million to our “Terminalling services” revenue and $5.6 million of Adjusted EBITDA during the twelve months preceding termination of the agreement. Also, one of our initial legacy terminalling services agreements expired in late August 2017. The expired agreement contributed $15.0 million to our “Terminalling services” revenue and $12.0 million of Adjusted EBITDA during the twelve months preceding expiration of the agreement. Furthermore, in March 2020, we tested the goodwill associated with our Casper Terminal for impairment due to the overall downturn in the crude market and the decline in the demand for petroleum products, which could lead to delays or reductions of expected throughput levels and changes in expectations for current contracts in place at the Casper Terminal. As a result of our impairment testing, we recognized an impairment loss of $33.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Tax
In June 2019, the Canadian Province of Alberta enacted a tax rate decrease that reduced the tax rate on business income from the previous rate of 12% to an ultimate rate of 8% effective for 2022. The reduction in the tax rate on business income was to be phased in over three years beginning with a reduction to an 11% rate effective July 1, 2019, with further reductions of 1% in each successive year until it reached 8% on January 1, 2022. In December 2020, the Alberta government passed legislation accelerating the change to 8% to be effective as of July 1, 2020. As a result, the Alberta tax rate on business income for Alberta businesses in 2020 is 9%, representing a blended rate of 10% from January 1, 2020 through June 30, 2020 and 8% from July 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020.
In conjunction with our adoption of ASC 606 in 2018, we recognized a deferred tax liability associated with the previously deferred revenues net of previously deferred pipeline fees. For Canadian tax purposes, the previously deferred revenue, net of previously deferred expenses associated with our adoption of ASC 606 was recovered during the year ended December 31, 2018. The deferred tax recovery of $3.8 million (representing C$4.9 million) for year ended December 31, 2018, was partially offset by the Canadian tax liability attributable to our earnings for the year ended December 31, 2018. Our financial results for the year ended December 31, 2019 were not affected by similar activities.
CARES Act
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was signed into law. The CARES Act is an emergency economic stimulus package enacted in response to the coronavirus outbreak which, among other measures, contains numerous income tax provisions. Some of these tax provisions are expected to be effective retroactively for tax years ending before the date of enactment. For us, the most significant change included in the CARES Act was the impact to U.S. net operating loss carryback provisions. U.S. net operating losses incurred in tax years 2018, 2019, and 2020 can now be fully carried back to the preceding five tax years and may be used to fully offset taxable income (i.e. they are not subject to the 80 percent net income offset limitation of Section 172 of the U.S. Tax Code).
As a result of these CARES Act changes, for the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a current tax benefit of $536 thousand for a claimable tax refund by carrying back to 2015 and 2017 U.S. net operating losses incurred in 2018, 2019, and 2020. We also recognized a one-time deferred tax expense of $46 thousand in the first quarter of 2020 due to the net effect of utilizing all U.S. net operating loss deferred tax assets and releasing the corresponding U.S. valuation allowance as of December 31, 2019. The tax impacts of the CARES Act were
computed with the best available information, and will be adjusted after the 2020 U.S. tax return is finalized. However, we do not expect these adjustments to result in a material change to the tax provision in future periods.
Cash Distributions
The board of directors of our general partner has adopted a cash distribution policy pursuant to which we intend to distribute at least the minimum quarterly distribution of $0.2875 per unit ($1.15 per unit on an annualized basis) on all of our units to the extent we have sufficient available cash after the establishment of cash reserves and the payment of our expenses, including payments to our general partner and its affiliates. The board of directors of our general partner may change our distribution policy at any time and from time to time. Our partnership agreement does not require us to pay cash distributions on a quarterly or other basis. The amount of distributions we pay under our cash distribution policy and the decision to make any distributions are determined by our general partner. We intend to pay distributions no later than 60 days after the end of each quarter. Given the uncertainty in the energy industry, as a proactive measure to strengthen our financial position and redeploy certain free cash to de-lever, the board of directors of our general partner elected in the first quarter of 2020 to reduce the quarterly distribution per unit declared by 70% as compared to the distribution for the fourth quarter of 2019. For the quarter ended December 31, 2020, the board of directors of our general partner determined that we had sufficient available cash after the establishment of cash reserves and the payment of our expenses to distribute $0.111 per unit ($0.444 per unit on an annualized basis) on all of our units, which we paid on February 19, 2021 to unitholders of record at the close of business on February 10, 2021.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
We conduct our business through two distinct reporting segments: Terminalling services and Fleet services. We have established these reporting segments as strategic business units to facilitate the achievement of our long-term objectives, to aid in resource allocation decisions and to assess operational performance.
The following table summarizes our operating results by business segment and corporate charges for each of the years indicated:
Summary Analysis of Operating Results
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Changes in our operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared with our operating results for the year ended December 31, 2019, were primarily driven by:
•activities associated with our terminalling services business including:
-higher revenues resulting from rates on certain of our terminalling services agreements at our Hardisty Terminal that became effective July 1, 2019;
-higher revenues associated with revenue that was recognized in 2020 that we previously deferred associated with the make-up right options we granted to customers of our Hardisty Terminal;
-higher revenues due to higher rates at our Stroud Terminal during the last half of 2020 that are based on crude oil pricing index differentials;
-lower operating income resulting from the conclusion of contracts at our Casper Terminal in August 2019 and lower subcontracted rail service costs due to lower throughput; and
-higher operating costs resulting from a non-cash impairment of the goodwill associated with our Casper Terminal due to current economic conditions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the overall downturn in the crude market and the decline in the demand for petroleum products.
•a decrease in interest expense due to lower weighted average interest rates;
•non-cash losses associated with declines in the fair value of our interest rate derivatives resulting from decreases in the forward interest rate index upon which the derivative values are based; and
•an increase in our benefit from income taxes associated with our fleet services segment primarily related to net operating loss carrybacks made available by provisions in the CARES Act, coupled with a tax recovery on the Canadian tax filings associated with an adjustment in the appropriate taxable economic return from our Hardisty Terminal. This benefit was partially offset by a provision for income taxes associated with our terminalling
services segment resulting from the recognition of previously deferred income for Canadian tax purposes at our Hardisty terminal recognized in 2020.
A more comprehensive discussion regarding our results of operations and financial condition for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operation for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared with the year ended December 31, 2018 can be found under Item 7 in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on March 5, 2020, which is available free of charge on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and on our website at www.usdpartners.com.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - BY SEGMENT
TERMINALLING SERVICES
The following table sets forth the operating results of our Terminalling services business and the approximate average daily throughput volumes of our terminals for the periods indicated:
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Terminalling Services Revenue
Revenue generated by our Terminalling services segment increased $6.9 million to $114.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared with $107.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was due to increased revenue at our Hardisty Terminal resulting from revenue recognized during 2020 for contracted capacity that exceeded the transloading capacity of the terminal pursuant to an agreement that commenced in July 2019. This revenue was offset by additional operating costs incurred pursuant to an agreement with a related party for providing terminalling services for the additional capacity on our behalf at the same rate, on
a per barrel basis, that we received as revenue in 2020. Higher rates included in some of our terminalling services agreements that became effective July 1, 2019 at our Hardisty Terminal due to our re-contracting efforts and increased rates in some of our contracts for the last half of 2020 also contributed to the increase in revenues. Additionally, we recognized revenue in 2020 that we previously deferred associated with the make-up right options we granted to customers of our Hardisty Terminal, as the likelihood that the make-up right options would be utilized in future periods was deemed remote and the make-up right options have now expired. In addition to the increases in revenue that were attributable to our Hardisty Terminal, we also had increased revenue at our Stroud Terminal in the last half of 2020 due to higher rates that are based on crude oil pricing index differentials. These increases in revenues were partially offset by lower revenue at our Casper Terminal resulting from the conclusion of a customer agreement in August 2019.
Our average daily terminal throughput decreased 46,826 bpd to 72,740 bpd for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared with 119,566 bpd for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our throughput volumes decreased primarily due to a decrease in demand for export capacity by customers of our Hardisty Terminal that occurred during the second quarter of 2020 and continued throughout 2020, a portion of which drives the demand for deliveries to our Stroud Terminal and its connection to the Cushing oil hub. The decreased demand associated with our Hardisty Terminal resulted from the narrowed WCS to WTI pricing spreads during the last nine months of 2020, primarily as a result of the decline in global oil demand, as described in Overview and Recent Developments-Market Update-COVID-19 and Crude Oil Pricing Environment Update. Our terminalling services revenues are recognized based upon the contractual terms set forth in our agreements that contain primarily “take-or-pay” provisions, where we are entitled to the payment of minimum monthly commitment fees from our customers, which are recognized as revenue as we provide terminalling services.
Our terminalling services revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, would have been $0.8 million more if the average exchange rate for the Canadian dollar in relation to the U.S. dollar for the year ended December 31, 2020, was the same as the average exchange rate for the year ended December 31, 2019. The average exchange rate for the Canadian dollar in relation to the U.S. dollar was 0.7463 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared with 0.7538 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Operating Costs
The operating costs of our Terminalling services segment increased $35.4 million to $111.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared with $75.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily attributable to an impairment of our goodwill recognized in the first quarter of 2020 at our Casper Terminal due to current economic conditions, an increase in operating and maintenance costs, higher pipeline fees and increased depreciation and amortization, partially offset by lower subcontracted rail services costs.
Our terminalling services operating costs for the year ended December 31, 2020, would have been $0.4 million more if the average exchange rate for the Canadian dollar in relation to the U.S. dollar for the year ended December 31, 2020, was the same as the average exchange rate for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Subcontracted rail services. Our costs for subcontracted rail services decreased $3.9 million to $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared with the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the reduced throughput at our terminals that occurred during the last nine months of 2020, as discussed above.
Pipeline fees. We incur pipeline fees related to a facilities connection agreement with Gibson for the delivery of crude oil from Gibson’s Hardisty storage terminal to our Hardisty Terminal via pipeline. The pipeline fees we pay to Gibson are based on a predetermined formula, which includes amounts collected from customers at our Hardisty Terminal less direct operating costs. Our pipeline fees increased $2.9 million to $23.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared with $21.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to higher revenues at our Hardisty Terminal. Additionally, we recognized pipeline fees during the year ended December 31, 2020, associated with revenue that we previously deferred associated with the make-up right options we granted to customers of our Hardisty Terminal, since the likelihood that the make-up right options would be utilized in future periods was deemed remote and the make-up right options have now expired.
Operating and maintenance. Operating and maintenance expense increased $2.8 million to $14.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. The increased operating and maintenance expenses are primarily due to expenses incurred pursuant to an agreement that commenced in July 2019 with a related party for providing terminalling services on our behalf to a customer of our Hardisty Terminal for contracted capacity that exceeds the current transloading capacity available at our Hardisty Terminal. These costs represent the same rate, on a per barrel basis, that we received as revenue from our third-party customer.
Goodwill impairment loss. In March 2020, we tested the goodwill associated with our Casper Terminal for impairment due to the overall downturn in the crude market and the decline in the demand for petroleum products. As a result of our impairment testing, we recognized an impairment loss of $33.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Refer to Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 1. Organization and Description of Business and Note 9. Goodwill and Intangible Assets of this report for further discussion.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense increased $0.8 million to $21.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared with $20.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily due to a revised estimate of our asset retirement obligations, or ARO, that decreased depreciation and amortization expense by $0.6 million in the first quarter of 2019 associated with our decommissioned San Antonio Rail Terminal as compared to a revised ARO estimate that decreased depreciation and amortization by only $0.2 million during the second quarter of 2020 associated with the same terminal, coupled with an increase in depreciation associated with the outbound pipeline at our Casper Terminal that was placed into service in December 2019.
Other Expenses (Income)
Other expense (income), net. Other expense (income), net increased $0.6 million to $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared with $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase is primarily attributable to income that we earned in 2020 as an incentive for railcar movements of a customer at our Hardisty Terminal associated with new railroad incentive agreements.
Provision for (benefit from) income taxes. Our Canadian operations are conducted through entities that are subject to Canadian federal and Alberta provincial income taxes. The Canadian federal income tax on business income is currently 15%. In June 2019, the Canadian province of Alberta enacted a tax rate decrease that reduced the tax rate on business income from the previous rate of 12% to an ultimate rate of 8% effective for 2022. The reduction in the tax rate on business income was to be phased in over three years beginning with a reduction to a rate of 11% effective July 1, 2019, with further reductions of 1% in each successive year until it reached 8% on January 1, 2022. However, in December 2020, the Alberta government passed legislation accelerating the change to 8% to be effective as of July 1, 2020. As a result, the effective tax rate on business income for Alberta businesses in 2020 is 9%, representing a blended rate of 10% from January 1, 2020 through June 30, 2020 and 8% from July 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020.
We recognize income tax expense in our consolidated financial statements based upon enacted rates in effect for the periods presented. As such for the year ended December 31, 2020, income tax expense for our Canadian operations is determined based upon the combined federal and provincial income tax rate of 24%, representing a 15% federal income tax rate and a 9% provincial income tax rate. For the year ended December 31, 2019, income tax expense of our Canadian operations was determined based on the combined federal and provincial income tax rate of 26.5%. The combined income tax rate of 23%, representing a 15% federal income tax rate and an 8% provincial income tax rate, was used to compute the deferred income tax benefit, representing the impact of temporary differences that are expected to reverse in the future.
Our income taxes for the Terminalling services segment decreased by $0.2 million to $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease resulted primarily from a benefit recognized in the third quarter of 2020 associated with the 2019 Canadian tax filings and an adjustment to the appropriate economic return from the Hardisty Terminal, partially offset by a provision for income
taxes associated with our terminalling services segment resulting from the recognition of previously deferred income for Canadian tax purposes at our Hardisty terminal recognized in 2020.
FLEET SERVICES
The following table sets forth the operating results of our Fleet services business for the periods indicated:
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Operating Results
Revenues from our Fleet services segment decreased $0.5 million to $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in revenue was primarily attributable to fewer customer reimbursements to us for freight and other reimbursables charges that we have incurred on their behalf. The decrease in Freight and other reimbursables revenue was exactly offset by a corresponding decrease in Freight and other reimbursables operating costs for the same reason.
Our benefit for income taxes in the Fleet services segment increased $0.5 million to a benefit of $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared with a provision of $28 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase in benefit is due to a provision in the CARES Act that allows U.S. net operating losses incurred in tax years 2018, 2019, or 2020 to be carried back to the preceding five years and generate a tax refund. Under prior guidance, these net operating losses could only be carried forward.
Historically we have assisted our customers with procuring railcars to facilitate their use of our terminalling services. Our wholly-owned subsidiary USD Rail LP has historically entered into leases with third-party manufacturers of railcars and financial firms, which it has then leased to customers. Although we expect to continue to assist our customers in obtaining railcars for their use transporting crude oil to or from our terminals, we do not intend to continue to act as an intermediary between railcar lessors and our customers as our existing lease agreements expire, are otherwise terminated, or are assigned to our existing customers. Should market conditions change, we could potentially act as an intermediary with railcar lessors on behalf of our customers again in the future.
CORPORATE ACTIVITIES
The following table sets forth our corporate charges for the periods indicated:
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
Costs associated with our corporate activities decreased by $1.1 million to $24.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $25.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our interest expense costs decreased $3.1 million to $8.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $12.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to a decrease in interest expense that resulted from a decrease in the interest rates we were charged under our Credit Agreement. A higher non-cash loss of $3.9 million on our interest rate derivative for the year ended December 31, 2020, partially offset the decrease in interest expense, as compared to the loss of $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. In September 2020, we terminated our existing interest rate collar and simultaneously entered into a new interest rate swap that was made effective as of August 2020. In lieu of settling the liability value of the existing interest rate collar agreement of $3.5 million that existed at the time the agreement was terminated, the value of the liability was rolled into the fixed rate of the new interest rate swap agreement. The new interest rate swap is a five-year contract with a $150 million notional value that fixes our one-month LIBOR to 0.84% for the notional value of the swap agreement instead of the variable rate that we pay under our Credit Agreement. The swap settles monthly through the termination date in August 2025.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our principal liquidity requirements include:
•financing current operations;
•servicing our debt;
•funding capital expenditures, including potential acquisitions and the costs to construct new assets; and
•making distributions to our unitholders
We have historically financed our operations with cash generated from our operating activities, borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility and loans from our sponsor.
Liquidity Sources
We expect our ongoing sources of liquidity to include borrowings under our senior secured credit agreement, issuances of debt securities and additional partnership interests as well as cash generated from our operating activities. We believe that cash generated from these sources will be sufficient to meet our ongoing working capital and capital expenditure requirements and to make quarterly cash distributions at current levels for the next 12 months following the filing of this report.
Credit Agreement
Our Credit Agreement is a $385 million revolving credit facility (subject to limits set forth therein) with Citibank, N.A., as administrative agent, and a syndicate of lenders. Our Credit Agreement is a four year committed facility that initially matures on November 2, 2022. Our Credit Agreement provides us with the ability to request two one-year maturity date extensions, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions, and allows us the option to increase the maximum amount of credit available up to a total facility size of $500 million, subject to receiving increased commitments from lenders and satisfaction of certain conditions. Our Credit Agreement contains customary representations, warranties, covenants and events of default for facilities of this type. In connection with establishing the Credit Agreement, which replaced the prior credit agreement entered into in October 2014, we incurred additional deferred financing costs of $2.9 million in 2018, which, in addition to any remaining deferred financing costs from our previous credit agreement, will be amortized over the four-year term of the Credit Agreement using the straight line method, which approximates the effective interest method.
Our Credit Agreement and any issuances of letters of credit are available for working capital, capital expenditures, general partnership purposes. The Credit Agreement includes an aggregate $20 million sublimit for standby letters of credit and a $20 million sublimit for swingline loans. Obligations under the Credit Agreement are guaranteed by our restricted subsidiaries (as such term is defined therein) and are secured by a first priority lien on our assets and those of our restricted subsidiaries, other than certain excluded assets.
Our borrowings under the Credit Agreement bear interest at either a base rate plus an applicable margin ranging from 1.00% to 2.00%, or at a rate based on the London Interbank Offered Rate, or LIBOR, or a comparable or successor rate plus an applicable margin ranging from 2.00% to 3.00%. The applicable margin, as well as a commitment fee of 0.375% to 0.50% per annum on unused commitments under the Credit Agreement, will vary based upon our consolidated net leverage ratio, as defined in our Credit Agreement.
Our Credit Agreement contains affirmative and negative covenants that, among other things, limit or restrict our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to incur or guarantee debt, incur liens, make investments, make restricted payments, engage in certain business activities, engage in mergers, consolidations and other organizational changes, sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of assets, enter into burdensome agreements or enter into transactions with affiliates on terms that are not at arm’s length, in each case, subject to exceptions.
Additionally, we are required to maintain the following financial ratios, each determined on a quarterly basis for the immediately preceding four quarter period then ended (or such shorter period as shall apply, on an annualized basis):
•Consolidated Interest Coverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of at least 2.50 to 1.00;
•Consolidated Net Leverage Ratio of not greater than 4.50 to 1.00 (or 5.00 to 1.00 at any time after we have issued at least $150 million of certain qualified unsecured notes and for so long as the notes remain outstanding (the “Qualified Notes Requirement”)). In addition, upon the consummation of a Specified Acquisition (as defined in our Credit Agreement), for the fiscal quarter in which the Specified Acquisition is consummated and for two fiscal quarters immediately following such fiscal quarter (the “Specified Acquisition Period”), if timely elected by us by written notice to the Administrative Agent, the maximum permitted ratio shall be increased to 5.00 to 1.00 (or 5.50 to 1.00 if the Qualified Notes Requirement has been met); and
•after we have met the Qualified Notes Requirement, a Consolidated Senior Secured Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of not greater than 3.50 to 1.00 (or 4.00 to 1.00 during a Specified Acquisition Period).
Our Credit Agreement generally prohibits us from making cash distributions (subject to exceptions as set forth in the Credit Agreement). However, so long as no default exists or would be caused by making a cash distribution, we may make cash distributions to our unitholders up to the amount of our available cash (as defined in our partnership agreement).
The Credit Agreement contains events of default, including, but not limited to (and subject to grace periods in circumstances set forth in the Credit Agreement), the failure to pay any principal, interest or fees when due, failure to perform or observe any covenant (subject in some cases to certain grace periods or other qualifications), any representation, warranty or certification made or deemed made in the agreements or related loan documentation being untrue in any material respect when made, default under certain material debt agreements, commencement of bankruptcy or other insolvency proceedings, certain changes in our ownership or the ownership of our general partner, certain material judgments or orders, ERISA events or the invalidity of the loan documents. Upon the occurrence and during the continuation of an event of default under the agreements, the lenders may, among other things, terminate their commitments, declare any outstanding loans to be immediately due and payable and/or exercise remedies against us and the collateral as may be available to the lenders under the agreements and related documentation or applicable law.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with the covenants set forth in our Credit Agreement.
The weighted average interest rate on our outstanding indebtedness was 2.66% and 4.24% at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, without consideration to the effect of our derivative contracts. We had Interest payable of $0.1 million and $0.6 million in “Other current liabilities” on our consolidated balance sheets at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following table presents our available liquidity as of the dates indicated:
(1) Excludes amounts that are restricted pursuant to our collaborative agreement with Gibson.
(2) Pursuant to the terms of our Credit Agreement, our borrowing capacity is limited to 4.5 times our trailing 12-month consolidated EBITDA, which equates to $53.2 million and $28.8 million of borrowing capacity available at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Energy Capital Partners must approve any additional issuances of equity by us, and such determinations may be made free of any duty to us or our unitholders. Members of our general partner’s board of directors appointed by
Energy Capital Partners must also approve the incurrence by us of additional indebtedness or refinancing outside of our existing indebtedness that is not in the ordinary course of business.
Cash Flows
The following table and discussion summarizes the cash flows associated with our operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $7.4 million to $45.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $38.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in net cash provided by operating activities is primarily attributable to the changes in cash flow derived from our operating results as discussed above in Results of Operations. While our net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $26.3 million more than our net income from 2019, the net loss for 2020 includes a significant amount of non-cash expenses that increase our net loss but do not decrease cash flow, such as our goodwill impairment loss and the increased loss associated with derivative instruments. The higher operating cash flow for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared with 2019, is primarily due to the increase in revenues at our Hardisty and Stroud terminals as discussed above. The change in net cash provided by operating activities was also impacted by the timing of receipts and payments on accounts receivable, accounts payable and deferred revenue balances.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $8.0 million to $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared with the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the construction of the outbound pipeline connection from our Casper Terminal to the Platte Terminal located at the termination point of the Express pipeline that was placed in service in December 2019.
Financing Activities
Net cash used for financing activities increased by $12.6 million to $45.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $32.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our net payments on our long-term debt during the year ended December 31, 2020 were $34 million higher than the net amounts we borrowed during the year ended December 31, 2019. Partially offsetting were decreased cash paid for distributions during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cash Requirements
Our primary requirements for cash are: (1) financing current operations, (2) servicing our debt, (3) funding capital expenditures, including potential acquisitions and the costs to construct new assets, and (4) making distributions to our unitholders.
Capital Requirements
Our historical capital expenditures have primarily consisted of the costs to construct and acquire energy-related logistics assets. Our operations are expected to require investments to expand, upgrade or enhance existing
facilities and to meet environmental and operational regulations. We also occasionally invest in our assets to expand their capacity or capability, such as the pipeline connection from our Casper Terminal to the Platte Terminal. We may incur unanticipated costs in connection with any expansion projects, which costs could be material or be incurred in periods after the project is completed.
Our partnership agreement requires that we categorize our capital expenditures as either expansion capital expenditures, maintenance capital expenditures, or investment capital expenditures.
• Expansion capital expenditures are cash expenditures incurred for acquisitions or capital improvements that we expect will increase our operating income or operating capacity over the long term. Examples of expansion capital expenditures include the acquisition of terminals or other complementary midstream assets from USD or third parties and the construction or development of new terminals or additional capacity at our existing terminals to the extent such capital expenditures are expected to expand our operating capacity or operating income. Expansion capital expenditures include interest payments (and related fees) on debt incurred to finance all or a portion of expansion capital expenditures in respect of the period from the date that we enter into a binding obligation to commence the construction, development, replacement, improvement or expansion of a capital asset and ending on the earlier to occur of the date that such capital improvement commences commercial service and the date that such capital improvement is disposed of or abandoned.
• Maintenance capital expenditures are cash expenditures made to maintain, over the long term, our operating capacity, operating income or our asset base. Examples of maintenance capital expenditures are expenditures to repair and refurbish our terminals.
• Investment capital expenditures are those capital expenditures that are neither maintenance capital expenditures nor expansion capital expenditures. Investment capital expenditures will largely consist of capital expenditures made for investment purposes. Examples of investment capital expenditures include traditional capital expenditures for investment purposes, such as purchases of securities, as well as other capital expenditures that might be made in lieu of such traditional investment capital expenditures, such as the acquisition of a capital asset for investment purposes or development of facilities that are in excess of the maintenance of our existing operating capacity or operating income, but that are not expected to expand our operating capacity or operating income over the long term.
We have not experienced significant maintenance capital expenditures in prior years, however, as the age of our assets increase, we expect that costs we incur to maintain our assets in compliance with sound business practice, our contractual relationships and applicable regulatory requirements will likely increase. Some of these costs will be characterized as maintenance capital expenditures. We incurred $171 thousand and $216 thousand of maintenance capital expenditures during the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Our total expansion capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2020, amounted to $0.3 million. We expect to fund future capital expenditures from cash on our balance sheet, cash flow generated by our operation activities, borrowings under our Credit Agreement and the issuance of additional partnership interests or long-term debt.
Our total capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $8.4 million were primarily associated with the construction of an outbound pipeline connection from the Casper Terminal to the Platte Terminal.
Debt Service
We anticipate reducing our outstanding indebtedness to the extent we generate cash flows in excess of our operating, investing and distribution needs. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received proceeds from borrowings of $12.0 million on our Revolving Credit Facility which we used for general partnership purposes and made repayments of $35.0 million on our Revolving Credit Facility from cash flow in excess of our operating and investing needs. Subsequent to December 31, 2020 and as of March 2, 2021, we have made additional repayments of $5.0 million to the outstanding balance of our Revolving Credit Facility. As of March 2, 2021, we had amounts outstanding of $192.0 million under the Revolving Credit Facility and $193.0 million available for borrowing under
the Revolving Credit Facility based on capacity that is subject to certain covenants. Refer to Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 10. Debt of this Annual Report for more information.
Distributions
Our partnership agreement does not require us to pay cash distributions on a quarterly or other basis, and we do not have a legal obligation to distribute any particular amount per common unit.
For the quarter ended December 31, 2020, the board of directors of our general partner determined that we had sufficient available cash after the establishment of cash reserves and the payment of our expenses to distribute $0.111 per unit on all of our units. Our current quarterly distribution of $0.111 per unit equates to $3.0 million per quarter, or $12.1 million per year, based on the number of common and general partner units outstanding as of February 10, 2021. This distribution represents a decrease of 70% from the distribution with respect to the fourth quarter of 2019, and is consistent with the distribution declared for the first three quarters of 2020. Given the uncertainty in the energy industry, the board of directors made a proactive decision to strengthen our financial position by reducing our quarterly distributions and redeploying certain free cash flow to de-lever. During the second, third, and fourth quarters of 2020, we made net repayments of $6 million, $9 Million and $12 million respectively, of the outstanding balance of our Revolving Credit Facility. Subsequent to December 31, 2020 and as of March 2, 2021, we have made additional repayments of $5.0 million of the outstanding balance of our Revolving Credit Facility.
The board of directors of our general partner may change our distribution policy or suspend distributions at any time and from time to time. Additionally, members of our general partner’s board of directors appointed by Energy Capital Partners, must approve any distributions made by us.
Other Items Affecting Liquidity
Credit Risk
Our exposure to credit risk may be affected by the concentration of our customers within the energy industry, as well as changes in economic or other conditions. Our customers’ businesses react differently to changing conditions. We believe that our credit-review procedures, customer deposits and collection procedures have adequately provided for amounts that may become uncollectible in the future.
Foreign Currency Exchange Risk
We currently derive a significant portion of our cash flows from our Canadian operations, particularly our Hardisty Terminal. As a result, portions of our cash and cash equivalents are denominated in Canadian dollars and are held by foreign subsidiaries, which amounts are subject to fluctuations resulting from changes in the exchange rate between the U.S. dollar and the Canadian dollar. We employ derivative financial instruments to minimize our exposure to the effect of foreign currency fluctuations, as we deem necessary based upon anticipated economic conditions.
SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
Refer to Note 22. Subsequent Events of our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report for a discussion regarding subsequent events.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
Refer to Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report for a discussion regarding recent accounting pronouncements that we have not yet adopted.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
In the normal course of business, we are a party to off-balance sheet arrangements relating to various master fleet services agreements, whereby we have agreed to assign certain payment and other obligations to third-party special purpose entities that are not consolidated with us. We have also entered into agreements to provide fleet services to these special purpose entities for fixed servicing fees and reimbursement of out-of-pocket expenses. The purpose of these transactions is to remove the risk to us of non-payment by our customers, which would otherwise negatively impact our financial condition and results of operations. For more information on these special purpose entities, see the discussion of our relationship with the variable interest entities described in Note 12. Nonconsolidated Variable Interest Entities to our consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 included in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report. Assets and liabilities related to these arrangements are generally not reflected in our consolidated balance sheets, and we do not expect any material impact on our cash flows, results of operations or financial condition as a result of these off-balance sheet arrangements. As of the end of February 2021, the remaining railcar leases associated with our off-balance sheet arrangements were either assigned directly to our customers or expired. As such, we have terminated our relationship with the third-party special purpose entities discussed herein effective as of the end of February 2021.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our selection and application of accounting policies is an important process that has developed as our business activities have evolved and as new accounting pronouncements have been issued. Accounting decisions generally involve an interpretation of existing accounting principles and the use of judgment in applying those principles to the specific circumstances existing in our business. We make every effort to comply with all applicable accounting principles and believe the proper implementation and consistent application of these principles is critical. However, not all situations we encounter are specifically addressed in the accounting literature. In such cases, we must use our best judgment to implement accounting policies that clearly and accurately present the substance of these situations. We accomplish this by analyzing similar situations and the accounting guidance governing them and consulting with experts about the appropriate interpretation and application of the accounting literature to these situations.
In addition to the above, certain amounts included in or affecting our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures must be estimated, requiring us to make certain assumptions with respect to values or conditions that cannot be known with certainty at the time the consolidated financial statements are prepared. These estimates affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures with respect to contingent assets and liabilities. The basis for our estimates is historical experience, consultation with experts and other sources we believe to be reliable. While we believe our estimates are appropriate, actual results can and often do differ from these estimates. Any effect on our business, financial position, results of operations and cash flows resulting from revisions to these estimates are recorded in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become known.
We believe our critical accounting policies and estimates discussed in the following paragraphs address the more significant judgments and estimates we use in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Each of these areas involve complex situations and a high degree of judgment either in the application and interpretation of existing accounting literature or in the development of estimates that affect our consolidated financial statements. Our management has discussed the development and selection of the critical accounting policies and estimates related to the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and disclosure of contingent liabilities with the Audit Committee of the board of directors of our general partner.
The following discussion relates to the critical accounting policies and estimates for USD Partners LP. Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates based on the best available information at the time. The following accounting policies are considered critical because they are important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results, and involve a higher degree of complexity and judgment on the part of management. Actual results may differ based on the
accuracy of the information utilized and subsequent events, some over which we may have little or no control. Significant estimates by management include the estimated lives of depreciable property and equipment, recoverability of long-lived assets and goodwill, and provision or benefit for income taxes.
Revenue
We recognize revenue from contracts with customers by applying the provisions of ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. We recognize revenue under the core principle to depict the transfer of control to our customers of goods or services in an amount reflecting the consideration for which we expect to be entitled. In order to achieve the core principle, we apply the following five step approach:
(1) identify the contract with a customer;
(2) identify the performance obligations in the contract;
(3) determine the transaction price;
(4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
(5) recognize revenue when a performance obligation is satisfied.
We define a performance obligation as a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer, which also represents the unit of account under ASC 606. We allocate the transaction price in a contract to each distinct performance obligation, which we recognize as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price in the contract to each performance obligation using our best estimate of the standalone selling price for each distinct good or service in the contract, utilizing market-based and cost-plus margin inputs. We have elected to account for sales taxes received from customers on a net basis.
We apply the right-to-invoice practical expedient to contracts for which we recognize revenue at the amount to which we have the right to invoice for services performed.
Terminalling Services Revenues
We derive a majority of our revenues from contracts to provide terminalling services, which include pipeline transportation, storage, loading and unloading of crude oil and related products from and into railcars and trucks, as well as the transloading of biofuels from railcars into trucks. Our terminalling services agreements for crude oil and related products are generally established under multi-year, take-or-pay provisions that require monthly payments from our customers for their minimum monthly volume commitments in exchange for our performance of the terminalling services enumerated above. Our terminalling services for biofuels typically require monthly payments for actual volumes handled. Variable consideration, such as volume-based pricing, included in our agreements is typically resolved within the applicable accounting period.
We recognize revenue for the terminalling services we provide based upon the contractual rates set forth in our agreements related to throughput volumes. We recognize revenue over time as we render services based on the throughput delivered as this best represents the value we provide to customers for our services. All of the contracted capacity at our Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal is contracted under multi-year agreements that contain “take-or-pay” provisions where we are entitled to the payment of minimum monthly commitment fees from our customers, regardless of whether the specified throughput volumes to which the customer committed is achieved.
Our terminalling services agreements at our Hardisty Terminal and Stroud Terminal generally grant our customers make-up rights that allow them to load volumes in excess of their minimum monthly commitment in future periods, without additional charge, to the extent capacity is available for the excess volume. The make-up rights typically expire, if unused, in subsequent periods up to 12 months following the period for which the volumes were originally committed. We currently recognize substantially all of the amounts we receive for minimum commitment fees as revenue when collected, since breakage associated with these make-up rights options has varied between 97% and 100% based on our experience and expectations around usage of these options. Breakage rates are regularly evaluated and modified as necessary to reflect our current expectations and experience. If we do not expect to be entitled to a breakage amount, we defer the recognition of revenue associated with volumes that are below the
minimum monthly commitment until we determine that the likelihood that the customer will be able to make up the minimum volume is remote or the make-up right expires. If we expect to be entitled to a breakage amount, we estimate expected breakage and recognize the expected breakage amount as revenue in proportion to the trend of rights exercised by the customer.
Fleet Services Revenues
Our fleet services contracts provide for the sourcing of railcar fleets and related logistics and maintenance services. We allocate revenue between the lease and service components based on the relative standalone values, typically utilizing market-based and cost-plus margin estimates, and account for each component under the applicable accounting guidance. We record revenues for fleet leases on a gross basis, since we are deemed the primary obligor for the services.
We recognize revenue for fleet leases and related party administrative services ratably over the contract period as services are consistently provided throughout the period. Revenue for reimbursable costs is recognized on a gross basis on our consolidated statements of operations as “Freight and other reimbursables,” as the costs are incurred. We have deferred revenues for amounts collected in advance from customers in our Fleet services segment, which we will recognize as revenue as the underlying services are performed pursuant to the terms of our contracts. We have prepaid rent associated with these deferred revenues on our railcar leases, which we will recognize as expense as these railcars are used.
Capitalization Policies and Depreciation Methods
We record property and equipment at its original cost, which we depreciate on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets, which range from three to 30 years. Our determination of the useful lives of property and equipment requires us to make various assumptions when the assets are acquired or placed into service about the expected usage, normal wear and tear and the extent and frequency of maintenance programs. Expenditures for repairs and maintenance are charged to expense as incurred, while improvements that extend the service life or capacity of existing property and equipment are capitalized. Upon the sale or retirement of an asset, the related costs and accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts and any gain or loss is recognized in our operating results.
During construction we capitalize direct costs, such as labor, materials and overhead, as well as interest cost we may incur on indebtedness at our incremental borrowing rate.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
We evaluate long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable.
We consider a long-lived asset to be impaired when the sum of the estimated, undiscounted future cash flows from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition is less than the carrying amount of the asset. Factors that indicate potential impairment include: a significant decrease in the market value of the asset, operating or cash flow losses associated with the use of the asset, or a significant change in the asset’s physical condition or use.
When alternative courses of action to recover the carrying amount of a long-lived asset are under consideration, estimates of future undiscounted cash flows take into account possible outcomes and probabilities of their occurrence. If the carrying amount of the long-lived asset is not recoverable based on the estimated future undiscounted cash flows, an impairment loss is recognized to the extent the carrying amount exceeds the estimated fair value of the long-lived asset.
We determined the overall downturn in the crude market and the decline in the demand for petroleum products, which could lead to delays or reduction of expected throughput levels and changes in expectations for current and future contracts in our terminalling services at the Casper Terminal was an event that required us to evaluate our Casper Terminal asset group for impairment. We tested the fair value of our Casper Terminal assets by
using projections of the undiscounted cash flows expected to be derived from the operation and disposition of the Casper Terminal asset.
The critical assumptions underlying our projections included the following:
1)a range of incremental volumes expected at our Casper Terminal of approximately 4,000 to 25,000 bpd for terminalling and storage services resulting from the anticipated successful completion of the Enbridge DRA project
2)expected volumes for our blended services business for distribution to local refiners;
3)a 15 year remaining useful life of the primary asset, represented by our property and equipment of the Casper Terminal asset group; and
4)a residual value of 8.0x projected cash flows for the Casper Terminal at the end of the 15 year remaining life of the primary asset.
Our projections of the undiscounted cash flows expected to be derived from the operation and disposition of the Casper Terminal asset group exceeded the carrying amount of the asset group as of March 31, 2020, the date of our evaluation, indicating cash flows were expected to be sufficient to recover the carrying amount of the Casper Terminal asset group. Accordingly, we did not recognize any impairment of our Casper Terminal asset.
To the extent that our assumptions as set forth above do not materialize, our projections of future financial performance underlying our cash flow projections for the Casper Terminal could yield undiscounted cash flows and a fair value that indicate our long-lived assets are impaired. Moreover, these assumptions may change over time in response to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and the state of the commodity markets, which are inherently uncertain and difficult to predict.
We have not observed any events or circumstances subsequent to our analysis at March 31, 2020 that would suggest the fair value of our Casper Terminal asset is below its carrying amount as of December 31, 2020.
Assessment of Recoverability of Goodwill
Goodwill represents the future economic benefits arising from assets acquired in a business combination that are not individually identified and separately recognized. Historically, goodwill was only included in our Terminalling services segment as part of our Casper Terminal reporting unit.
Historically, we did not amortize goodwill, but tested it for impairment annually based on the carrying amounts of our reporting units on the first day of the third quarter of each year or more frequently if impairment indicators arose that suggested the carrying amount of goodwill might be impaired. Our assessment of the recoverability of goodwill is highly subjective due to frequent changes in economic conditions underlying the assumptions upon which the valuations are based and global factors affecting the prices for various grades of crude oil and demand for our services.
In assessing our ability to recover the carrying amount of goodwill, we made critical assumptions that included but were not limited to:
1)our projections of future financial performance;
2)our expectations for contract renewals for existing and additional capacity with current customers;
3)our ability to expand our services and attract new customers;
4)our expected market weighted average cost of capital;
5)an expected range of EBITDA multiples derived from equity prices of public companies with similar operating and investment characteristics; and
6)an expected range of EBITDA multiples for transactions based on actual sales and purchases of comparable businesses.
We recognized an impairment loss when the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeded its implied fair value. We reduced the carrying amount of goodwill to its fair value at the time we determined that an impairment has occurred.
Our goodwill originated from our acquisition of the Casper Terminal in November 2015 and was wholly attributed to this reporting unit. We measured the fair value of our Casper Terminal reporting unit using customary business valuation techniques including an income analysis, market analysis and transaction analysis, which we weighted at 50%, 25% and 25%, respectively. Our weighting of the measurement methods was consistent with weightings used to value organizations that are similar to the Casper Terminal reporting unit.
In March 2020, we tested the goodwill associated with our Casper Terminal for impairment due to the overall downturn in the crude market and the decline in the demand for petroleum products, which could lead to delays or reductions of expected throughput levels and changes in expectations for current and future contracts at the Casper Terminal.
The critical assumptions used in our analysis include the following:
1)a weighted average cost of capital of 12%;
2)a capital structure consisting of approximately 65% debt and 35% equity based on the capital structure of market participants;
3)a range of EBITDA multiples derived from stock prices of public companies with similar operating and investment characteristics, from 7.25x to 8.25x;
4)a range of EBITDA multiples for transactions based on actual sales and purchases of comparable businesses, from 8.0x to 9.0x; and
5)a range of incremental volumes expected at our Casper Terminal of approximately 4,000 to 25,000 bpd for terminalling and storage services resulting from the anticipated successful completion of the Enbridge DRA project.
The key assumptions listed above were based upon economic and other operational conditions existing at or prior to our March 31, 2020 valuation date. Our weighted average cost of capital is subject to variability and is dependent upon such factors as changes in benchmark rates of interest established by the Federal Open Market Committee of the Federal Reserve Board, the British Bankers Association and other central banking regulatory authorities, as well as perceptions of risk and market uncertainty regarding our business, industry and those of our peers and our underlying capital structure. We expect our long-term underlying capital structure to approximate a weighting of 50% debt and 50% equity. Each of the above assumptions are likely to change due to economic uncertainty surrounding global and North American energy markets that are highly correlated with crude oil, natural gas and other energy-related commodity prices and other market factors.
The EBITDA multiples we used to estimate the fair value of the Casper Terminal reporting unit are subject to uncertainty associated with market conditions in the energy sector. We derived the assumption based upon the EBITDA multiples from several comparable businesses that operate in the midstream energy sector, generally providing services associated with the transportation of energy-related products. The EBITDA multiples of each of these entities is affected by changes in the supply of and demand for energy-related products, which affects the demand for the services they provide. Declines in the production of energy-related products as well as lower demand for these products can reduce the operating results of these organizations, and accordingly, the multiples that market participants are willing to pay. Changes in the EBITDA multiples of these comparable businesses we use to estimate fair value could significantly affect the fair value of the Casper Terminal reporting unit we derived using this approach.
The EBITDA multiples from executed purchase and sales transactions of businesses that are similar to our Casper Terminal reporting unit we used to estimate the fair value are also subject to variability, which is dependent upon market conditions in the energy sector, as well as the perceived benefits the acquiring entity expects to derive from the transaction. The transactions comprising the pool occurred during the immediately preceding three years and future transactions may have no correlation to the EBITDA multiples for similar transactions in the future.
Further deterioration in economic conditions in the energy sector could result in a greater number of distressed sales at lower EBITDA multiples than currently estimated. Additionally, a representative sample of transactions in the future may not provide a sufficient population upon which to derive an EBITDA multiple. These factors, among others, could cause our estimates of fair value for the Casper Terminal reporting unit to vary significantly from the amounts determined under this method.
As indicated above, our estimate of fair value for the Casper Terminal reporting unit required us to use significant unobservable inputs representative of Level 3 fair value measurements, including assumptions related to the future performance of our Casper Terminal. During the first quarter of 2020, we completed our goodwill impairment analysis and determined that the carrying amount of the Casper Terminal reporting unit exceeded its fair value at March 31, 2020. Accordingly, we recognized an impairment loss of $33.6 million in our goodwill asset and included this charge in “Goodwill impairment loss” within our consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2020, we did not have any remaining goodwill balance in our consolidated balance sheet.
Income Taxes
We are not a taxable entity for U.S. federal income tax purposes or for a majority of the states that impose an income tax. Taxes on our net income or loss are generally borne by our unitholders through the allocation of taxable income or loss, except for USD Rail LP, which, in October 2014, elected to be classified as an entity taxable as a corporation. Our income tax expense is predominantly attributable to Canadian federal and provincial income taxes imposed on our operations based in Canada. Additionally, we are also subject to state franchise tax in the State of Texas, which is treated as an income tax under the applicable accounting guidance. This state income tax is computed on our modified gross margin, which we have determined to be an income tax as set forth in the authoritative accounting guidance. Our current and historical provision for income taxes also reflects income taxes associated with USD Rail LP.
We recognize deferred income tax assets and liabilities for temporary differences between the relevant basis of our assets and liabilities for financial reporting and tax purposes. We record the impact of changes in tax legislation on deferred income tax assets and liabilities in the period the legislation is enacted.
Pursuant to the authoritative accounting guidance regarding uncertain tax positions, we recognize the tax effects of any uncertain tax position as the largest amount that will more likely than not be realized upon ultimate settlement with the taxing authority having full knowledge of the position and all relevant facts. Under this criterion, we evaluate the most likely resolution of an uncertain tax position based on its technical merits and on the outcome that we expect would likely be sustained under examination.
Our policy is to recognize any interest or penalties related to the underpayment of income taxes as a component of income tax expense or benefit. We have not historically incurred any significant interest or penalties for the underpayment of income taxes.
Net income or loss for financial statement purposes may differ significantly from taxable income we allocated to our unitholders as a result of differences between the tax basis and financial reporting basis of assets and liabilities and the taxable income allocation requirements set forth in our partnership agreement. The aggregate difference in the basis of our net assets for financial and tax reporting purposes compared to unitholders cannot be readily determined because information regarding each partner’s tax attributes in us is not available.
Foreign Currency
A substantial portion of our operations are conducted in Canada and are accounted for in the local currency, the Canadian dollar, which we translate into our reporting currency, the U.S. dollar. We translate most Canadian dollar denominated balance sheet accounts at the end of period exchange rate, while most statement of operations accounts are translated monthly based on the average exchange rate for each monthly period. Amounts translated from foreign currencies into our U.S. dollar reporting currency can vary between periods due to fluctuations in the exchange rates between the foreign currency and the U.S. dollar.