Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This discussion includes forward-looking statements. Please refer to “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” of this annual report on Form 10-K for important information about these types of statements and “Risk Factors”, above. Additionally, please refer to the “Glossary of Oil and Natural Gas Terms” of this annual report on Form 10-K for oil and natural gas industry terminology used herein.
Recent Developments
On February 11, 2021, we sold 1,131,500 shares of our common stock in an underwritten offering at a public offering price of $5.10 per share (the “Offering”). The Offering closed on February 17, 2021. The net proceeds to us from the Offering, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and Offering expenses, were $5.3 million. We intend to use the net proceeds from this offering for general corporate purposes, capital expenditures, working capital, and potential acquisitions of oil and gas properties.
On March 4, 2021 we entered into a Debt Conversion Agreement with APEG II. Pursuant to the Debt Conversion Agreement, APEG II converted a total of approximately $413,000, representing the principal of the Secured Promissory Note of $375,000 and accrued interest of approximately $38,000 into 97,962 unregistered shares of our common stock. The number of shares was based on a conversion price of $4.21 per share, a 9.9% discount to the ten-day volume weighted average price of our common stock for the ten days immediately preceding the signing of the Debt Conversion Agreement (the “VWAP Discount Price”).
Also, on March 4, 2021, APEG II entered into a Subscription Agreement with us, whereby APEG II subscribed to purchase 90,846 unregistered shares of our common stock for an aggregate of approximately $383,000 based on the VWAP Discount Price. The $383,000 subscription price was paid by way of forgiveness by APEG II of the same amount of funds owed by us for reimbursement of APEG II’s legal costs in connection with certain shareholder derivative actions brought by APEG against us and our former Chief Executive Officer in Colorado and Texas, which were dismissed in May 2020 and August, respectively.
On March 9, 2021, we entered into a commodity derivative contract to hedge the price of 100 barrels of crude oil per day from March 1 to December 31, 2021at $61.90 based on the calendar month average of WTI Crude Oil.
Impacts of COVID-19 Pandemic and Effect on Economic Environment
In early March 2020, there was a global outbreak of COVID-19 that has resulted in a drastic decline in global demand of certain mineral and energy products including crude oil. As a result of the lower demand caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and the oversupply of crude oil, spot and future prices of crude oil fell to historic lows during the second quarter of 2020 and only recently recovered to pre-COVID-19 levels. Operators in North Dakota’s Williston Basin responded by significantly decreasing drilling and completion activity and shutting in or curtailing production from a significant number of producing wells. Operators’ decisions on these matters are changing rapidly and it is difficult to predict the future effects on the Company’s business. Lower oil and natural gas prices not only decrease our revenues, but an extended decline in oil or gas prices may materially and adversely affect our future business, financial position, cash flows, results of operations, liquidity, ability to finance planned capital expenditures and the oil and natural gas reserves that we can economically produce.
Additionally, the outbreak of COVID-19 and decreases in commodity prices resulting from oversupply, government-imposed travel restrictions, and other constraints on economic activity have caused a significant decrease in the demand for oil and has created disruptions and volatility in the global marketplace for oil and gas beginning in the first quarter of 2020, which negatively affected our results of operations and cash flows. These conditions persisted throughout 2020 and continue to negatively affect our results of operations and cash flows. While demand and commodity prices have shown signs of recovery, they are not back to pre-pandemic levels, and financial results may continue to be depressed in future quarters. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our business going forward will depend on numerous evolving factors we cannot reliably predict, including the duration and scope of the pandemic; governmental, business, and individuals’ actions in response to the pandemic; and the impact on economic activity including the possibility of recession or financial market instability. These factors may adversely impact the supply and demand for oil and gas and our ability to produce and transport oil and gas and perform operations at and on our properties. This uncertainty also affects management’s accounting estimates and assumptions, which could result in greater variability in a variety of areas that depend on these estimates and assumptions, including investments, receivables, and forward-looking guidance.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make assumptions and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. A summary of our significant accounting policies is detailed in Note 1 - Organization, Operations and Significant Accounting Policies in