Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of USANA’s financial condition and results of operations is presented in nine sections:
●
Overview
● Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
●
Customers
●
Presentation
●
Results of Operations
●
Liquidity and Capital Resources
●
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Contingencies
●
Inflation
●
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this report.
Overview
We develop and manufacture high quality, science-based nutritional and personal care and skincare products that are distributed internationally through direct selling. We use this distribution method because we believe it is more conducive to meeting our vision as a company, which is to improve the overall health and nutrition of individuals and families around the world. Our customer base is primarily comprised of two types of customers: “Associates” and “Preferred Customers” referred to together as “active Customers.” Our Associates also sell our products to retail customers. Associates share in our company vision by acting as independent distributors of our products in addition to purchasing our products for their personal use. Preferred Customers purchase our products strictly for personal use and are not permitted to resell or to distribute the products. We only count as active Customers those Associates and Preferred Customers who have purchased from us at any time during the most recent three-month period. As of January 2, 2021, we had approximately 599,000 active Customers worldwide.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted economies, businesses, sales practices, supply chains, and consumer behavior around the world. While the overall impact of the pandemic on our business and results of operations was not material in fiscal 2020, the pandemic disrupted and negatively affected our business. Government-imposed restrictions, health and safety mandated best practices, and public hesitance regarding in-person gatherings have reduced our ability and the ability of our Associates to hold sales meetings, required our Associates to share and sell our products in a predominantly virtual environment, resulted in cancellations of key Company events and trips, required us to utilize a work-from-home strategy for all non-manufacturing and non-distribution employees, and required us to temporarily close our walk-in and fulfillment locations in some markets where we have such properties. The pandemic has also affected our ability to obtain some ingredients and packaging as well as ship products in some markets. While we have not experienced a meaningful supply chain interruption, our supply chain and logistics have incurred some disruption and we could experience more significant disruptions or closures in the future. These factors and others related to the COVID-19 pandemic will likely continue to negatively affect our business throughout 2021 in a number of ways, including those described below.
● Our Workforce. The health and safety of our employees around the world remains our top priority. We remain committed to being socially responsible as a corporate leader in each of our markets and doing our part to reduce the spread of COVID-19. As such, we are continuing to utilize a modified operating model in each of our markets as necessary to follow applicable guidelines from government and health officials. We continue to utilize a work-from-home plan for all non-manufacturing and non-distribution employees. Although our manufacturing and distribution employees continue to work on site, they are following applicable health and safety guidelines. We continue to require body temperature monitoring, social distancing and mandatory use of facemasks for employees and visitors at our facilities. We are also continuing to utilize flexible shift schedules, time and attendance policies, and sick-leave policies to promote health, wellness and safety. Where necessary in our international markets, we have temporarily closed product will-call centers and continue to offer curbside delivery and subsidized shipping to customers. We will continue to monitor the situation surrounding the pandemic and implement additional risk mitigation actions where necessary.
● Our Operations. All of our production facilities remain operational under enhanced safety measures and as of the date of this Annual Report, we have not experienced meaningful disruptions to our supply chain, shipping, or logistics. Although we have successfully modified our operations in each of our markets to date, future efforts to reduce the spread of COVID-19 may negatively affect our business. The extent of any disruption to our business in each of our markets going forward is difficult to estimate and will depend on many factors, many of which are outside of our control. Our operating plan continues to entail efforts to safeguard against disruptions through maintaining and operating (i) raw material procurement; (ii) manufacturing; (iii) distribution; (iv) selling; (v) operating cash flows and liquidity; (vi) Associate engagement and activity; and (vii) employee support and engagement.
● Our Sales and Salesforce. Demand for our high quality nutritional products remained high during fiscal 2020 during the pandemic. In 2021, we will continue to utilize a virtual strategy to hold meetings and events with our salesforce and will evaluate this strategy as the year and situation with the pandemic progresses. Our salesforce will also continue to utilize a virtual sales and operating strategy. Notwithstanding the foregoing, person-to-person and face-to-face selling and events remain an important part of our business and we plan to begin incorporating the same into our strategy as it becomes safe and appropriate for us and our sales force to do so.
● Our Liquidity. Our liquidity position is strong. We expect to continue to fund our business with cash flow from operations and believe that we have sufficient liquidity to satisfy our cash needs. Notwithstanding the foregoing, we will continue to evaluate and take action, as necessary, to preserve adequate liquidity and ensure that our business can continue to operate at full strength during these uncertain times. Additionally, as long as uncertainty remains surrounding the duration and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the potential impact from the pandemic on our business, financial condition or longer-term financial or operational results will remain uncertain. We will continue to align spending with sales performance and defer non-essential capital investments amid the COVID-19 pandemic.
Customers
Because we sell our products to a customer base of independent Associates and Preferred Customers, we increase our sales by increasing the number of our active Customers, the amount they spend on average, or both. Our primary focus continues to be increasing the number of active Customers. We believe this focus is consistent with our vision of improving the overall health and nutrition of individuals and families around the world. Sales to Associates accounted for approximately 59% of product sales during 2020 with the remainder of our sales being to Preferred Customers. Increases or decreases in product sales are typically the result of variations in the volume of product sold relating to fluctuations in the number of active Customers purchasing our products. The number of active Associates and Preferred Customers is therefore, used by management as a key non-financial indicator to evaluate our operational performance.
The table below summarizes the change in our active Customer base by geographic region, rounded to the nearest thousand, as of the dates indicated.
Presentation
Product sales along with the shipping and handling fees billed to our customers are recorded as revenue net of applicable sales discounts when, or as control of the promised product is transferred to the customer, which is at the time of delivery to the third party carrier for shipment. Payments received for unshipped products are recorded as deferred revenue and are included in the "Other current liabilities" line item in the consolidated balance sheet. Also reflected in net sales is a provision for a refund liability for sales returns, which is estimated, based on our historical experience. Additionally, other types of revenue include fees, which are paid by the customer at the beginning of the service period, for access to online customer service applications and annual account renewal fees for Associates, for which control is transferred over time as services are delivered and are recognized as revenue on a straight-line basis over the term of the respective contracts.
Cost of sales primarily consists of expenses related to raw materials, labor, quality assurance, and overhead costs that are all directly associated with the production and distribution of our products and sales materials, as well as duties and taxes that are associated with the import and export of our products. As international sales increase as a percentage of net sales, cost of sales are increasingly affected by additional duties, freight, and other factors, such as changes in currency exchange rates.
Associate incentives expense includes all forms of commissions, and other incentives paid to our Associates. Incentives paid to Associates include bonuses earned, rewards from contests and promotions, and base commissions, which makes up the majority of our Associate incentives expense. We pay bonuses to Associates based on certain business-related criteria, total base commission earnings, and leadership level. Contests and promotions are offered as an incentive and reward to our Associates and are typically paid out only after an Associate achieves specific criteria. Base commissions are paid out on the sale of products. Associates earn their commissions based on sales volume points that are generated in their sales organization. Sales volume points are assigned to each commissionable product and comprise a certain percent of the product price. Items such as our starter kits and sales tools have no sales volume point value, and commissions are not paid on the sale of these items. Although insignificant to our financial statements, an Associate may earn commissions on sales volume points that are generated from personal purchases that are not considered part of their “Qualifying Sales.” To be eligible to earn commissions, an Associate must reach a certain level of Qualifying Sales each month, which may include product that they use personally or that they resell to consumers. Associates do not earn commissions on their Qualifying Sales. Commissions paid to Associates on personal purchases are considered a sales discount and are reported as a reduction to our net sales.
Selling, general and administrative expenses include wages and benefits, depreciation and amortization, lease costs and utilities, Associate event costs, advertising, professional fees, marketing, and research and development expenses. Wages and benefits represent the largest component of selling, general and administrative expenses. Significant depreciation and amortization expense is incurred as a result of investments in physical facilities, computer and information technology infrastructure to support our international operations.
Sales to customers outside the United States are transacted in the respective local currencies and translated to U.S. dollars at weighted-average currency exchange rates for each monthly accounting period to which they relate. With the exception of China, our raw material purchases from suppliers and product purchases from third-party manufacturers are transacted in U.S. dollars. Consequently, our net sales and earnings are affected by changes in currency exchange rates. In general, our operating results are affected positively by a weakening U.S. dollar and negatively by a strengthening U.S. dollar. In our net sales discussions that follow, we approximate the impact of currency fluctuations on net sales by translating current year net sales at the average exchange rates in effect during the comparable prior-year periods.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our consolidated operating results as a percent of net sales, respectively, for the years indicated:
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We believe that presentation of certain non-GAAP financial information is meaningful and useful in understanding the activities and business metrics of our operations. Management believes these measures reflect an additional way of viewing aspects of our business that, when viewed with our GAAP results, provide a more complete understanding of factors and trends affecting our business. This non-GAAP financial information may be determined or calculated differently by other companies, limiting the usefulness of those measures for comparative purposes. We provide such non-GAAP financial information for informational purposes only. Readers should consider the information in addition but not instead of or superior to, our Consolidated Financial Statements prepared in accordance with GAAP, accompanying this report.
In analyzing business trends and performance, management uses “constant currency” net sales, “local currency” net sales, and other currency-related financial information terms to discuss our financial results in a way we believe is helpful in understanding the impact of fluctuations in foreign-currency exchange rates and facilitating period-to-period comparisons of results of operations and providing investors an additional perspective on trends and underlying business results. Changes in our reported revenue and profits in this report include the impacts of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. As additional information to the reader, we provide constant currency assessments in the tables and the narrative information in this MD&A to remove or quantify the impact of the fluctuation in foreign exchange rates and utilize constant currency results in our analysis of performance. Our constant currency financial results are calculated by translating the current period’s financial results at the same average exchange rates in effect during the applicable prior-year period and then comparing this amount to the prior-year period’s financial results.
Summary of 2020 Financial Results
Our discussion and analysis is focused on our 2020 and 2019 financial results, including comparisons of our year-over-year performance between these years. Discussion and analysis of our 2018 fiscal year specifically, as well as the year-over-year comparison of our 2019 financial performance to 2018, are located in Part II, Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 25, 2020, which is available on our investor relations website at https://ir.usana.com or the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. That information is incorporated by reference into this report.
Net sales in 2020 increased 7.0%, or $73.7 million, to $1.135 billion, compared with 2019. Fiscal 2020 was a 53-week year and included, comparatively, one additional week of sales. We estimate that this extra week contributed approximately $18 million to net sales for the year. The increase in net sales was driven by active Customer growth throughout the year as demand for high quality nutritional products remained high, as well as the successful execution of our strategic initiatives throughout the year.
Net earnings increased 24.0% to $124.7 million in 2020, when compared with 2019. The increase in net earnings was mainly the result of increased sales, lower relative operating expenses, and a reduced income tax rate.
Fiscal Year 2020 compared to Fiscal Year 2019
Net Sales
The following table summarizes the changes in our net sales by geographic region for the fiscal years ended January 2, 2021, and December 28, 2019:
Asia Pacific: The growth in this region was primarily driven by a successful worldwide incentive program that ran primarily during the third quarter of 2020 and was designed to further incent product sales to new customers. The increase in constant currency net sales in Southeast Asia Pacific was driven primarily by the Philippines and Malaysia, which had local currency net sales growth of 55.1% and 24.5% due to a 67.6% and 16.1% increase in active Customers, respectively. In addition to the world wide incentive programs, the Philippines also participated in a market specific incentive program that further incented sales growth. The growth in this sub-region was partially offset by a 5.8% local currency sales decline in Australia due to a 9.5% decrease in active Customers.
The decrease in constant currency net sales in Greater China was largely the result of a sales decline in Hong Kong, where local currency net sales decreased 20.9% as a result of a continued challenging operating environment in that market. Local currency net sales in China were essentially flat, however, there was a 13.9% decline in active Customers. Our 2020 results in China reflect the combination of (i) the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the related operating restrictions in China, which meaningfully limited in-person meetings in the market, and (ii) the 2019 contraction of our business in this market due to a challenging consumer environment following negative media concerning the health foods and direct selling industries. Our 2021 strategy for China entails continued investment in digital transformation, additional production innovation and introductions, and executing our customer experience strategy through enhancing our 29 branches in this market.
Growth in the North Asia region was driven by South Korea, where local currency net sales increased 20.3% due to a 3.6% increase in active Customers in that market.
Americas and Europe: The growth in this region was aided by the world wide incentive program described above. The increase in constant currency net sales in Americas and Europe region was driven by local currency net sales growth in all markets. This was driven mainly by growth in Canada, the U.S., and Europe. Local currency sales for Canada and the United States increased 9.8% and 2.1% due to an increase in active Customers of 7.0% and 9.4%, respectively. Europe had constant currency net sales growth of 31.8% due to an increase in active Customers of 83.3%.
Gross Profit
Gross profit decreased 70 basis points to 81.6% of net sales, down from 82.3% in 2019. This decrease can be attributed primarily to (i) a change in market sales mix, (ii) higher relative shipping costs, and (iii) higher production costs. These decreases were partially offset by (i) a favorable change in currency exchange rates, and (ii) lower scrap costs.
Associate Incentives
Associate incentives decreased 30 basis point points to 43.0% of net sales in 2020, compared with 43.3% in the prior year. This decrease can be attributed to (i) changes in market sales mix, and (ii) lower spending on Associate related incentive trips due to travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic. This decrease was partially offset by incentive promotions offered throughout the year.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased 220 basis points relative to net sales and $6.5 million in absolute terms. The relative improvement can be attributed to (i) leverage gained on higher sales, (ii) decreased event costs due to moving several large events to a virtual platform, and (iii) lower overall travel costs. The absolute decrease in expense can be attributed to the aforementioned decreased event and travel costs, which was partially offset by higher employee related costs.
Income Taxes
Income taxes decreased to 29.9% of pre-tax earnings in 2020, down from 33.2% of pre-tax earnings in 2019. The effective tax rate benefited from an increase in U.S. domestic earnings before income taxes compared to the prior year, which allowed for utilization of previously unbenefited tax attributes. This favorable tax result was partially offset by audit settlements and tax reserves.
Diluted Earnings Per Share
Diluted EPS increased to $5.86 in 2020 from $4.41 in 2019. This increase can be attributed to higher net earnings and a lower diluted share count.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have historically met our working capital and capital expenditure requirements by using both net cash flow from operations and by drawing on our line of credit. Our principal source of liquidity is our operating cash flow. There are currently no material restrictions on our ability to transfer and remit funds among our international markets. In China, however, our compliance with Chinese accounting and tax regulations promulgated by the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (“SAFE”) results in transfer and remittance of our profits and dividends from China to the United States on a delayed basis. If SAFE or other Chinese regulators introduce new regulations, or change existing regulations, which allow foreign investors to remit profits and dividends earned in China to other countries, our ability to remit profits or pay dividends from China to the United States may be limited in the future.
We believe we have sufficient liquidity to satisfy our cash needs and expect to continue to fund our business with cash flow from operations. We continue, however, to evaluate and take action, as necessary, to preserve adequate liquidity and ensure that our business can continue to operate during these uncertain times. Additionally, we continually evaluate opportunities to repurchase shares of our common stock and will, from time to time, consider the acquisition of, or investment in complementary businesses, products, services and technologies, which might affect our liquidity.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents increased to $311.9 million at January 2, 2021, from $234.8 million at December 28, 2019. This increase is due primarily to cash flow provided by operations of $160.4 million during the full year ended January 2, 2021. This increase was partially offset by (i) cash used to repurchase and retire shares of our common stock totaling $57 million, (ii) our strategic collaboration and investment with Built Brands totaling $20 million, and (iii) purchases of plant, property and equipment totaling $15.1 million, the majority of which was used to support in-house manufacturing of our foods product line.
The following table below presents concentrations of cash and cash equivalents by market for the periods indicated:
Cash Flows Provided by Operations
We have historically generated positive cash flow due to our strong operating margins. Net cash flow provided by operating activities totaled $160.4 million in 2020, an increase of $33.7 million from $126.7 million in 2019. The increase in cash flows from operating activities was driven primarily by (i) higher sales combined with an improved operating margin and (ii) higher accruals in the current period. These increases were partially offset by (i) cash used to build up inventory levels to offset any potential disruptions in the supply chain and (ii) an increase in prepaid expenses.
Line of Credit
Information with respect to our line of credit may be found below under the caption “Contractual Obligations and Commercial Contingencies,” and in Note I to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report, which is incorporated by reference.
Share Repurchase
Information with respect to our share repurchases may be found in Note M to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report, which is incorporated by reference.
Summary
We believe that current cash balances, future cash provided by operations, and amounts available under our line of credit will be sufficient to cover our operating and capital needs in the ordinary course of business for the foreseeable future. If we experience an adverse operating environment or unanticipated and unusual capital expenditure requirements, additional financing may be required. No assurance can be given, however, that additional financing, if required, would be available at all or on favorable terms. We might also require or seek additional financing for the purpose of expanding into new markets, growing our existing markets, or for other reasons. Such financing may include the use of additional debt or the sale of additional equity securities. Any financing which involves the sale of equity securities or instruments that are convertible into equity securities could result in immediate and possibly significant dilution to our existing shareholders.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Contingencies
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments as of January 2, 2021 and the effect such obligations and commitments are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flow in future periods:
“Operating Leases” generally provide that property taxes, insurance, and maintenance expenses are our responsibility. Such expenses are not included in the operating lease amounts in the table above. Information with respect to our Operating Leases may be found in Note F to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report, which is incorporated by reference.
“Other Commitments” generally include consulting- and IT-related services, investments in brand awareness through corporate and athlete sponsorships, facility maintenance, and services related to the events that we hold for our Associates both locally and internationally. Additionally, throughout the year we will enter into various short-term contracts, mostly for services related to events that we hold for our Associates. Information with respect to our Unconditional Purchase Obligations may be found in Note J to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report, which is incorporated by reference.
The “Line of Credit” is with a bank and has a maturity date of August 2025. Although we currently have no balance outstanding on the Line of Credit, fees on the unused portion of this line are due periodically and are reflected in the table above. If we utilize the Line of Credit prior to its maturity, we will be required to pay it in full at maturity.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation has had a material impact on our historical operations or profitability.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“US GAAP”). Our significant accounting policies are described in Consolidated Financial Statements included herein. The preparation of financial statements in accordance with US GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes. Those estimates and assumptions are derived and are continually evaluated based on our historical experiences, current facts and circumstances, and on changes in the business environment. Actual results, however, may sometimes differ materially from estimates under different conditions. Critical accounting estimates are defined as both those that are material to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and those that require management’s most subjective judgments. We believe that our most critical accounting policies and estimates are described in this section.
Revenue Recognition. Revenue is recognized when, or as, control of a promised product or service transfers to a customer, in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring those products or services. Revenue recognition is evaluated through the following five-step process:
1)
identification of the contract with a customer;
2)
identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
3)
determination of the transaction price;
4)
allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
5)
recognition of revenue when or as a performance obligation is satisfied.
A majority of our sales are for products sold at a point in time and shipped to customers, for which control is transferred to the customer as goods are delivered to the third-party carrier for shipment. We receive payment, primarily via credit card, for the sale of products at the time customers place orders and payment is required prior to shipment. Our product sales contracts include terms that could cause variability in the transaction price for items such as discounts, credits, or sales returns. Accordingly, the transaction price for product sales includes estimates of variable consideration to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue recognized will not occur. At the time of sale, we estimate a refund liability for the variable consideration based on historical experience.
Initial product orders with a new customer may include multiple performance obligations related to sales discounts earned under our initial order reward program. Under this program, the customer receives an option to apply the discounts earned on the initial order to two subsequent Auto Orders, which conveys a material right to the customer. As such, the initial order transaction price is allocated to each separate performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price and recognized as revenue as each performance obligation is satisfied.
Associate incentives represent consideration paid and include all forms of commissions, and other incentives paid to our Associates. With the exception of commissions paid to Associates on personal purchases, which are considered a sales discount and are reported as a reduction to net sales, the incentives are paid for distinct services related to our product sales and are recorded as an expense when revenue for the goods is recognized.
Shipping and handling activities are performed upon delivery to the third-party carrier for shipment. We account for these activities as fulfillment costs. Therefore, we recognize the costs of these activities when revenue for the goods is recognized. Shipping and handling costs are included in cost of sales for all periods presented.
Contract liabilities relate to deferred revenue for product sales for customer payments received in advance of shipment, for outstanding material rights under the initial order program, and for services where the performance obligations are satisfied over time as services are delivered. Contract liabilities are recorded as deferred revenue within the “Other current liabilities” line item in the consolidated balance sheet. Deferred revenue is recognized when or as the related performance obligation is satisfied. On the occasion that will-call orders are not picked up by customers, we periodically assess the likelihood that customers will exercise their contractual right to pick up orders and recognize revenue when the likelihood that customers will pick up orders is remote.
Inventory Valuation. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined using a standard costing system, which approximates the first-in, first-out method. The components of inventory cost include raw materials, labor, and overhead. Net realizable value is determined using various assumptions with regard to excess or slow-moving inventories, non-conforming inventories, expiration dates, current and future product demand, production planning, and market conditions. The forecasted future product demand for excess or slow-moving inventories is based on judgment and available information. A change in any valuation assumptions could result in an adjustment to inventory. However, the reported carrying value of inventory is not highly sensitive to reasonable changes in individual assumptions.