Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following is Management’s discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations of UTG, Inc. and its subsidiaries (collectively with the Parent, the “Company”) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this report.
Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This report on Form 10-K contains certain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which are intended to be covered by the safe harbors created by those laws. We have based our forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. Our forward-looking statements include information about possible or assumed future results of operations. All statements, other than statements of historical facts, included or incorporated by reference in this report that address activities, events or developments that we expect or anticipate may occur in the future, including such things as the growth of our business and operations, our business strategy, competitive strengths, goals, plans, future capital expenditures and references to future successes may be considered forward-looking statements. Also, when we use words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” “probably,” or similar expressions, we are making forward-looking statements.
Numerous risks and uncertainties may impact the matters addressed by our forward-looking statements, any of which could negatively and materially affect our future financial results and performance.
Although we believe that the assumptions underlying our forward-looking statements are reasonable, any of these assumptions, and, therefore, the forward-looking statements based on these assumptions, could themselves prove to be inaccurate. In light of the significant uncertainties inherent in the forward-looking statements that are included in this report, our inclusion of this information is not a representation by us or any other person that our objectives and plans will be achieved. In light of these risks, uncertainties and assumptions, any forward-looking event discussed in this report may not occur. Our forward-looking statements speak only as of the date made, and we undertake no obligation to update or review any forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future events or other developments, unless the securities laws require us to do so.
Overview
UTG, Inc., a Delaware corporation, is a life insurance holding company. The Company’s dominant business is individual life insurance, which includes the servicing of existing insurance policies in-force, the acquisition of other companies in the life insurance business, the acquisition of blocks of business and the administration and processing of life insurance business for other entities.
UTG has a strong philanthropic program. The Company generally allocates a portion of its earnings to be used for its philanthropic efforts primarily targeted to Christ-centered organizations or organizations that help the weak or poor. The Company also encourages its staff to be involved on a personal level through monetary giving, volunteerism and use of their talents to assist those less fortunate than themselves. Through these efforts, the Company hopes to make a positive difference in the local community, state, nation and world.
Critical Accounting Policies
We have identified the accounting policies below as critical to the understanding of our results of operations and our financial condition. The application of these critical accounting policies in preparing our consolidated financial statements requires Management to use significant judgments and estimates concerning future results or other developments including the likelihood, timing or amount of one or more future transactions or amounts. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, assumptions and judgments based upon historical experience and various other information that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. For a detailed discussion of other significant accounting policies, see Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Future Policy Benefits - Because of the long-term nature of insurance contracts, the insurance company is liable for policy benefit payments that will be made in the future. The liability for future policy benefits is determined by standard actuarial procedures common to the life insurance industry. The accounting policies for determining this liability are disclosed in Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Cost of Insurance Acquired - The costs of acquiring blocks of insurance from other companies or through the acquisition of other companies are deferred and recorded as deferred acquisition costs. The deferred amounts are recorded as an asset and amortized to expense in a systematic manner as indicated in Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Valuation of Securities - The Company’s investment portfolio consists of fixed maturities, equity securities, trading securities, mortgage loans, notes receivable and real estate to provide funding of future policy contractual obligations. The Company’s fixed maturities are classified as available-for-sale. Available-for-sale fixed maturity investments are carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses reported in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Equity securities reported at fair value, which include common and preferred stocks, are reported at fair value with unrealized gains and losses reported as a component of net income (loss).
Equity securities reported at cost are reported at their cost basis, minus impairment, if any, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for the identical or a similar investment of the same issuer.
Mortgage loans on real estate are carried at their unpaid principal balances, adjusted for amortization of premium or discount and valuation allowances. Valuation allowances are established for impaired loans when it is probable that contractual principal and interest will not be collected. A portion of the mortgage loan balance consists of discounted mortgage loans that were purchased at deep discounts through an auction process led by the Federal Government. In general, the discounted mortgage loans are non-performing and there is a significant amount of uncertainty surrounding the timing and amount of cash flows to be received by the Company. Accordingly, the Company records its investment in the discounted mortgage loans at its original purchase price adjusted for any principal receipts received.
Real estate held-for-investment is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation. Depreciation is computed on a straight-line-basis for financial reporting purposes using estimated useful lives of 3 to 30 years. The Company periodically reviews its real estate held-for-investment for impairment and test for recoverability whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. Real estate for which the Company commits to a plan to sell within one year and actively markets in its current condition, for a reasonable price, in comparison to its estimated fair value, is classified as held-for-sale. Real estate held-for-sale is stated at lower of depreciated cost or estimated fair value less expected disposition costs and is not depreciated.
Notes receivable are reported at their unpaid principal balances, adjusted for valuation allowances. Valuation allowances are established for impaired loans when it is probable that contractual principal and interest will not be collected. Interest accruals are analyzed based on the likelihood of repayment. The Company does not utilize a specified number of days delinquent to cause an automatic non-accrual status.
The Company’s trading securities and equity securities are carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses reported in income in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Fair value is the price that the Company would expect to receive upon sale of the asset in an orderly transaction.
While the available-for-sale securities are generally expected to be held to maturity, they are classified as available-for-sale and are sold periodically to manage risk. Although a majority of the investment portfolio is classified as available-for-sale, the Company has the ability and intent to hold the securities until maturity. See Note 2 - Investments in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for detailed disclosures regarding the Company’s investment portfolio.
Impairment of Investments - The Company continually monitors the investment portfolio for investments that have become impaired in value; where fair value has declined below carrying value. While the value of the investments in the Company’s portfolio continuously fluctuate due to market conditions, an other-than-temporary impairment charge is recorded only when a security has experienced a decline in fair market value which is deemed to be other than temporary. The policies and procedures the Company uses to evaluate and account for impairments of investments are disclosed in Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 2 - Investments in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company makes every effort to appropriately assess the status and value of the securities with the information available regarding an other-than-temporary impairment. However, it is difficult to predict the future prospects of a distressed or impaired security.
Deferred Income Taxes - The provision for deferred income taxes is based on the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred income taxes are recognized by applying enacted statutory tax rates to temporary differences between amounts reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and the tax basis of existing assets and liabilities. A valuation allowance is recognized for the portion of deferred tax assets that, in Management's judgment, is not likely to be realized.
Results of Operations
During March 2020, a global pandemic was declared by the World Health Organization related to the rapidly growing outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19). The pandemic has significantly impacted the economic conditions in the U.S. and globally, accelerating during the first half of March, as federal, state, and local governments reacted to the public health crisis, creating significant uncertainties in the U.S. economy. The Company has not experienced a slow-down in activities, however government restrictions and client imposed delays are evaluated regularly and this could change. While the disruption is expected to be temporary, there continues to be uncertainty around the duration or effects of resurgence of the virus. The Company cannot at this time predict the ultimate impact the pandemic will have on its results of operations, financial position, liquidity, or capital resources, but such impact could be material.
On a consolidated basis, the Company had net income attributable to common shareholders of approximately $2.1 million and $16.3 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. In 2020, income before income taxes was approximately $2.6 million compared to $20.2 million in 2019. Total revenue were approximately $27.3 million in 2020 and $44.2 million in 2019.
One-time events, primarily reflected in realized gains, comprise a substantial portion of the net income and revenue reported by the Company during 2020 and 2019. The magnitude of realized investment gains and losses in a given year is a function of the timing of trades of investments relative to the markets themselves as well as the recognition of any impairments on investments. Future earnings will be significantly negatively impacted should earnings from these one-time items not be realizable in a future period. While Management believes there remain additional investments with such one-time earnings, when or if realized remains uncertain.
Total benefits and other expenses paid in 2020 were approximately $24.7 million compared to $24 million in 2019.
Revenues
Premiums and policy fee revenues, net of reinsurance premiums and policy fees, declined approximately 8% when comparing 2020 to 2019. The Company writes very little new business. Unless the Company acquires a new company or a block of in-force business, Management expects premium revenue to continue to decline on the existing block of business at a rate consistent with prior experience. The Company’s average persistency rate for all policies in-force for 2020 and 2019 was approximately 98% and 96.6%, respectively. Persistency is a measure of insurance in-force retained in relation to the previous year.
The following table summarizes the Company's investment performance for the years ended December 31:
The following table reflects net investment income of the Company for the years ended December 31:
Net investment income represented approximately 35% and 25% of the Company's total revenues as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. When comparing current and prior year results, net investment income was comparable in a majority of the investment categories. Investment income earned by the fixed maturities, equity securities, and real estate investment portfolios represented approximately 77% and 78% of the total consolidated investment income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
In March 2020, with the onset of the pandemic in America, financial markets became jittery experiencing a significant drop in the major market indices. In response, the Federal Reserve dropped interest rates to near zero. This action resulted in a drop in all other interest rates in the marketplace. While this increased the fair value of the Company’s current fixed income holdings, it made finding investments to acquire with any type of historic yield nearly impossible. The stock markets have experienced a rebound since that time; however, interest rates remain at historic low levels with short term rates at or near zero. Longer term bonds have experienced rate increases later in 2020 and into early 2021, but still remain below recent historic rates. Should rates remain at these levels, it will become increasingly more difficult for the Company to maintain its historic net investment income levels as existing investments mature and are replaced with lower yielding investments.
Income from the fixed maturities investment portfolio represented 44% of the total consolidated investment income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. When comparing earnings from the fixed maturities portfolio for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 income was down approximately 9% or $545,000. Fixed maturities continue to represent the largest investment type and asset class owned by the company. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, fixed maturities represented 48% and 49%, respectively, of the total investments owned by the Company.
Earnings from the equity securities investment portfolio represented approximately 15% and 12% of the total consolidated investment income report by the Company during 2020 and 2019, respectively. Income from the equity securities portfolio was up approximately 14% or $211,000 when comparing 2020 and 2019 results.
The earnings reported by the real estate investment portfolio represented 18% and 22% of the total consolidated investment income reported by the Company during 2020 and 2019, respectively. Earnings from the real estate investment portfolio were down approximately 25% or $722,00 when comparing 2020 and 2019 results. The earnings from the real estate investment portfolio are expected to vary depending on the real estate activities and the potential distributions that may occur. The real estate investment portfolio represents 11% and 13% of the total investment portfolio as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following table reflects net realized investment gains (losses) for the years ended December 31:
Realized investment gains are the result of one-time events and are expected to vary from year to year.
The sales of fixed maturities available for sale produced net realized gains of approximately $704,000 in 2020 and $189,000 in 2019. The 2019 gains were offset by the recognition of an other-than-temporary impairment of $650,956. The other-than-temporary impairment were taken as a result of Management’s assessment and consideration of the length of time the security had remained in an unrealized loss position and as a result of management’s analysis and determination of value. The investment was written down to better reflect its current estimated fair value. The gains and losses from the sales of fixed maturity investments are expected to vary from year to year depending on market conditions and Management's analysis of the portfolio holdings.
The 2020 real estate gains are the result of the sales of real estate in Alabama, Florida and Georgia. The sale of the property in Alabama produced a gain of approximately $2 million and represented approximately 45% of the net investment gains from real estate. The Company sold three real estate parcels located in Georgia that produced gains of approximately $2.2 million and represented 51% of the net investment gains from real estate.
The 2019 real estate gains are the result of the sales of real estate in California, Florida, Kentucky, Tennessee, and Texas. The sale of the real estate located in Florida produced a realized gain of approximately $1.7 million and represented approximately 42% of the net investment gains from real estate. The Company sold real estate located in Tennessee that produced a realized gain of approximately $1.1 million and represented approximately 28% of the net investment gains from real estate.
Realized gains and losses from equity securities represent the difference between the fair value at the beginning of the reporting period and the fair value at the time of sale. The Company reported net realized losses of approximately $(406,000) in 2020 from the sales of equity securities. During 2020, the Company sold seven equity securities that produced gross realized gains of approximately $2.6 million. The gross gains were offset by the sale of three equity securities that produced gross realized losses of approximately $3 million.
The sale of three equity securities represents approximately $2.5 million of the gross realized investment gains from equity securities during 2020. The sale of these securities was first disclosed in the MD&A of the Company's Form 10-K filing for the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company disclosed that we received an offer to purchase investments in certain music royalties held in the form of equity securities. We continued to report on these transactions in MD&A of Company's 2020 quarterly Form 10-Q filings. The reported gain changed throughout 2020 as additional proceeds were received. The sales agreements contained holdback provisions for a portion of the sales price. Under the terms of the holdback, certain performance results must be achieved during 2020 to release additional sales proceeds to the sellers. At the time of closing, it was determined it was more likely than not that the royalty interests would not perform at the levels necessary to receive the holdback funds. Performance was reviewed throughout the year, and was better than anticipated, resulting in the holdback proceeds being released to the seller. A portion of this transaction flows through change in the fair value of equity securities and will be further discussed below.
The sale of one common stock represented almost 100% of the realized losses on equity securities. The Company sold 10,000 shares of this common stock holding that is associated with the oil and gas industry. While this security produced a current period realized loss, overall, the sale of this security produced a significant gain for the Company over the period it was held. The other component of this transaction flows through the change in the fair value of equity securities and will be further discussed below.
During 2019, the company sold three equity securities that produced gross realized gains of approximately $3.5 million. One of those equity securities represented 86% or approximately $3 million of the gross realized gains from equity securities. The Company sold 14,000 shares of this common stock holding that is associated with the oil and gas industry. The Company sold one equity security in 2019 that produced an immaterial loss.
The Company reported a change in fair value of equity securities of approximately $6.2 million and $18.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This line item is material to the results reported in the consolidated statements of operations. This line item can also be extremely volatile, reflecting changes in the stock market. While both 2019 and 2020 reflected positive results, 2020 results were only 1/3 of that of 2019. With the onset of the pandemic in March 2020, the stock market took a major downward swing. At March 31, 2020, the Company reflected a loss on this line of approximately $(18) million. From that point forward, we have seen a recovery in the market sufficient to move this number to a $6 million positive by year end. While these results can be material and volatile, most of the equity holdings of the Company were acquired with a long-term view, thus making these intermediate changes in value of less concern to Management. Management monitors its equity holdings looking more at the specific entity and market it is in relative to performance and less to changes due to general market swings that occur over the holding period of the investment.
While the Company has seen significant positive results on its equity investments in the last two years, a pull back or downward market adjustment could slow these gains or even result in losses in future periods. Management believes its current equity investments continue to be solid investments for the Company and have further growth potential; however, changes in market conditions could cause volatility in market prices.
In summary, the Company’s basis for future revenue is expected to come from the following primary sources: Conservation of business currently in-force, the maximization of investment earnings and the acquisition of other companies or policy blocks in the life insurance business. Management has placed a significant emphasis on the development of these revenue sources to enhance these opportunities.
Expenses
The Company reported total benefits and other expenses of approximately $24.7 million and $24 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Benefits, claims and settlement expenses represented approximately 66% and 64% of the Company’s total expenses for 2020 and 2019, respectively. The other major expense category of the Company is operating expenses, which represented 32% and 33% of the Company’s total expenses for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Benefits, claims and settlement expenses, net of reinsurance benefits, were up approximately 6% or $859,000 when comparing 2020 and 2019 results. Policy claims vary from year to year and therefore, fluctuations in mortality are to be expected and are not considered unusual by Management.
Early in the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company implemented a process to monitor death claims resulting from COVID-19. During 2020, the Company incurred total death benefits of approximately $844,000 with COVID-19 listed as the cause of death. The average death benefit of these policies was $9,500. The Company will continue to monitor COVID-19 death claims.
Changes in policyholder reserves, or future policy benefits, also impact this line item. Reserves are calculated on an individual policy basis and generally increase over the life of the policy as a result of additional premium payments and acknowledgment of increased risk as the insured continues to age.
The short-term impact of policy surrenders is negligible since a reserve for future policy benefits payable is held which is, at a minimum, equal to and generally greater than the cash surrender value of a policy. The benefit of fewer policy surrenders is primarily received over a longer time period through the retention of the Company’s asset base. The surrender process has been impacted by temporary state rulings that have been implemented as a result of COVID-19 and in some cases will not allow life insurance companies to lapse policies temporarily.
Operating expenses decreased approximately 2% in 2020 compared to that of the same period in 2019. Expenses were comparable in all of the major categories for 2020 and 2019.
Effective January 1, 2017, the Company and FSNB began sharing certain services. The shared services focuses on departments commonly utilized by both organizations such as financial accounting, human resources and information technology. The shared services did not initially make a noticeable difference in operating expenses, but provides a larger team, which enhances capabilities and quality.
As mentioned above in the Overview section of the Management Discussion and Analysis, UTG has a strong philanthropic program. The Company generally allocates a portion of its earnings to be used for its philanthropic efforts primarily targeted to Christ-centered organizations or organizations that help the weak or poor. Charitable contributions made by the Company are expected to vary from year to year depending on the earnings of the Company.
Net amortization of cost of insurance acquired decreased approximately 4% when comparing current and prior year activity. Cost of insurance acquired is established when an insurance company is acquired or when the Company acquires a block of in-force business. The Company assigns a portion of its cost to the right to receive future profits from insurance contracts existing at the date of the acquisition. Cost of insurance acquired is amortized with interest in relation to expected future profits, including direct charge-offs for any excess of the unamortized asset over the projected future profits. The interest rates may vary due to risk analysis performed at the time of acquisition on the business acquired. The Company utilizes a 12% discount rate on the remaining unamortized business. The amortization is adjusted retrospectively when estimates of current or future gross profits to be realized from a group of products are revised. Amortization of cost of insurance acquired is particularly sensitive to changes in interest rate spreads and persistency of certain blocks of insurance in-force. This expense is expected to decrease, unless the Company acquires a new block of business.
Management continues to place significant emphasis on expense monitoring and cost containment. Maintaining administrative efficiencies directly impacts net income.
Financial Condition
Investment Information
Investments are the largest asset group of the Company. The Company's insurance subsidiary is regulated by insurance statutes and regulations as to the type of investments they are permitted to make, and the amount of funds that may be used for any one type of investment.
The following table reflects, by investment category, the investments held by the Company as of December 31:
The Company's investments are generally managed to match related insurance and policyholder liabilities. The comparison of investment return with insurance or investment product crediting rates establishes an interest spread. Interest crediting rates on adjustable rate policies have been reduced to their guaranteed minimum rates, and as such, cannot be lowered any further. Policy interest crediting rate changes and expense load changes become effective on an individual policy basis on the next policy anniversary. Therefore, it takes a full year from the time the change was determined for the full impact of such change to be realized. If interest rates decline in the future, the Company will not be able to lower rates and both net investment income and net income will be impacted negatively.
The Company’s total investments represented 82% and 85% of the Company’s total assets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Fixed maturities consistently represented a substantial portion, 48% and 49%, respectively, of the total investments during 2020 and 2019. The overall investment mix, as a percentage of total investments, remained fairly consistent when comparing the respective investments held as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
During 2019, the Company invested approximately $10.4 million in short-term treasury bills. The Company was holding a significant cash balance and determined it appropriate to invest in these short term treasuries to increase yield, while working to find longer-term quality investments to invest in.
As of December 31, 2020, the carrying value of fixed maturity securities in default as to principal or interest was immaterial in the context of consolidated assets, shareholders’ equity or results from operations. To provide additional flexibility and liquidity, the Company has identified all fixed maturity securities as "investments available for sale". Investments available for sale are carried at market value, with changes in market value charged directly to the other comprehensive component of shareholders' equity. Changes in the market value of available for sale securities resulted in net unrealized gains (losses) of approximately $9.1 million and $10.8 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The variance in the net unrealized gains and losses is the result of normal market fluctuations mainly related to changes in interest rates in the market place.
In March 2020, with the onset of the pandemic in America, financial markets became jittery experiencing a significant drop in the major market indices. In response, the Federal Reserve dropped interest rates to near zero. This action resulted in a drop in all other interest rates in the marketplace. While this increased the fair value of the Company’s current fixed income holdings, it made finding investments to acquire with any type of historic yield nearly impossible. The stock markets have experienced a rebound since that time; however, interest rates remain at historic low levels with short term rates at or near zero. Longer term bonds have experienced rate increases later in 2020 and into early 2021, but still remain below recent historic rates. Should rates remain at these levels, it will become increasingly more difficult for the Company to maintain its historic net investment income levels as existing investments mature and are replaced with lower yielding investments.
Management continues to view the Company’s investment portfolio with utmost priority. Significant time has been spent internally researching the Company’s risk and communicating with outside investment advisors about the current investment environment and ways to ensure preservation of capital and mitigate losses. Management has put extensive efforts into evaluating the investment holdings. Additionally, members of the Company’s Board of Directors and investment committee have been solicited for advice and provided with information. Management reviews the Company’s entire portfolio on a security level basis to be sure all understand our holdings, potential risks and underlying credit supporting the investments. Management intends to continue its close monitoring of its bond holdings and other investments for possible deterioration or market condition changes. Future events may result in Management’s determination that certain current investment holdings may need to be sold which could result in gains or losses in future periods. Such future events could also result in other than temporary declines in value that could result in future period impairment losses.
There are a number of significant risks and uncertainties inherent in the process of monitoring impairments and determining if impairment is other-than-temporary. These risks and uncertainties related to Management’s assessment of other-than-temporary declines in value include but are not limited to: the risk that Company's assessment of an issuer's ability to meet all of its contractual obligations will change based on changes in the credit characteristics of that issuer; the risk that the economic outlook will be worse than expected or have more of an impact on the issuer than anticipated; the risk that fraudulent information could be provided to the Company's investment professionals who determine the fair value estimates.
Liquidity
Liquidity provides the Company with the ability to meet on demand the cash commitments required by its business operations and financial obligations. The Company’s liquidity is primarily derived from cash balances, a portfolio of marketable securities and line of credit facilities. The Company has two principal needs for cash - the insurance company’s contractual obligations to policyholders and the payment of operating expenses.
Parent Company Liquidity
UTG is a holding company that has no day-to-day operations of its own. Cash flows from UTG’s insurance subsidiary, UG, are used to pay costs associated with maintaining the Company in good standing with states in which it does business and purchasing outstanding shares of UTG stock. UTG's cash flow is dependent on management fees received from its insurance subsidiary, stockholder dividends from its subsidiary and earnings received on cash balances. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, substantially all of the consolidated shareholders’ equity represents net assets of its subsidiaries. In 2020, the Parent company received $4 million in dividends from its insurance subsidiary and $6 million in 2019. Certain restrictions exist on the payment of dividends from the insurance subsidiary to the Parent company. For further information regarding the restrictions on the payment of dividends by the insurance subsidiary, see Note 9 - Shareholders’ Equity in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Although these restrictions exist, dividend availability from the insurance subsidiary has historically been sufficient to meet the cash flow needs of the Parent company.
Insurance Subsidiary Liquidity
Sources of cash flows for the insurance subsidiary primarily consist of premium and investment income. Cash outflows from operations include policy benefit payments, administrative expenses, taxes and dividends to the Parent company.
Short-Term Borrowings
An additional source of liquidity to the Parent company and its subsidiaries is the line of credit facilities extended to them. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company and its subsidiaries had available $18 million in line of credit facilities. The Company did not utilize its available credit facilities during 2019 or 2020. For additional information regarding the line of credit facilities, see Note 7 - Credit Arrangements in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Company expects to have readily available funds for the foreseeable future to conduct its operations and to maintain target capital ratios in the insurance subsidiary through internally generated cash flow and the credit facilities. In the unlikely event that more liquidity is needed, the Company could generate additional funds through such sources as a short-term credit facility and inter company borrowing.
Consolidated Liquidity
Cash used in operating activities was approximately $13.2 million and $6.5 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Sources of operating cash flows of the Company, as with most insurance entities, is comprised primarily of premiums received on life insurance products and income earned on investments. Uses of operating cash flows consist primarily of payments of benefits to policyholders and beneficiaries and operating expenses. The Company has not marketed any significant new products for several years. As such, premium revenues continue to decline. Management anticipates future cash flows from operations to remain similar to historic trends.
During 2020 and 2019, the Company’s investing activities provided net cash of approximately $27 million and $16.3 million, respectively. The Company recognized proceeds of approximately $80 million and $67.1 million from investments sold and matured in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company used approximately $53 million and $50.9 million to acquire investments during 2020 and 2019, respectively. The net cash provided by investing activities is expected to vary from year to year depending on market conditions and management’s ability to find and negotiate favorable investment contracts.
Net cash used in financing activities was approximately $3.4 million and $1.2 million during 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had no debt outstanding with third parties.
The Company had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $39 million and $28.8 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company has a portfolio of marketable fixed maturities and equity securities that could be sold, if an unexpected event were to occur. These securities had a fair value of approximately $165.8 million and $171.6 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. However, the strong cash flows from investing activities, investment maturities and the availability of the line of credit facilities make it unlikely that the Company would need to sell securities for liquidity purposes. See Note 2 - Investments in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for detailed disclosures regarding the Company’s investment portfolio.
Management believes the overall sources of liquidity available will be sufficient to satisfy its financial obligations.
Capital Resources
The Company’s capital structure consists of available short-term debt, long-term debt and shareholders’ equity. A complete analysis and description of the short-term and long-term debt issues available as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 are presented in Note 7 - Credit Arrangements in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Company had $0 debt outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The NAIC's risk-based capital requirements require insurance companies to calculate and report information under a risk-based capital formula. The risk-based capital (RBC) formula measures the adequacy of statutory capital and surplus in relation to investment and insurance risks such as asset quality, mortality and morbidity, asset and liability matching and other business factors. The RBC formula is used by state insurance regulators as an early warning tool to identify, for the purpose of initiating regulatory action, insurance companies that potentially are inadequately capitalized.
At December 31, 2020, UG has a ratio of approximately 6.40, which is 640% of the authorized control level. Accordingly, the Company meets the RBC requirements.
The Board of Directors of UTG has authorized the repurchase in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions of UTG's common stock. At a meeting of the Board of Directors in September of 2020, the Board of Directors of UTG authorized the repurchase of up to an additional $1.5 million of UTG’s common stock, for a total repurchase of $20 million. Repurchased shares are available for future issuance for general corporate purposes. Company Management has broad authority to operate the program, including the discretion of whether to purchase shares and the ability to suspend or terminate the program. Open market purchases are made based on the last available market price but may be limited. During 2020, the Company repurchased 112,907 shares through the stock repurchase program for approximately $3,313,154. Through December 31, 2020, UTG has spent approximately $18,086,249 in the acquisition of 1,282,265 shares under this program.
Shareholders’ equity was approximately $136.7 million and $131 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Total shareholders' equity increased approximately 4% in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase is primarily attributable to the change in accumulated other comprehensive income and retained earnings. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company reported accumulated other comprehensive income of approximately $15.6 million and $9 million, respectively.
For the periods ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the increase in accumulated other comprehensive income was approximately $6.6 million and $8.9 million, respectively, as a result of unrealized gains on fixed maturity securities. The variance in the net unrealized gains and losses is the result of normal market fluctuations mainly related to changes in interest rates in the marketplace.
The Company's investments provide sufficient return to cover future obligations. The Company carries all of its fixed maturity holdings as available for sale, which are reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements at their fair value.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 - Summary of Significant Account Policies in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding new accounting pronouncements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, financing activities or other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons.
Contractual Obligations
As a smaller reporting company, as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act and Item 10(f)(1) of Regulation S-K, the Company has elected to comply with certain scaled disclosure reporting obligations, and therefore does not have to provide the information required by this item.