Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes to our consolidated financial statements. All statements in this filing are made as of the date this Report is filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise these statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and other sections of this Report contain forward-looking statements made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the Exchange Act) and the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements, which are based on our beliefs and expectations about future outcomes and on information available to us through the date this Report on Form 10-K is filed with the SEC, include, among others, statements related to the following:
•The potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, results of operations, liquidity, and operations and our ability to mitigate those potential impacts;
•Expectations of revenues, expenses, profitability, and cash flows;
•The sufficiency of our cash on hand to support operations;
•Our ability to obtain financing on terms favorable to us or at all;
•Our ability to obtain and maintain domestic and international regulatory approvals;
•Our ability to maintain attractive pricing for our products, in light of increasing competition, including from generic products, and pressure from government and other payers to decrease the costs associated with healthcare;
•The expected volume and timing of sales of Remodulin, Tyvaso, Orenitram, Unituxin, and the Remunity Pump, as well as potential future commercial products, including the anticipated effect of various research and development efforts on sales of these products;
•The timing and outcome of clinical studies, other research and development efforts, and related regulatory filings and approvals;
•The potential timing and outcome of our anticipated launch of Tyvaso DPI, Trevyent, and the Implantable System for Remodulin;
•The timing and outcome of our supplemental NDA for Tyvaso to reflect the INCREASE study results;
•The timing and outcome of our NDA resubmission for Trevyent in response to the CRL;
•The outcome of pending and potential future legal and regulatory actions by the FDA and other regulatory and government enforcement agencies, and the anticipated duration of regulatory exclusivity for our products;
•The timing and outcome of the lawsuit filed against us by Sandoz and RareGen and our patent litigation with Liquidia related to its NDA for LIQ861;
•The impact of competing therapies on sales of our commercial products and the amount of inventory of our products that will expire unsold, including the impact of generic versions of Adcirca and Remodulin; established therapies such as Uptravi; and newly-developed therapies such as LIQ861;
•The expectation that we will be able to manufacture sufficient quantities and maintain adequate inventories of our commercial products, through both our in-house manufacturing capabilities and third-party manufacturing sites, and our ability to obtain and maintain related approvals by the FDA and other regulatory agencies;
•The adequacy of our intellectual property protection and the validity and expiration dates of the patents we own or license, as well as the regulatory exclusivity periods for our products;
•Any statements that include the words “believe,” “seek,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “forecast,” “project,” “intend,” “estimate,” “should,” “could,” “may,” “will,” “plan,” or similar expressions; and
•Other statements contained or incorporated by reference in this Report that are not historical facts.
We caution you that these statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to numerous evolving risks and uncertainties that we may not be able to accurately predict or assess, and that may cause our actual results to differ materially from anticipated results, including the risks and uncertainties we describe in Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors of this Report and factors described in other cautionary statements, cautionary language, and risk factors set forth in our other filings with the SEC.
2020 Annual Report 49
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
We are closely monitoring developments related to the COVID-19 pandemic and are making every effort to ensure we remain focused on the health and well-being of our patients and our employees while maintaining business continuity. It remains difficult to predict what impact this pandemic, and the associated economic impacts, will ultimately have on our business. While we remain confident in our prospects over the longer term, there is considerable uncertainty and lack of visibility regarding our near-term revenue growth prospects and product development plans due to the rapidly evolving situation.
Our financial position is strong. We believe our healthy balance sheet makes us well-positioned to endure the impact of this pandemic. With enough cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities on hand to fund our operations as we conduct them today for at least two years regardless of our future revenues, we are able to retain and hire new employees, continue our research and development and commercial activities, subject to the limitations described below, and make new strategic investments. We expect to be able to return to “normal” operations rapidly once pandemic-related restrictions and precautionary measures are no longer in force or advisable.
We have an ample supply of our products. To ensure access to our treprostinil-based products, and in accordance with our long-standing inventory policy, we have sufficient inventory of finished treprostinil-based drug products (Remodulin, Tyvaso, and Orenitram) to supply the market for at least two years at current levels of demand. In addition, we manufacture our own treprostinil active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) at our Silver Spring, Maryland facility and have three years’ worth of treprostinil API on hand at any given time, as well as a substantial inventory of the key raw material necessary to manufacture it. These products and API supplies are all stored at our own warehouses in the United States. Manufacturing of our treprostinil-based products, both internally and at our contract manufacturers, continues mostly as usual, and we do not currently anticipate any supply shortages of our treprostinil-based products.
We also have a significant amount of inventory of Unituxin drug supply and raw materials for additional production, and intend to continue manufacturing Unituxin in quantities sufficient to meet current patient demand. Unlike our treprostinil-based products, Unituxin is a biologic with a shorter shelf life, so our ability to maintain longer-term inventories is limited; however, we do not currently anticipate any supply shortages of Unituxin.
We have redundant qualified manufacturing sites for our two current best-selling products: Remodulin and Tyvaso. Should either site be impacted by an outbreak, production activities could be diverted to the other qualified site, each of which is capable of supplying the worldwide market. Our internal manufacturing and packaging operations are independently staffed and physically segregated by technical capability (e.g., oral solid dose, aseptic vial filling, etc.). If any internal operation is impacted by an outbreak, we believe that area and staff could shut down and isolate, respectively, without affecting the other manufacturing areas.
To date, we have not experienced any interruption of our supply of drug products and devices needed to support our ongoing clinical trials.
Distribution of drug product to patients continues without interruption. Specialty pharmacy distributors, which we require to maintain at least 30 days’ worth of inventory on hand at any given time, continue to ship our products to patients and hospitals. Specialty pharmacies have assured us that they have exercised their continuity plans to avoid supply disruptions. They have also assured us that their nursing support services, which are required for therapy initiation and over the course of treatment to train patients to safely administer their medicine, continue through a combination of in-person and virtual visits. Similarly, we are not aware of any disruption to the distribution of Unituxin treatment for patients with neuroblastoma. We have a contingency plan in place to secure alternative product transportation capability to deliver our products to distributors in the event traditional freight operations are disrupted.
Our commercial efforts continue but could be disrupted as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our commercial field-based teams are predominantly meeting with prescribing physicians virtually instead of in person, although we have recommenced in-person visits to those sites where it is possible to do so safely.
During the second quarter of 2020, we observed several COVID-19 related impacts on U.S. demand for our treprostinil-based therapies:
•In the second quarter of 2020, we saw a reduction in new patient prescriptions and new patient starts across all of our treprostinil-based products, which was due to the inability of patients to visit their physician’s office to determine whether our medicines may be appropriate, and physician concerns about initiating new PAH therapies via telemedicine. By the end of the third quarter, the number of new patient prescriptions and new patient starts had reached or exceeded pre-pandemic levels for all of our products, a trend that continued through the end of 2020.
•Drug shipments to patients during the second quarter were stable relative to prior quarters due to lower discontinuation rates for patients already on our medicines. Drug shipments steadily increased during the second half of the year, consistent with growth in the number of patients on our therapies.
•We believe the reduction in new patient starts had a negative impact on sales of Remodulin, and to a lesser extent Tyvaso and Orenitram, during the second quarter of 2020. During the second half of 2020, new patient starts recovered to pre-pandemic levels.
United Therapeutics
We have overcome pandemic-related delays in launching the Remunity Pump. We recently launched sales of the Remunity Pump for Remodulin in February 2021, following a delay due to pandemic-related issues impacting our partner DEKA’s ability to secure certain components and raw materials necessary to manufacture a continuous supply of pumps, pump disposables, and pump controllers. We launched the product once DEKA built safety stock of these components and raw materials to a level that we believe will allow us to withstand a significant supplier disruption without adverse impact to our patient base. We implemented this strategy due to the increasing COVID-19 infection rates observed in the United States during the second quarter of 2020, as many of the Remunity Pump component suppliers are located domestically. We will continue to closely monitor infection rates and their geographic intensity, which may cause us to increase safety stock further for certain suppliers based on location.
Our clinical studies remain open. Most of our ongoing clinical studies initially paused enrollment during the first quarter of 2020 due to the pandemic, but patients already enrolled in studies continued to receive the study drug and complete necessary clinical evaluations as appropriate. This enrollment pause has been lifted for all of our studies. However, we have only been able to re-open enrollment at a limited number of clinical trial sites, and it is difficult to predict when we will be able to re-open enrollment at additional sites for these studies, and whether we will experience further disruptions as the pandemic unfolds. In addition, it is unclear what impact the pandemic may have on the timing of future studies, such as TETON. As such, we expect that completion and data readouts for several of our ongoing and planned studies will be delayed, but we do not currently expect delays of our potential product launch plans relative to the near- and medium-term windows described in the table above under Part I, Item 1 - Business-Research and Development. To mitigate these delays, we expanded our efforts to enter into contracts with additional clinical study sites and complete other site activation activities for certain studies where practicable, so that we may rapidly resume enrollment of our clinical studies at the appropriate time.
For additional discussion of the risks to our business associated with COVID-19, please see the risk factor above entitled, We face risks and uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic, which could significantly disrupt our operations and/or business for an unknown period of time.
Overview of Marketed Products
We market and sell the following commercial products:
•Remodulin, a continuously-infused formulation of the prostacyclin analogue treprostinil, approved by the FDA for subcutaneous and intravenous administration to diminish symptoms associated with exercise in patients with PAH. Remodulin has also been approved in various countries outside of the United States. In February 2021, we launched sales of the Remunity Pump, a new subcutaneous delivery system for Remodulin.
•Tyvaso, an inhaled formulation of treprostinil, approved by the FDA and regulatory authorities in Argentina and Israel to improve exercise ability in PAH patients.
•Orenitram, a tablet dosage form of treprostinil, approved by the FDA to delay disease progression and improve exercise capacity in PAH patients.
•Unituxin, a monoclonal antibody approved by the FDA and Health Canada for the treatment of high-risk neuroblastoma.
•Adcirca, an oral PDE-5 inhibitor approved by the FDA to improve exercise ability in PAH patients.
For additional detail regarding our commercial products, see Part I, Item 1 - Business-Our Commercial Products.
Research and Development
We are engaged in research and development of new indications and delivery devices for our existing products. In particular, we are developing the Implantable System for Remodulin, Trevyent, and RemoLife, all of which are new delivery systems for Remodulin. We are developing Tyvaso DPI, a dry powder inhalation form of Tyvaso. We are studying Tyvaso in patients with WHO Group 3 pulmonary hypertension and in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
In addition, we are developing new products to treat PAH (OreniPro, RemoPro, ralinepag, and Aurora-GT). We are also heavily engaged in early-stage research and development of a number of organ transplantation-related technologies including regenerative medicine, xenotransplantation, and ex-vivo lung perfusion. Finally, we are engaged in additional, early-stage research and development efforts in PAH and other diseases. For additional detail regarding our research and development programs, see Part I, Item 1 - Business-Research and Development.
Revenues
Our net product sales consist of sales of the five commercial products noted above. We have entered into separate, non-exclusive distribution agreements with Accredo and CVS Specialty to distribute Remodulin, Tyvaso, and Orenitram in the United States, and we have entered into an exclusive distribution agreement with ASD, an affiliate of AmerisourceBergen Corporation, to distribute Unituxin in the United States. We also sell Remodulin, Tyvaso, and Unituxin to distributors internationally. We sell Adcirca
2020 Annual Report 51
through Lilly’s pharmaceutical wholesale network. To the extent we have increased the price of any of these products, increases have typically been in the single-digit percentages per year, except for Adcirca, the price of which is set solely by Lilly.
We require our specialty pharmaceutical distributors to maintain reasonable levels of inventory reserves because the interruption of Remodulin, Tyvaso, or Orenitram therapy can be life threatening. Our specialty pharmaceutical distributors typically place monthly orders based on current utilization trends and contractual minimum and maximum inventory requirements. As a result, sales of Remodulin, Tyvaso, and Orenitram can vary depending on the timing and magnitude of these orders and do not precisely reflect changes in patient demand.
Acquisition of SteadyMed Ltd.
On August 30, 2018, we completed the acquisition of SteadyMed. As consideration for the acquisition, we paid the former holders of SteadyMed securities approximately $141 million, and issued them contingent value rights to receive additional cash payments upon the achievement of a milestone defined as 3,000 patients initiating treatment using SteadyMed’s Trevyent product on a commercial basis on or before August 30, 2023 (the Milestone). Aggregate contingent consideration of $75.0 million will become payable if the Milestone is achieved.
Operating Expenses
Since our inception, we have devoted substantial resources to our various clinical trials and other research and development efforts, which are conducted both internally and through third parties. From time to time, we also license or acquire additional technologies and compounds to be incorporated into our development pipeline. Our operating expenses include the costs described below.
Cost of Product Sales
Our cost of product sales primarily includes costs to manufacture and acquire products sold to customers, royalty, and milestone payments under license agreements granting us rights to sell related products, direct and indirect distribution costs incurred in the sale of products, and the costs of inventory reserves for current and projected obsolescence. These costs also include share-based compensation and salary-related expenses for direct manufacturing and indirect support personnel, quality review and release for commercial distribution, direct materials and supplies, depreciation, facilities-related expenses, and other overhead costs. We will remain liable for returns of expired Adcirca product even after our license agreement with Lilly expires on December 31, 2023, after which we will no longer be able to sell Adcirca, unless we and Lilly agree to extend the term of our license agreement.
Research and Development
Our research and development expenses primarily include costs associated with the research and development of products and post-marketing research commitments. These costs also include share-based compensation and salary-related expenses for research and development functions, professional fees for preclinical and clinical studies, costs associated with clinical manufacturing, facilities-related expenses, regulatory costs, and costs associated with pre-FDA approval payments to third-party contract manufacturers. Expenses also include costs for third-party arrangements, including upfront fees and milestone payments required under license arrangements for therapies under development. We have incurred, and expect to continue to incur, significant clinical trial-related expenses, driven by the expansion of our pipeline programs.
Selling, General, and Administrative
Our selling, general, and administrative expenses primarily include costs associated with the commercialization of approved products and general and administrative costs to support our operations. Selling expenses also include share-based compensation, salary-related expenses, product marketing and sales operations costs, and other costs incurred to support our sales efforts. General and administrative expenses also include our core corporate support functions such as human resources, finance, and legal, external costs to support our core business such as insurance premiums, legal fees, and other professional service fees.
We recently expanded our sales, marketing, and medical affairs staff by approximately 30 employees in anticipation of the potential launch of Tyvaso for patients with PH-ILD, which has increased our compensation expenses.
Share-Based Compensation
Historically, we granted stock options under our Amended and Restated Equity Incentive Plan (the 1999 Plan) and awards under our Share Tracking Awards Plans (STAP). Issuance of awards under these plans was discontinued in 2015. Currently, we grant
United Therapeutics
stock options and restricted stock units under the United Therapeutics Corporation Amended and Restated 2015 Stock Incentive Plan (as amended to date, the 2015 Plan), which provides for the issuance of up to 10,000,000 shares of our common stock, including the 500,000 shares added pursuant to an amendment and restatement of the 2015 Plan approved by our shareholders in June 2020. In February 2019, our Board of Directors approved the 2019 Inducement Stock Incentive Plan (the 2019 Inducement Plan), which provides for the issuance of up to 99,000 shares of our common stock pursuant to awards granted to newly-hired employees. Currently, we grant equity-based awards to employees and members of our Board of Directors in the form of stock options and restricted stock units under the 2015 Plan, and we grant restricted stock units to newly-hired employees under the 2019 Inducement Plan. The grant date fair values of stock options and restricted stock units are recognized as share-based compensation expense ratably over their vesting periods.
The fair value of STAP awards and stock options is measured using inputs and assumptions under the Black-Scholes-Merton model. The fair value of restricted stock units is measured using our stock price on the date of grant. Although we no longer grant STAP awards, we still had approximately 2.1 million STAP awards outstanding as of December 31, 2020. We account for STAP awards as liabilities because they are settled in cash. As such, we must re-measure the fair value of STAP awards at the end of each financial reporting period until the awards are no longer outstanding. Changes in our STAP liability resulting from such re-measurements are recorded as adjustments to share-based compensation expense (benefit) and can create substantial volatility within our operating expenses from period to period. The following factors, among others, have a significant impact on the amount of share-based compensation expense (benefit) recognized in connection with STAP awards from period to period: (1) volatility in the price of our common stock (specifically, increases in the price of our common stock will generally result in an increase in our STAP liability and related compensation expense, while decreases in our stock price will generally result in a reduction in our STAP liability and related compensation expense); and (2) changes in the number of outstanding awards.
Future Prospects
We anticipate revenue growth in 2021 compared to 2020, driven primarily by: (1) growth in sales of Tyvaso in the event the FDA approves our pending sNDA to expand its label to include treatment of PH-ILD; (2) continued growth in the number of patients prescribed with Orenitram following our expansion of the Orenitram label to reflect the results of the FREEDOM-EV study; and (3) modest price increases for some of our products; partially offset by further generic erosion for Adcirca. We believe additional revenue growth beyond 2021 will be driven by commercializing five key therapeutic platforms in our pipeline, which are comprised of the enabling technologies described below:
Platform Enabling Technologies
Remodulin (parenteral treprostinil) Remunity Pump, Implantable System for Remodulin, Trevyent, RemoLife, RemoPro
Tyvaso (inhaled treprostinil) INCREASE study, PERFECT study, Tyvaso DPI, TETON studies
Orenitram (oral treprostinil) OreniPro
New Chemical Entities and New Biologics Ralinepag, SAPPHIRE study, Unexisome
Organ Manufacturing and Transplantation Xenotransplantation, three-dimensional organ printing, regenerative medicine, ex-vivo lung perfusion
We believe this diverse portfolio of five therapeutic platforms will lead to significant revenue growth over the medium- and longer-term. For further details regarding our research and development initiatives, please see Part I, Item 1 - Business-Research and Development.
Our ability to achieve our objectives, grow our business, and maintain profitability will depend on many factors, including among others: (1) the timing and outcome of preclinical research, clinical trials, and regulatory approvals for products we develop; (2) the timing and degree of our success in commercially launching new products; (3) the demand for our products; (4) the price of our products and the reimbursement of our products by public and private health insurance organizations; (5) the competition we face within our industry, including competition from generic companies and new PAH therapies; (6) our ability to effectively manage our business in an increasingly complex legal and regulatory environment; (7) our ability to defend against challenges to our patents; (8) the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic; and (9) the risks identified in Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors, included in this Report.
We operate in a highly competitive market in which a small number of large pharmaceutical companies control a majority of available PAH therapies. These pharmaceutical companies are well established in the market and possess greater financial, technical, and marketing resources than we do. In addition, there are a number of investigational products in late-stage development that, if approved, may erode the market share of our existing commercial therapies and make market acceptance more difficult to achieve for any therapies we attempt to market in the future.
2020 Annual Report 53
Results of Operations
This section of this Report generally discusses 2020, 2019, and 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Report can be found in Part II, Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations of our Form 10-K filed on February 26, 2020 (our 2019 Annual Report).
Revenues
The table below presents the components of total revenues (dollars in millions):
Net product sales from our treprostinil-based products (Remodulin, Tyvaso, and Orenitram) grew by $65.2 million in 2020, as compared to 2019. This increase was driven by growth in U.S. net product sales from our treprostinil-based products of $122.6 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, partially offset by a decline in net product sales outside the U.S. from our treprostinil-based products of $57.4 million, as compared to 2019.
Remodulin net product sales decreased in 2020 as compared to 2019, driven by a $56.6 million decrease in sales outside the United States, primarily due to a decline in quantities sold, which we believe resulted from generic competition and the impact of COVID-19. U.S. Remodulin net product sales decreased by $13.7 million, as compared to 2019, which we believe primarily resulted from a reduction in new patient prescriptions and new patient starts that we experienced in the second quarter of 2020 due to the impact of COVID-19, as described above under Impact of COVID-19 on our Business.
Tyvaso net product sales increased in 2020 as compared to 2019, due to an increase in quantities sold, reflecting a growing number of patients, and price increases.
Orenitram net product sales increased in 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily resulting from an increase in quantities sold, reflecting a growing number of patients that we believe was driven by the expansion of Orenitram’s labeling to reflect the FREEDOM-EV clinical trial results.
Adcirca net product sales decreased in 2020, as compared to 2019, due to a continuing decline in bottles sold as a result of generic competition for Adcirca.
United Therapeutics
Gross-to-Net Deductions
We recognize revenues net of: (1) rebates and chargebacks; (2) prompt pay discounts; (3) allowance for sales returns; and (4) distributor fees. These are referred to as gross-to-net deductions and are primarily based on estimates reflecting historical experiences as well as contractual and statutory requirements. We currently estimate our allowance for sales returns using reports from our distributors and available industry data, including our estimate of inventory remaining in the distribution channel. The tables below include a reconciliation of the liability accounts associated with these deductions (in millions):
2020 Annual Report 55
Cost of Product Sales
The table below summarizes cost of product sales by major category (dollars in millions):
(1)Refer to Share-Based Compensation section below for discussion.
(2)Calculation is not meaningful.
Cost of product sales, excluding share-based compensation. The decrease in cost of product sales for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, was primarily attributable to decreases in royalty expense for Adcirca, as fewer bottles were sold following the onset of generic competition for Adcirca beginning in August 2018.
Research and Development
The table below summarizes research and development expense by major category (dollars in millions):
(1)Refer to Share-Based Compensation section below for discussion.
(2)Calculation is not meaningful.
Research and development, excluding share-based compensation. The decrease in research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, was due to a one-time, $800.0 million up-front payment to Arena under our licensing agreement related to ralinepag during the year ended December 31, 2019. The remainder of the decrease resulted primarily from: (1) the completion of the phase 3 BEAT study of esuberaprost in April 2019, the completion of the phase 3 DISTINCT study of Unituxin in February 2020, and the discontinuation of the phase 3 SOUTHPAW study of Orenitram in October 2019; (2) a decrease in spending due to terminated drug delivery device projects; and (3) an impairment charge related to the termination of a license agreement during the year ended December 31, 2019.
United Therapeutics
Selling, General, and Administrative
The table below summarizes selling, general, and administrative expense by major category (dollars in millions):
(1)Refer to Share-Based Compensation section below for discussion.
Share-Based Compensation
The table below summarizes share-based compensation expense (benefit) by major category (dollars in millions):
The table below summarizes share-based compensation expense (benefit) by line item on our consolidated statements of operations (dollars in millions):
(1)Calculation is not meaningful.
The increase in share-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, was primarily due to: (1) an increase in STAP expense driven by a 72 percent increase in our stock price during 2020 as compared to a 19 percent decrease in our stock price during 2019; and (2) an increase in restricted stock unit expense due to additional awards of restricted stock units granted and outstanding in 2020, partially offset by a decrease in stock option expense due to fewer awards granted and outstanding in 2020. Refer to Note 8-Share-Based Compensation, to our consolidated financial statements for more information.
2020 Annual Report 57
Other Income (Expense), Net
The increase in other income (expense), net of $26.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, was primarily due to the recognition of net unrealized and realized gains on our investments in privately-held companies and our publicly-traded equity securities. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized $25.5 million and $1.2 million, of net unrealized and realized gains, respectively, on our investments in privately-held companies. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized $25.1 million and $21.4 million of net unrealized and realized gains, respectively, on our publicly-traded equity securities. Refer to Note 4-Investments, to our consolidated financial statements for more information.
Impairments of Investments in Privately-Held Companies
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded $9.1 million and zero, respectively, of impairment charges related to our investments in privately-held companies.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Income tax expense was $124.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to income tax benefit of $60.5 million for the same period in 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the income tax benefit resulted primarily from the $800.0 million payment under our license agreement with Arena which caused us to incur a net loss before taxes. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our effective income tax rates (ETR) were approximately 19 percent and 37 percent, respectively. Changes to the ETR for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were primarily due to tax credits partially offset by non-deductible compensation which decreased our tax expense for 2020 and increased our tax benefit for 2019. For additional details, refer to Note 10-Income Taxes to our consolidated financial statements.
Financial Condition, Liquidity, and Capital Resources
We have funded our operations principally through sales of our commercial products and, from time-to-time, third-party financing arrangements. We believe that our current liquidity is sufficient to fund ongoing operations and future business plans as we expect long-term revenues from our commercial products, excluding Adcirca, to continue to grow due to our work on development of new products and label expansions for existing products. Furthermore, our customer base remains stable and we believe it presents minimal credit risk. However, any projections of future cash flows are inherently subject to uncertainty and we may seek other forms of financing. In June 2018, we entered into a credit agreement (the Credit Agreement), which provides an unsecured, revolving line of credit of up to $1.5 billion. Our aggregate outstanding balance under the Credit Agreement was $800.0 million and $850.0 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We classified the entire outstanding balance under the Credit Agreement, which matures in 2025, as a non-current liability on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2019, we classified $250.0 million of the outstanding principal balance as a current liability because we intended, at such time, to repay this amount within one year. As of March 31, 2020, we decided not to repay a portion of the loan within one year out of an abundance of caution given the uncertainty surrounding the current COVID-19 pandemic and its potential impact on our business. See Unsecured Revolving Credit Facility below for further details.
For information regarding the fluctuation explanations between 2019 and 2018, refer to our 2019 Annual Report.
Cash and Cash Equivalents and Marketable Investments
Cash and cash equivalents and marketable instruments comprise the following (dollars in millions):
United Therapeutics
Cash Flows
Cash flows comprise the following (dollars in millions):
Year Ended December 31, Percentage Change
2020 2019 2018 2020 v. 2019 2019 v. 2018
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities $ 755.7 $ (206.6) $ 778.4 466 % (127) %
Net cash used in investing activities $ (738.5) $ (335.4) $ (820.6) (120) % 59 %
Net cash (used in) provided by financing activities $ (16.9) $ 611.2 $ 6.3 (103) % NM(1)
(1)Calculation is not meaningful.
Operating Activities
Our operating assets and liabilities consist primarily of accounts receivable, inventories, accounts payable, accrued expenses, liabilities for our STAP awards, and tax-related payables and receivables.
The decrease of $962.3 million in net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to: (1) an $854.0 million decrease in research and development expense, excluding share-based compensation expense (benefit), primarily driven by an $800.0 million upfront payment to Arena under our license agreement related to ralinepag, which occurred during the year ended December 31, 2019; (2) a $27.4 million decrease in cash paid for income taxes; and (3) a $20.3 million decrease in cash paid for interest, partially offset by a $18.5 million increase in cash paid to settle STAP awards. The remainder of the change in cash used in operating activities was due to other changes in assets and liabilities.
Investing Activities
The increase of $403.1 million in net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to a $450.4 million increase in cash used for total purchases, sales, and maturities of marketable investments, partially offset by: (1) a $24.4 million decrease in cash paid to purchase property, plant, and equipment; (2) a $12.5 million decrease in cash used due to deconsolidation of a variable interest entity in 2019; and (3) an $8.0 million decrease in cash paid to purchase investments in privately held companies.
Financing Activities
The decrease of $628.1 million in net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to $800.0 million that we borrowed under our Credit Agreement, which was used to fund an $800.0 million upfront payment under our license agreement with Arena during the year ended December 31, 2019, partially offset by: (1) a $200.0 million repayment on our line of credit during the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to a $50.0 million repayment on our line of credit during the same period in 2020; and (2) a $23.9 million increase in proceeds from the exercise of stock options due to more exercises in 2020 compared to 2019. The higher volume of exercises in 2020 was driven by a 72 percent increase in our stock price during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a 19 percent decrease in our stock price during 2019.
Unsecured Revolving Credit Facility
In June 2018, we entered into the Credit Agreement, which provides for an unsecured revolving credit facility of up to $1.5 billion. On June 27, 2018, we borrowed $250.0 million under this facility and used the funds to repay outstanding indebtedness under a previous credit facility that was terminated in 2018. In January 2019, we borrowed an additional $800.0 million under this facility and used the funds for an upfront payment related to the global license agreement with Arena. We paid down $50.0 million and $200.0 million of our balance under the Credit Agreement for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The aggregate balance of $800.0 million remained outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and February 24, 2021. Refer to Note 7-Debt-Credit Agreement, to our consolidated financial statements.
2020 Annual Report 59
Contractual Obligations
At December 31, 2020, we had the following contractual obligations (in millions):
(1)Long-term debt obligations include future principal and interest payments on our LIBOR-based variable rate obligations under the Credit Agreement, assuming contractual maturity of the Credit Agreement. The Credit Agreement will mature in December 2025, and as of December 31, 2020, we have classified the entire $800.0 million outstanding balance as a non-current liability, as we have no intention to repay any portion during 2021. Refer to Note 7-Debt to our consolidated financial statements for further details.
(2)Estimated based on the intrinsic value of exercisable outstanding STAP awards as of December 31, 2020. Refer to Note 8-Share-Based Compensation to our consolidated financial statements for further details.
(3)Consists of actuarially derived, undiscounted, estimated future payouts of benefits. Refer to Note 11-Employee Benefit Plans-Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan to our consolidated financial statements for further details.
(4)Purchase obligations primarily include: (1) commitments related to research and development (including clinical trials) for new and existing products; (2) open purchase orders for capital expenditures primarily related to our continued investment in construction of additional facilities to support the development and commercialization of our products and technologies; and (3) open purchase orders for the acquisition of goods and services in the ordinary course of business. The timing and amount of our obligations may differ based on certain future events.
(5)In addition to amounts in the table above, we are contractually obligated to make payments upon the achievement of various development, regulatory, and commercial milestones for agreements we have entered into with third parties. These payments are contingent upon the occurrence of various future events, some of which have a high degree of uncertainty of occurring. These contingent payments have not been included in the table above, and, except with respect to the fair value of the contingent consideration obligations, are not recorded on our consolidated balance sheets. Consistent with other contingent payment obligations, the $105.0 million payment to acquire a rare pediatric disease priority review voucher that was paid on January 21, 2021 was not included within the table above because the acquisition was contingent on the satisfaction of certain conditions, including the expiration or early termination of the waiting period under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvement Act of 1976. Refer to Note 12-Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements for further details.
(6)As of December 31, 2020, our other non-current liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets includes a liability of $4.9 million for unrecognized tax benefits, including related interest and penalties. Due to the high degree of uncertainty on the timing of future events that could extinguish these unrecognized tax benefits, we are unable to estimate the period of settlement and therefore we have excluded these unrecognized tax benefits from the table above. Refer to Note 10-Income Taxes to our consolidated financial statements for further details.
Obligations Under License Agreements
We pay Lilly a royalty equal to ten percent of our net product sales of Adcirca, as well as milestone payments equal to $325,000 for each $1,000,000 in Adcirca net product sales. We pay a single-digit percentage royalty based on net product sales of Orenitram under our license agreement with Supernus. We also pay The Scripps Research Institute a one percent royalty on sales of Unituxin. We have entered into other license agreements under which we are required to make milestone payments upon the achievement of certain developmental and commercialization objectives and royalty payments upon the commercialization of products covered by the license agreements. Refer to Note 12-Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements for further details.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We hold an interest in an unconsolidated variable interest entity (VIE). We determined that we are not the primary beneficiary of this entity. As a result, we do not consolidate this VIE. Refer to Note 4-Investments-Variable Interest Entities. We do not have any other off-balance sheet arrangements within the meaning of Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K.
United Therapeutics
Summary of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (GAAP). GAAP requires that we make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts and timing reported in our consolidated financial statements. As we become aware of updated information or new developments, these estimates and assumptions may change and materially impact reported amounts. We consider the following accounting policies to be critical to our consolidated financial statements because they require the use of our judgment and estimates (including those that are forward-looking) in their application.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenues from the sale of our five commercial products: Remodulin, Tyvaso, Orenitram, Unituxin, and Adcirca. Revenue is recognized when we transfer control of our products to our distributors, as our contracts have a single performance obligation (delivery of our product). These revenues are subject to various product sales allowances, referred to as gross-to-net deductions, which are deducted from revenues to determine net product sales. For a description of our related accounting policies, refer to Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Revenue Recognition to our consolidated financial statements.
The following categories of gross-to-net deductions involve the use of significant estimates and judgments and information obtained from external sources.
Rebates and Chargebacks
Our most significant rebates relate to our participation in state Medicaid programs and contractual rebates offered to managed care organizations covering Medicare Part D and commercial plans. Chargebacks relate to our participation in programs with the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and 340B covered entities. Although we accrue for our allowance for rebates and chargebacks in the same period that we recognize revenue, the actual rebate or chargeback on the sale of our product to a distributor is not invoiced to us until a future period, generally within six months from the date of sale. Due to this time lag, we must estimate the amount of rebates and chargebacks to accrue. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had a liability of $60.7 million and $51.7 million, respectively, related to rebates and chargebacks.
Estimates associated with our participation in state Medicaid programs are particularly susceptible to adjustment given the extensive time lag that may occur between our recording of an accrual and its ultimate invoicing by individual state Medicaid programs, which can occur up to several years after the sale of our product. Because of the time lag for Medicaid and other rebates, in any particular quarter, our adjustments may incorporate revisions of accruals for prior quarters. Historically, adjustments to our estimates to reflect actual results or updated expectations have not been material to our overall financial results. Provisions attributed to sales in prior periods have been less than one percent of our net product sales for each of the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Allowance for Sales Returns
The sales terms for Adcirca and Unituxin include return rights; however, we have not recorded an allowance for returns of Unituxin because our historical returns have been insignificant. For our sales of Adcirca, we record an allowance for returns in the same period that we recognize revenue. Return rights extend throughout the distribution channel and allow for returns of expired product for up to 12 months after the product’s expiration date. As there are generally 24 to 36 months from the initial sale of Adcirca to its expiration date, we must estimate the amount of product that will be returned. Historically, actual returns have not differed materially from our estimates. Following the loss of exclusivity for Adcirca in the second quarter of 2018, we may experience an elevated level of product returns as product inventory remaining in the distribution channel expires. We will remain liable for returns of expired Adcirca product even after our license agreement with Lilly expires on December 31, 2023, after which we will no longer be able to sell Adcirca unless we and Lilly agree to extend the term of our license agreement.
For a roll-forward of the liability accounts associated with our gross-to-net deductions, see the section above entitled Results of Operations-Revenues.
2020 Annual Report 61
Share-Based Compensation
Our share-based awards are classified as either liabilities (STAP awards) or as equity (stock options, restricted stock units, and rights to purchase stock under our employee stock purchase plan). We recognize related share-based compensation expense based on (1) the fair value of outstanding STAP awards on the grant date and at the end of each reporting period; (2) the grant date fair value of stock options and restricted stock units; and (3) the purchase date fair value of stock under our employee stock purchase plan. With the exception of restricted stock units, we estimate the fair value of all share-based awards using the Black-Scholes-Merton valuation model. We measure the fair value of restricted stock units using the stock price on the grant date. Valuation models, like the Black-Scholes-Merton model, require the use of subjective assumptions that could materially impact the estimation of fair value and related compensation expense to be recognized. These assumptions include the expected volatility of our stock price and the expected term of awards. Developing these assumptions requires the use of judgment. For additional information on the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes-Merton valuation model, see Note 8-Share-Based Compensation, to our consolidated financial statements.
Performance-Based Stock Options
In March 2017 and March 2018, we issued stock options with performance conditions under the 2015 Plan. The awards have vesting conditions tied to the achievement of specified performance conditions. The performance conditions have target performance levels that span from one to three years. Throughout the performance period, we re-assess the estimated performance and update the number of performance-based awards that we believe will ultimately vest. Upon the conclusion of the performance period, the performance level achieved will be measured and the ultimate number of shares that may vest will be determined. The estimation of future performance requires the use of judgment. As of December 31, 2020, the performance period for these awards had ended, and the awards granted in March 2017 had vested. Share-based compensation expense for these awards is recorded ratably over their vesting period, depending on the specific terms of the award and achievement of the specified performance conditions.
In-Process Research and Development
As part of our business strategy, we sometimes acquire businesses or in-license the rights to develop and commercialize product candidates. For each in-license transaction, we evaluate whether we have acquired processes or activities along with inputs that would be sufficient to constitute a “business” as defined under GAAP. As defined under GAAP, a “business” consists of inputs and processes applied to those inputs that have the ability to create outputs. Although businesses usually have outputs, outputs are not required for an integrated set of activities to qualify as a business. When we determine that we have not acquired sufficient processes or activities to constitute a business, any up-front payments, as well as pre-commercial milestone payments, are immediately expensed as acquired in-process research and development (IPR&D) in the period in which they are incurred. In connection with an exclusive license agreement with Arena, we paid Arena $800.0 million, which was expensed as acquired IPR&D and included within research and development expenses on our consolidated statements of operations in 2019. Refer to Note 15-Arena License Agreement, to our consolidated financial statements. Milestone payments made to third parties subsequent to regulatory approval are capitalized as intangible assets and amortized over the estimated remaining useful life of the related product.
Acquired businesses are accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting. The acquisition purchase price is allocated to the net assets of the acquired business at their respective fair values. For an acquired business, amounts allocated to IPR&D are recorded at fair value and are considered indefinite-lived intangible assets subject to annual impairment testing until completion or abandonment of the research and development efforts. Upon completion of a project, the carrying value of the related IPR&D asset is reclassified to finite-lived intangible assets and is amortized over the estimated useful life of the asset. Our fair value assessments are highly reliant on various assumptions which are considered Level 3 inputs, including estimates of future cash flows (including long-term growth rates), discount rates, and the probability of achieving the estimated cash flows. In August 2018, we completed the acquisition of SteadyMed and acquired IPR&D related to the development of Trevyent. We determined that the fair value of the acquired IPR&D was $107.3 million.
IPR&D projects acquired in a business combination which have not reached technological feasibility or lack regulatory approval at the time of acquisition are reviewed for impairment annually, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable and upon establishment of technological feasibility or regulatory approval. We determine impairment by comparing the fair value of the IPR&D asset to its carrying value. If the IPR&D asset’s carrying value exceeds its fair value, an impairment charge is recorded for the difference and its carrying value is reduced accordingly.
Estimating future cash flows of an IPR&D product candidate for purposes of an impairment analysis requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions regarding the amount and timing of costs to complete the project and the amount, timing, and probability of achieving revenues from the completed product similar to how the acquisition date fair value of the project was determined, as described above. There are often major risks and uncertainties associated with IPR&D projects as we are required to obtain regulatory approvals in order to be able to market these products. Such approvals require completing clinical trials that demonstrate a product candidate is safe and effective. Consequently, the eventual realized value of the acquired IPR&D project may vary from its fair value at the date of acquisition, and IPR&D impairment charges may occur in future periods which could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations.
United Therapeutics
Investments in Privately-Held Companies
We have investments in several privately-held companies that have a strategic connection to our business, all of which are non-controlling equity investments in the form of preferred stock. Upon adoption of ASU 2016-01 on January 1, 2018, we began to measure these investments using the measurement alternative under ASC 321 because the fair values of these investments are not readily determinable. Under the measurement alternative, these investments are measured at cost, less any impairment, adjusted for observable price changes. We monitor these investments individually for any observable price changes or impairment indicators. We adjust the measurement of these investments for observable price changes in orderly transactions for the identical or a similar investment of the same issuer. We consider relevant transactions, including any potential funding opportunities, which occur on or before the balance sheet date in evaluating whether any observable price changes have occurred. When a relevant transaction is identified, a careful review of the attendant rights and obligations, such as voting rights, liquidation preferences, and protective provisions, is necessary to evaluate whether such transaction is deemed to be a similar or identical investment. When a transaction is identified as similar or identical to our investment, we perform a valuation analysis to assess the fair value of our investment using various inputs, such as the discount rate, time to a liquidation event, and price volatility of peer company stocks. We adjust the fair value of our investment based on this valuation analysis and recognize the gain or loss in the period in which the observable price change occurred.
At each reporting date, we review these investments individually for impairment by evaluating whether events or circumstances have occurred that may have a significant adverse effect on the fair value of the investments. If such events or circumstances have occurred, we will estimate the fair value of the investment. In such cases, we determine the estimated fair value of the investment using unobservable inputs including assumptions by the company’s management. Because several of these companies are in the early startup or development stages, these entities are more likely to be subject to potential changes in cash flows, valuation, and ability to attract new investors which may be necessary for the liquidity needed to support their operations. If we determine that a decline in the value of an investment has occurred, we recognize an impairment loss in the period in which the decline occurs. If our percentage ownership increases or our ability to direct or control management increases, we could be required to account for one or more of these investments under the equity method of accounting or consolidate the company’s operations for financial accounting purposes. Refer to Note 4-Investments-Investments in Privately-Held Companies, to our consolidated financial statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 3-Recently Issued Accounting Standards, to our consolidated financial statements for information on our anticipated adoption of recently issued accounting standards.