ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to assist in an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes in “Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” below. Except for the historical information contained herein, the discussions in this MD&A contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our future results could differ materially from those discussed herein. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed above under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors.”
Overview
We develop, market, and underwrite insurance products for consumers predominantly in the personal residential homeowners lines of business and perform substantially all other insurance-related services for our primary insurance entities, including risk management, claims management and distribution. Our primary insurance entities, UPCIC and APPCIC, offer insurance products through both our appointed independent agent network and our online distribution channels across 19 states (primarily in Florida), with licenses to write insurance in an additional two states. The Insurance Entities seek to produce an underwriting profit (defined as earned premium minus losses, LAE, policy acquisition costs and other operating costs) over the long term; maintain a conservative balance sheet to prepare for years in which the Insurance Entities are not able to achieve an underwriting profit; and generate investment income from invested assets.
Revenues
We generate revenue primarily from the collection of insurance premiums. Other sources of revenue include: commissions paid by our reinsurers to our reinsurance intermediary subsidiary BARC on reinsurance it places for the Insurance Entities; policy fees collected from policyholders by our managing general agent subsidiary, ERA (formerly Universal Risk Advisors, Inc.); and financing fees charged to policyholders who choose to defer premium payments. In addition, our subsidiary Alder receives fees from the Insurance Entities for claims-handling services. The Insurance Entities are reimbursed for these fees on claims that are subject to recovery under the Insurance Entities’ respective reinsurance programs. These fees, after expenses, are recorded in the consolidated financial statements as an adjustment to LAE. We also generate income by investing our assets.
The nature of our business tends to be seasonal during the year, reflecting consumer behaviors in connection with the Florida residential real estate market and the hurricane season. The amount of direct premiums written tends to increase just prior to the second quarter and tends to decrease approaching the fourth quarter.
Trends and Geographical Distribution
In recent years, the Florida personal residential insurance market has been characterized by increased losses and LAE due to abuses and inflated claims. These conditions have continued to worsen and have reached levels well beyond historical norms and levels experienced in other jurisdictions. The adverse conditions in the Florida personal residential insurance market can be attributed largely to the proliferation of represented claims, involving both public adjusters and attorneys, as well as by aggressive estimates and demands put forth by remediation and repair companies. In many cases, policyholders have representation even before the claims are filed or before the Company is able to provide an initial assessment of damages. In other instances, policyholder representatives are taking opportunities occasioned by hurricanes or other events to solicit customers to file other claims or to re-open prior claims, sometimes years after the purported dates of loss. These conditions are fostered in large part by the one-way right to attorneys’ fees against insurers provided under the Florida Insurance Code. These actions adversely affect both the frequency and severity of losses as otherwise understood based on historical patterns and patterns experienced in other states. See “Part I-Item 1A - Risk Factors-Risks Relating to Our Business and Operations-Actual claims incurred have exceeded, and in the future may exceed, reserves established for claims, adversely affecting our operating results and financial condition.”
The Company has taken a series of steps over time to mitigate the financial impact of these negative trends in the Florida market. We also have closely monitored rate levels, especially in the Florida market, and have submitted rate filings based upon evolving data. In addition, the Company has implemented several initiatives in its claims department in response to the adverse market trends. We utilize our process called Fast Track, which is an initiative to handle straightforward, meritorious claims as promptly as possible to mitigate the adverse impacts that can be seen with claims that remain open for longer periods. In addition, we increased our emphasis on subrogation to reduce our net losses while also recovering policyholders’ deductibles when losses are attributable to the actions of others. We have an internal staff of trained water remediation experts to address the extraordinary number of purported water damage claims filed by policyholders and vendors. We developed a specialized in-house unit for responding to the unique aspects of represented claims, and we have substantially increased our in-house legal staff in an effort to address the increase in litigated or represented claims as cost-effectively as possible.
Additionally, we have taken steps to implement claim settlement rules associated with the Florida legislation passed in 2019 designed to reduce the negative effects of claims involving assignments of benefits (“AOB”). See “Part I- Item 1 - Business-Government Regulation.” An AOB is a document signed by a policyholder that allows a third party to be paid for services performed for an insured homeowner who would normally be reimbursed by the insurance company directly after making a claim. Prior to the AOB reform legislation, the Company experienced an increase in the use of AOBs involving litigation by Florida policyholders. Claims paid under an AOB often involve unnecessary litigation, with the Company required to pay both its own defense costs and those of the plaintiff, and, as a result, cost the Company significantly more than claims settled when an AOB is not involved. In 2019, the Florida legislature passed legislation designed to increase consumer protections against AOB abuses and reduce AOB-related litigation. While the Florida legislation addressing abuses associated with AOBs may be beneficial in reducing one aspect of the concerns affecting the Florida market, the overall impact of the deterioration in claims-related tactics and behaviors, including other first-party litigation, thus far has continued to outpace benefits arising from the 2019 AOB reform legislation.
Despite our initiatives, such as those mentioned above, our costs to settle claims in Florida have increased for the reasons mentioned above. For example, the Company has previously increased its current year loss estimates and increased estimates associated with prior years’ claims. Over the past three years, even as we have increased our estimates of prospective losses each year, we have recorded adverse claim development on prior years’ loss reserves and further strengthened current year losses during the year to address the increasing impact Florida’s market disruptions have had on the claims process and the establishment of reserves for losses and LAE. The full extent and duration of these market disruptions is unknown and still unfolding, and we will monitor the impact of such disruptions on the recording and reporting of claim costs.
Direct premiums written continue to increase across the states we conduct business. As a result of our business strategy, rate changes and marketing and underwriting initiatives, we have seen increases in policy count, in-force premium and total insured value in almost all states for the past three years. Direct premiums written for states outside of Florida increased 17.7%, representing a $40.1 million increase during 2020. Direct premium for Florida increased 17.3%, representing a $184.6 million increase during 2020. The following table provides direct premiums written for Florida and other states for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
We seek to grow and generate long-term rate adequate premium in each state where we offer policies, including Florida. Diversified sources of business are an important objective and premium growth outside Florida is a measure monitored by management toward meeting that objective.
The geographical distribution of our policies in force, premium in force and total insured value across all states were as follows, as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (dollars in thousands, rounded to the nearest thousand):
Also see “Results of Operations” below and “Part I-Item 1A - Risk Factors-Risks Relating to Our Business and Operations-Because we conduct the majority of our business in Florida, our financial results depend on the regulatory, economic and weather conditions in Florida” for discussion on geographical diversification.
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
The Company considers the measures and ratios in the following discussion to be key performance indicators for its businesses. Management believes that these indicators are helpful in understanding the underlying trends in the Company’s businesses. Some of these indicators are reported on a quarterly basis and others on an annual basis. Please also refer to “Item 8 - Note 2 (Summary of Significant Accounting Policies)” for definitions of certain other terms we use when describing our financial results.
These indicators may not be comparable to other performance measures used by the Company’s competitors and should only be evaluated together with our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes.
Definitions of Key Performance Indicators
Book Value Per Common Share - the ratio of total stockholders’ equity, adjusted for preferred stock liquidation, divided by the number of common shares outstanding as of a reporting period. Book value per common share is the excess of assets over liabilities at a reporting period attributed to each share of stock. Changes in book value per common share informs shareholders of retained equity in the Company on a per share basis which may assist in understanding market value trends for the Company’s stock.
Combined Ratio - the combined ratio is a measure of underwriting profitability for a reporting period and is calculated by dividing total operating costs and expenses (which is made up of losses and LAE and general and administrative expenses) by premiums earned, net, which is net of ceded premiums earned. The combined ratio and changes to the ratio over time provide management with an understanding of costs to operate its business in relation to net premiums it is earning and the impact of rate, underwriting and other business management actions on underwriting profitability. A combined ratio below 100 indicates underwriting profit; a combined ratio above 100 indicates underwriting losses.
Core Loss Ratio - a common operational metric used in the insurance industry to describe the ratio of current accident year expected losses and LAE to premiums earned. Core loss ratio is an important measure identifying profitability trends of premiums in force. Core losses consists of all other losses and LAE, excluding weather events beyond those expected and prior years’ reserve development. The financial benefit from the management of claims, including claim fees ceded to reinsurers, is recorded in the condensed consolidated financial statements as a reduction to core losses.
Debt-to-Equity Ratio - long-term debt divided by stockholders’ equity. This ratio helps management measure the amount of financing leverage in place in relation to equity and future leverage capacity.
Debt-to-Total Capital Ratio - long-term debt divided by the sum of total stockholders’ equity and long-term debt (often referred to as total capital resources). This ratio helps management measure the amount of financing leverage in place (long-term debt) in relation to total capital resources and future leverage capacity.
Direct Premiums Written (“DPW”) - reflects the total value of policies issued during a period before considering premiums ceded to reinsurers. Direct premiums written, comprised of renewal premiums, endorsements and new business, is initially recorded as unearned premium in the balance sheet which is then earned pro-rata over the next year or remaining policy term. Direct premiums written reflects current trends in the Company’s sale of property and casualty insurance products and amounts that will be recognized as earned premiums in the future.
DPW (Florida) - includes only DPW in the state of Florida. This measure allows management to analyze growth in our primary market and is also a measure of business concentration risk.
Expense Ratio (Including Policy Acquisition Cost Ratio and Other Operating Cost Ratio) - calculated as general and administrative expenses as a percentage of premiums earned, net. General and administrative expenses is comprised of policy acquisition costs and other operating costs, which includes such items as underwriting costs, facilities and corporate overhead. The expense ratio, including the sub-expense ratios of policy acquisition cost ratio and other operating cost ratio, are indicators to management of the Company’s cost efficiency in acquiring and servicing its business and the impact of expense items to overall profitability.
Losses and Loss Adjustment Expense Ratio or Loss and LAE Ratio - a measure of the cost of claims and claim settlement expenses incurred in a reporting period as a percentage of premiums earned in that same reporting period. Losses and LAE incurred in a reporting period includes both amounts related to the current accident year and prior accident years, if any, referred to as development. Ultimate losses and LAE are based on actuarial estimates with changes in those estimates recognized in the period the estimates are revised. Losses and LAE consist of claim costs arising from claims occurring and settling in the current period, an estimate of claim costs for reported but unpaid claims, an estimate of unpaid claim costs for incurred-but-not-reported claims and an estimate of claim settlement expenses associated with reported and unreported claims which occurred during the reporting period. The loss and LAE ratio can be measured on a direct basis, which includes losses and LAE divided by direct earned premiums, or on a net basis, which includes losses and LAE after amounts have been ceded to reinsurers divided by net earned premiums (i.e., direct premium earned less ceded premium earned). The net loss and LAE ratio is a measure of underwriting profitability after giving consideration to the effect of reinsurance. Trends in the net loss and LAE ratio are an indication to management of current and future profitability.
Monthly Weighted Average Renewal Retention Rate - measures the monthly average of policyholders that renew their policies over the period of a calendar year. This measure allows management to assess customer retention.
Premiums Earned, Net - the pro-rata portion of current and previously written premiums that the Company recognizes as earned premium during the reporting period, net of ceded premium earned. Ceded premiums are premiums paid or payable by the Company for reinsurance protection. Written premiums are considered earned and are recognized pro-rata over the policy coverage period. Premiums earned, net is a measure that allows management to identify revenue trends.
Policies in Force - represents the number of active policies with coverage in effect as of the end of the reporting period. The change in the number of policies in force is a growth measure and provides management with an indication of progress toward achieving strategic objectives. Inherent seasonality in our business makes this measure more useful when comparing each quarter’s balance to the same quarter in prior years.
Premium in Force - is the amount of the annual direct written premiums previously recorded by the Company for policies which are still active as of the reporting date. This measure assists management in measuring the level of insured exposure and progress toward meeting revenue goals for the current year, and provides an indication of business available for renewal in the next twelve months. Inherent seasonality in our business makes this measure more useful when comparing each quarter’s balance to the same quarter in prior years.
Return on Average Equity (“ROAE”) - calculated by dividing earnings (loss) per common share by average book value per common share. Average book value per common share is computed as the sum of book value per common share at the beginning and the end of a period, divided by two. ROAE is a capital profitability measure of how effectively management creates profits per common share.
Total Insured Value - represents the amount of insurance limits available on a policy for a single loss based on all policies active as of the reporting date. This measure assists management in measuring the level of insured exposure.
Unearned Premiums - represents the portion of direct premiums corresponding to the time period remaining on an insurance policy and available for future earning by the Company. Trends in unearned premiums generally indicate expansion, if growing, or contraction, if reducing, which are important indicators to management. Inherent seasonality in our business makes this measure more useful when comparing each quarter’s balance to the same quarter in prior years.
Weather events - an estimate of losses and LAE from weather events occurring during the current accident year that exceed initial estimates of expected weather events when establishing the core loss ratio for each accident year. This metric informs management of factors impacting overall current year profitability.
REINSURANCE
Reinsurance enables our Insurance Entities to limit potential exposures to catastrophic events. Reinsurance contracts are typically classified as treaty or facultative contracts. Treaty reinsurance provides coverage for all or a portion of a specified group or class of risks ceded by the primary insurer, while facultative reinsurance provides coverage for specific individual risks. Within each classification, reinsurance can be further classified as quota share or excess of loss. Quota-share reinsurance is where the primary insurer and the reinsurer share proportionally or pro-rata in the direct premiums and losses of the insurer. Excess-of-loss reinsurance indemnifies the direct insurer or reinsurer for all or a portion of the loss in excess of an agreed upon amount or retention.
Developing and implementing our reinsurance strategy to adequately protect our balance sheet and Insurance Entities in the event of one or more catastrophes while maintaining efficient reinsurance costs has been a key strategic priority for us. In order to limit the Insurance Entities’ potential exposure to catastrophic events, we purchase significant reinsurance from third-party reinsurers and the FHCF. The FLOIR requires the Insurance Entities, like all residential property insurance companies doing business in Florida, to have a certain amount of capital and reinsurance coverage in order to cover losses upon the occurrence of a single catastrophic event and a series of catastrophic events occurring in the same hurricane season. The Insurance Entities’ respective 2020-2021 reinsurance programs meet the FLOIR’s requirements, which are based on, among other things, successfully demonstrating cohesive and comprehensive reinsurance programs that protect the policyholders of our Insurance Entities as well as satisfying a series of stress test catastrophe loss scenarios based on past historical events.
We believe the Insurance Entities’ retentions under their respective reinsurance programs are appropriate and structured to protect policyholders. We test the sufficiency of the reinsurance programs by subjecting the Insurance Entities’ personal residential exposures to statistical testing using a third-party hurricane model, RMS RiskLink v18.1 (Build 1945). This model combines simulations of the natural occurrence patterns and characteristics of hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes and other catastrophes with information on property values, construction types and occupancy classes. The model outputs provide information concerning the potential for large losses before they occur, so companies can prepare for their financial impact. Furthermore, as part of our operational excellence initiatives, we continually look to enable new technology to refine our data intelligence on catastrophe risk modeling.
Effective June 1, 2020, the Insurance Entities entered into multiple reinsurance agreements comprising our 2020-2021 reinsurance program. See “Part II-Item 8 - Note 4 (Reinsurance).”
UPCIC’s 2020-2021 Reinsurance Program
•First event All States retention of $43 million; first event Non-Florida retention of $15 million.
•All States first event tower extends to $3.36 billion with no co-participation in any of the layers, no limitations on loss adjustment expenses and no accelerated deposit premiums.
•Assuming a first event completely exhausts the $3.36 billion tower, the second event exhaustion point would be $1.343 billion.
•Full reinstatement available for all private market first event catastrophe layers for guaranteed second event coverage. For all layers purchased between $90 million and the projected FHCF retention, to the extent that all of our coverage or a portion thereof is exhausted in a catastrophic event and reinstatement premium is due, UPCIC has purchased enough reinstatement premium protection (“RPP”) limit to pay the premium necessary for the reinstatement of these coverages.
•Effective September 1, 2020, UPCIC purchased RPP limit for the layer attaching at $45 million. Combined with the RPP limit purchased at June 1, 2020, UPCIC has purchased enough RPP limit to pay for the premium necessary for the reinstatement of all catastrophe layers between $45 million and the projected FHCF retention.
•Specific 3rd and 4th event private market catastrophe excess of loss coverage of $76 million in excess of $35 million provides frequency protection for a multiple event storm season.
•For the FHCF Reimbursement Contracts effective June 1, 2020, UPCIC has continued the election of the 90% coverage level. We estimate the total mandatory FHCF layer will provide approximately $2.008 billion of coverage for UPCIC, which inures to the benefit of the open market coverage secured from private reinsurers.
•Secured $197 million of new catastrophe capacity with contractually agreed limits that extend coverage to include the 2021 and 2022 wind seasons. In total, UPCIC has $420 million of multi-year capacity with coverage extending to include the 2021 wind season or beyond.
Reinsurers
The table below provides the A.M. Best and S&P financial strength ratings for each of the largest third-party reinsurers in UPCIC’s 2020-2021 reinsurance program:
(1)No rating is available, because the fund is not rated.
APPCIC’s 2020-2021 Reinsurance Program
•First event All States retention of $3 million.
•All States first event tower of $43.6 million with no co-participation in any of the layers, no limitation on loss adjustment expenses and no accelerated deposit premiums.
•Full reinstatement available for all private market first event catastrophe layers for guaranteed second event coverage. For the layer purchased between $3 million and the projected FHCF retention, to the extent that all coverage or a portion thereof is exhausted in a catastrophic event and reinstatement premium is due, APPCIC purchased enough RPP limit to pay the premium necessary for the reinstatement of this coverage.
•APPCIC also purchases extensive multiple line excess per risk reinsurance with various reinsurers due to the high-value risks it insures in both the personal residential and commercial multiple peril lines of business. Under this multiple line excess per risk contract, APPCIC has coverage of $8.5 million in excess of $0.5 million ultimate net loss for each risk and each property loss, and $1 million in excess of $0.3 million for each casualty loss. A $19.5 million aggregate limit applies to the term of the contract for property-related losses and a $2 million aggregate limit applies to the term of the contract for casualty-related losses. This contract also contains a profit-sharing feature if specific performance measures are met.
•For the FHCF Reimbursement Contracts effective June 1, 2020, APPCIC has continued the election of the 90% coverage level. The total mandatory FHCF layer is estimated to provide approximately $22.5 million of coverage for APPCIC, which inures to the benefit of the open market coverage secured from private reinsurers.
Reinsurers
The table below provides the A.M. Best and S&P financial strength ratings for each of the largest third-party reinsurers in APPCIC’s 2020-2021 reinsurance program:
(1)No rating is available, because the fund is not rated.
The total cost of the 2020-2021 reinsurance programs for UPCIC and APPCIC is projected to be $499.8 million, representing approximately 34.0% of estimated direct premium earned for the 12-month treaty period.
Results of Operations
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 COMPARED TO YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019
2020 Financial and Business Highlights (comparisons are to 2019 unless otherwise specified)
•Direct premiums written overall grew by $224.8 million, or 17.4%, to $1,517.5 million.
•In Florida, direct premiums written grew by $184.6 million, or 17.3%, and in our other states, direct premiums written grew by $40.1 million, or 17.7%.
•Premiums earned, net grew by $81.1 million, or 9.6%, to $923.6 million.
•Net realized gains were $56.9 million from sales of available-for-sale securities and net realized gains were $6.5 million from the sales of equity securities.
•In May 2020, the FLOIR approved an overall 12.4% rate increase for UPCIC on Florida personal residential homeowners line of business, effective May 2020 for new business and July 2020 for renewals.
•In December 2020, the FLOIR approved an overall 7.0% rate increase for UPCIC on Florida personal residential homeowners line of business, effective December 2020 for new business and March 2021 for renewals.
•Total revenues increased by $133.4 million, or 14.2%, to $1,072.8 million.
•Weather events in excess of plan for named hurricanes and other severe weather events occurred during the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting in a $162.0 million impact after reinsurance.
•Net loss and LAE ratio was 82.2% as compared to 71.6%, driven by severe weather and prior years’ reserve development.
•Diluted earnings per common share (“EPS”) was $0.60 compared to $1.36.
•Weighted average diluted common shares outstanding were lower by 6.6% to 32.0 million shares as of December 31, 2020 from 34.2 million shares as of December 31, 2019.
•Book value per share decreased by $0.70, or 4.6%, to $14.43 at December 31, 2020 from $15.13 at December 31, 2019.
•Declared and paid dividends per common share of $0.77, including a $0.13 special dividend in December 2020.
•Repurchased 1,610,783 shares in 2020 at an aggregate cost of $28.9 million.
•Offered Universal DirectSM in all 19 states in which the Company writes policies as of December 31, 2020.
•Contributed $114 million of capital to UPCIC during 2020 to support insurance operations.
•UPCIC commenced writing homeowners policies in Iowa.
•Received Certificate of Authority from Tennessee.
A detailed discussion of our results of operations follows the table below (in thousands, except per share data).
Net income was $19.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net income of $46.5 million for the same period in 2019.
Diluted EPS for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.60 compared to $1.36 in 2019, a decrease of $0.76, or 55.9%. Weighted average diluted common shares outstanding for the year ended December 31, 2020 were lower by 6.6% to 32.0 million shares from 34.2 million shares for the same period of the prior year. Benefiting the year ended December 31, 2020 were increases in premiums earned, net, realized gains on investments, commission revenue, policy fees and other revenue, offset by a decrease in net investment income, a lower level of unrealized gains in the fair value of our equity securities in 2020 and increased total operating costs and expenses. Direct premium earned and premiums earned, net were up 13.2% and 9.6%, respectively, due to growth of policies in almost all states in which we are licensed and writing during the past 12 months and rate increases implemented during 2020, offset by higher costs for reinsurance flowing through to premiums earned, net. Increases in losses and LAE were the result of several factors including (1) increased estimated core losses and LAE for the current year compared to prior year, (2) premium growth and change in mix between Florida and other states and (3) increased adverse weather events. The increase was partially offset by a reduced level of prior years’ reserve development in 2020.
Direct premiums written increased by $224.8 million, or 17.4%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, driven by growth within our Florida business of $184.6 million, or 17.3%, and growth in our other states business of $40.1 million, or 17.7%, as compared to the same period of the prior year. Rate increases in Florida and in certain other states along with slightly improved retention also contributed to the premium growth. Premium in force increased in every state in which we are writing at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019. We implemented new guidelines during the year ended December 31, 2020 on new business to address emerging loss trends that have since slowed the rate of growth in Florida in certain territories during December 31, 2020. We actively wrote policies in 19 states during 2020 compared to 18 in 2019. In addition, we are authorized to do business in Tennessee and Wisconsin and are proceeding with product filings in those states. During the second quarter of 2020 the Company withdrew its application to write business in Connecticut. Policies in force, premium in force and total insured value all increased as of December 31, 2020 when compared to December 31, 2019.
Direct premium earned increased by $162.5 million, or 13.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, reflecting the earning of premiums written over the past 12 months and changes in rates and policies in force during that time.
Reinsurance enables our Insurance Entities to limit potential exposures to catastrophic events and other covered events. Ceded premium represents amounts paid to reinsurers for this protection. Ceded premium earned increased $81.4 million, or 20.8%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of the prior year. The increase in reinsurance costs reflects both an increase in costs associated with the increase in exposures we insure, reinstatement premiums emerging during the year and increased pricing when compared to the expired reinsurance program. Reinsurance costs, as a percentage of direct premium earned, increased from 31.7% in 2019 to 33.8% in 2020. During the fourth quarter of 2020 the Company recorded additional ceded written premiums of $18.5 million representing reinstatement premiums on Hurricane Sally losses of which $7.7 million was unearned at December 31, 2020. Reinsurance costs associated with each year’s reinsurance program are earned over the June 1st to May 31st twelve-month coverage period. See the discussion above for the Insurance Entities’ 2020-2021 reinsurance program and “Part II-Item 8 - Note 4 (Reinsurance).”
Premiums earned, net of ceded premium earned, grew by 9.6%, or $81.1 million, to $923.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, reflecting an increase in direct premium earned offset by increased costs for reinsurance.
Net investment income was $20.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $30.7 million for the same period in 2019, a decrease of $10.4 million, or 33.7%. The decrease is driven by lower trends in market yields. During 2020, the Company sold most securities in an unrealized gain position to recognize market value appreciation. The total amount of securities sold was $1.1 billion. As a result, the Company reinvested its portfolio into similar securities yielding current market rates, which in many cases is a reduction from the book yields of the portfolio prior to the sale and reinvestment. The book yield of the available-for-sale debt securities was 3.08% at December 31, 2019 compared to 1.16% at December 31, 2020, a reduction of 62.3%. Total invested assets were $919.9 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to $914.6 million as of December 31, 2019. Cash and cash equivalents were $167.2 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $182.1 million at December 31, 2019, a decrease of 8.2%. Cash and cash equivalents are invested short term until needed to settle loss and LAE payments, reinsurance premium payments and operating cash needs or until they are deployed by our investment advisors.
Yields from cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments and the available-for-sale debt portfolio are dependent on future market forces, monetary policy and interest rate policy from the Federal Reserve. The Federal Reserve has broadly been lowering and maintaining lower interest rates, which has impacted the effective yields on new available-for-sale portfolio and overnight cash purchases and short-term investments. The overall trend has been lower interest rates on new purchases of securities over the past year and lower returns on cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments. As discussed below, due to the significant sale of securities during the third quarter of 2020, it is expected that future portfolio returns will reflect lower book yields based on current market conditions.
We sell investments from our investment portfolio from time to time to meet our investment objectives or take advantage of market opportunities. During the year ended December 31, 2020, sales of available-for-sale debt securities resulted in net realized gain of $56.9 million and sales of equity securities resulted in net realized gain of $6.5 million, in total generating net realized gain of $63.4 million. We took the opportunity to monetize an increase in fair value of these securities to enhance surplus for UPCIC. The proceeds from the sale of available-for-sale debt securities are in the process of reinvestment. During the year ended December 31, 2019, sales of equity securities resulted in net realized losses of $14.4 million, sales of available-for-sale debt securities resulted in net realized gains of $0.5 million and the sale of an investment real estate property resulted in a realized gain of $1.2 million, in total generating net realized loss of $12.7 million. See “Part II-Item 8 - Note 3 (Investments).”
There was a nominal favorable net unrealized gain in equity securities during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a $23.2 million favorable net unrealized gain during the year ended December 31, 2019. Unrealized gains or losses reflected on the income statement are the result of changes in the fair market value of our equity securities during the period for securities still held and the reversal of unrealized gains or losses for securities sold during the period. See “Part II-Item 8 - Note 3 (Investments).”
During 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic disrupted the financial markets. In the first quarter of 2020, our investment portfolio was negatively impacted, but has since substantially recovered. We took advantage of the recovery with the realization of gains on our available-for-sale debt securities discussed above. We believe the adverse impact to our investment portfolio was minimized during this COVID-19-induced market dislocation as a result of our conservative investment strategy’s focus on capital preservation and adequate liquidity to pay claims. We believe the high credit rating and shorter duration foundation of our portfolio and portfolio diversification will help us weather these difficult market conditions, thereby limiting the impact of future economic financial market downturns on the portfolio. Recent market yields have been lower when compared to prior years and we expect that trend to continue, negatively impacting future investment returns on our portfolio. We will continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 on our portfolio. Significant uncertainties and emerging risks still exist regarding the potential long-term impact of COVID-19 on the credit markets and our investment portfolio.
Commission revenue is comprised principally of brokerage commissions we earn from third-party reinsurers (excluding the FHCF) on reinsurance placed for the Insurance Entities. Commission revenue is earned pro-rata over the reinsurance policy period which runs from June 1st to May 31st of the following year. For the year ended December 31, 2020, commission revenue was $33.2 million, compared to $26.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in commission revenue of $7.1 million, or 27.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to increased commissions from third-party
reinsurers earned on increased reinsurance premiums due to growth in our exposures, as well as the difference in pricing and structure associated with our reinsurance program when compared to the prior year.
Policy fees for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $23.8 million compared to $21.6 million for the same period in 2019. The increase of $2.2 million, or 10.3%, was the result of an increase in the total number of new and renewal policies written during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019.
Other revenue, representing revenue from policy installment fees, premium financing and other miscellaneous income, was $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $8.0 million for the same period in 2019.
The following table presents losses and LAE incurred on a direct, ceded and net basis expressed in dollars and as a percent of the respective amounts of earned premium. These amounts are further categorized as 1) core losses, 2) weather events for the current accident year and 3) prior years’ reserve development (dollars in thousands):
*Includes only current weather events beyond those expected.
See “Part II-Item 8 - Note 17 (Liability for Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses)” for change in liability for unpaid losses and LAE.
Management evaluates losses and LAE in three areas, as described below and represented in the tables above, each of which have different drivers which impact reported results. As a result, these components of losses and LAE are described separately. Overall losses and LAE, net of reinsurance recoveries, were $758.8 million resulting in a 82.2% net loss and LAE ratio for the year ended December 31, 2020. This compares to $603.4 million resulting in a 71.6% net loss and LAE ratio for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The factors impacting losses and LAE are as follows:
Core losses
Our core losses consist of all losses and LAE, except weather events beyond those expected and prior years’ reserve development. We establish core loss reserves by applying a direct loss percentage (loss pick) to direct premium earned. The loss pick is set by management each year with input coming out of the annual study performed by our independent third-party
actuary. Our loss pick before the claims management benefits described below, which we increased in 2019 as a result of higher loss trends in Florida, was increased slightly (0.9 loss ratio points) in 2020.
The core losses and loss ratios in the above table benefit from favorable claim management adjustment benefits derived from certain ceded claim fees or other benefits, which are described below, reducing core losses. Core losses for the year, after favorable claim management adjusting benefits for the year ended 2020 were 38.6% of direct premium earned compared to 38.7% for the same period in 2019. Although the core loss ratio only slightly changed year over year, core loss and LAE has increased and reserves increased resulting from higher premium volume and the impact of primary rate increases approved in 2020.
Weather events beyond those expected
During the year ended December 31, 2020, there were a significant number of storms including Hurricane Sally compared to prior years which in the aggregate exceeded core loss ratio expectations. The number of adverse weather events and resulting claims during the fourth quarter exceeded weather event claims reported during the first three quarters. Reported losses from Hurricane Sally significantly benefited from our catastrophe reinsurance protection. Our reinsurance program reduced our direct estimate of Hurricane Sally ultimate losses of $133.4 million to $43.0 million on a net basis after estimated reinsurance recoveries. Other weather events resulting in losses with only limited benefit from our catastrophe reinsurance protection included Hurricanes Isaias, Eta, Delta and Zeta and other unnamed storms tracked by an industry numerically assigned identifier. These weather events totaled direct losses of $123.5 million and $119.0 million net after reinsurance. In 2020 the Company experienced the highest level of unnamed weather events when compared to the previous three years.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, weather events totaled $45.6 million direct and $38.7 million net, principally for Hurricane Dorian and other weather events beyond those expected.
Prior years’ reserve development
Management identifies two drivers which influence amounts recorded as prior years’ reserve development, namely: (i) changes to prior estimates of direct and net ultimate losses on prior accident years excluding major hurricanes and (ii) changes in prior estimates of direct and net ultimate losses on hurricanes. During the year ended December 31, 2020, prior years’ reserve development totaled $284.3 million of direct losses and $58.3 million of net losses after the benefit of reinsurance.
Prior years’ reserve development, excluding hurricanes described above, was $42.1 million direct and $40.2 million net of reinsurance for the year ended December 31, 2020. This development largely resulted from increased prior-year non-hurricane companion claims in the run up to the expiration of limitations period for Hurricane Irma claims, the emergence of claims associated with AOB litigated claims, and an increase in reopened claims. In 2019, the Florida legislature enacted legislation intended to reduce abuses with claims involving AOB. Prior the effective date of the new law, the Company experienced an increase in claims reported by vendors seeking to pursue their claims under the prior law. In many instances, these claims have since further developed into litigated claims during 2020. Also, Hurricane Irma made landfall in 2017. In accordance with Florida law, the deadline for filing Hurricane Irma claims expired three years later in September 2020. As a result, in 2020 the Company experienced adverse development due to non-hurricane companion claims reported with new Hurricane Irma claims reported as the deadline approached. In 2020, claims associated with these issues continued to adversely develop, Florida’s one-way attorneys’ fee statute and overall negative legal environment have led to increased litigation and higher losses and LAE.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, development of direct and net losses on previously reported hurricanes was $242.2 million direct and $18.1 million net after the benefit of reinsurance. This was principally driven by continued adverse development of previous estimated losses and LAE on Hurricanes Irma, Michael, Florence and Matthew. Net development for the year ended December 31, 2020 principally resulted from an increase in our previously estimated losses and LAE on Hurricane Irma for claims which are not eligible for recovery from the FHCF.
As noted above, Florida law bars new, supplemental or reopened claim for loss caused by the peril of windstorm or hurricane unless notice is provided within three years of the event. In September 2020, the three-year period following Hurricane Irma expired. The Company continues to adjust and settle Hurricane Irma claims that were reported prior to the expiration of the three-year period.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, direct prior years’ reserve development of $562.3 million was principally due to increased ultimate direct losses and LAE for Hurricane Irma, which were fully ceded, while net prior years’ reserve development of $88.1 million was principally due to a change in the allocation of estimated reinsurance recoveries on Hurricane Michael losses from our Non-Florida reinsurance coverage to the All States reinsurance coverage. The Non-Florida reinsurance coverage has a lower retention and the change in the allocation of reinsurance recoveries to the All States reinsurance coverage resulted in higher retained losses.
The net loss and LAE ratio for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 82.2% compared to 71.6% for the prior year. The increase of 10.6% loss ratio points was a result of: (1) increase in weather (13.0% loss ratio points); and (2) an increase in estimated core losses and LAE ratio for the current year (1.7% loss ratio points) principally the result of higher reinsurance costs. The increase was partially offset by a lower level of prior years’ reserve development on prior years’ losses and LAE reserves (4.1% loss ratio points).
The Company continues to experience increased costs for losses and LAE in the Florida market where an industry has developed around the solicitation, filing and litigation of personal residential claims, resulting in a pattern of continued increased year over year levels of represented claims, inflation of purported claim amounts, and increased demands for attorneys’ fee. Active solicitation of personal residential claims in Florida by policyholder representatives, remediation companies and repair companies has led to an increase in the frequency and severity of personal residential claims in Florida exceeding historical levels and levels seen in other jurisdictions. A Florida statute providing a one-way right of attorneys’ fees against insurers, coupled with other adverse statutes and judicial rulings, have further produced a legal environment in Florida that encourages litigation, in many cases without regard to the underlying circumstances of the claims.
The market trends in losses and LAE led us to file in February 2020 for an overall 12.4% rate increase in Florida, which was approved effective May 18, 2020 for new business and July 7, 2020 for renewals. In addition we filed and received approval on December 31, 2020 to further increase our rates in Florida by an additional 7.0% in response to higher reinsurance costs associated with the reinsurance program we put into effect June 1, 2020. This rate change was effective December 31, 2020 for new business and March 1, 2021 for renewal business. In addition, we implemented changes to certain new business underwriting guidelines, reduced new business writings in certain Florida counties and developed and implemented specialized claims and litigation management efforts to address market trends which we believe are driving up claim costs. Nonetheless, the deterioration of the Florida residential insurance market, fostered by the proliferation of represented and litigated claims, thus far has outpaced the benefits of these initiatives.
The financial benefit from the management of claims ceded, including claim fees ceded to reinsurers, was $17.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $3.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, driven primarily by the recoveries from reinsurers in excess of costs and the financial impact of internal claim services on the expected core loss ratio. The benefit was recorded in the consolidated financial statements as a reduction to losses and LAE.
General and administrative expenses were $289.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $272.4 million during the same period in 2019 as detailed below (dollars in thousands):
General and administrative expenses increased by $17.3 million, which was the result of increases in policy acquisition costs of $21.6 million due to commissions associated with increased premium volume offset by a decrease in other operating costs of $4.3 million. The expense ratio as a percentage of premiums earned, net decreased from 32.3% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 31.4% for the same period in 2020. Our increase in policy acquisition costs continued to be driven by increased premium volume and continued geographic expansion into states that typically have higher commission rates as compared to Florida. Other operating costs ratio for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 9.8% compared to 11.2% for the year ended December 31, 2019, reflecting lower share-based compensation and performance bonuses in 2020 and economies of scale as other operating costs did not increase at the same rate as premiums earned, net. In addition, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, travel and auto expenses along with meal and entertainment were lower in 2020 when compared to the prior year.
Income tax expense decreased by $11.9 million, or 69.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of a 61.9% reduction in income before income taxes, when compared with the year ended December 31, 2019. Our estimated tax rate (“ETR”) decreased to 21.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 26.8% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The ETR decreased as a result of a higher ratio of permanent items relative to the amount of income before taxes, principally non-deductible compensation, and a higher level of discrete tax benefits.
Other comprehensive loss, net of taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $17.6 million, compared to other comprehensive income of $28.4 million for the same period in 2019, reflecting reclassifications out of cumulative other comprehensive income for available-for-sale debt securities sold and after-tax changes in fair value of available-for-sale debt securities held in our investment portfolio. See “Part II-Item 8 - Note 11 (Other Comprehensive Income (Loss))” for additional information about the amounts comprising other comprehensive income for these periods.
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019 COMPARED TO YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2018
A detailed discussion of our results of operations follows the table below (in thousands, except per share data).
Benefiting the year ended December 31, 2019 were increases in net earned premium, net investment income, commission revenue and increases in the net change in unrealized gains of equity securities, offset by realized losses on investments and increased operating costs for losses and LAE and general and administrative costs. Direct and net earned premium were up 8.6% and 9.9%, respectively, due to growth in all states in which we are licensed and writing during the past 12 months. Increases in losses and LAE were the result of several factors including (1) premium growth and change in mix between Florida and other states, (2) reduced financial benefit from the management of claims including claim fees ceded to reinsurers, (3) increased estimated core losses and LAE for the current year compared to prior year, (4) adverse development on prior years’ loss and LAE reserves and (5) weather events in excess of plan this year.
Policy count, premium in force and total insured value increased at December 31, 2019 when compared to December 31, 2018. Direct premiums written increased by $101.8 million, or 8.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by growth within our Florida business of $52.8 million, or 5.2%, and growth in our other states business of $49.0 million, or 27.6%, as compared to the same period of the prior year. Rate increases in Florida and in certain other states along with slightly improved retention were also a source of premium growth. We implemented new guidelines during the year ended December 31, 2019 on new business to address emerging loss trends that have impacted the rate of growth in Florida. Direct premiums earned increased in every state in which we are writing compared to December 31, 2018. In early March 2019, we commenced writing in Illinois, and as of December 31, 2019 we were actively writing policies in 17 states in addition to our home state of Florida.
Direct premium earned increased by $111.5 million, or 9.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, reflecting the earning of premiums written over the past 12 months and changes in rates and policy count during that time.
Reinsurance enables our Insurance Entities to limit potential exposures to catastrophic events or other covered events. Ceded premium represents amounts paid to reinsurers for this protection. Ceded premium earned increased $37.4 million, or 10.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2019. Reinsurance costs, as a percentage of direct premium earned, increased from 31.5% in 2018 to 31.7% in 2019. This year ceded earned premiums had a lower level of additional costs from ceded earned reinstatement premiums, $2.6 million in 2019, compared to $20.7 million in 2018. These costs relate to additional reinsurance costs from Hurricane Irma. Excluding reinstatement premiums, ceded premiums earned were 31.5% of direct premiums earned in 2019 compared to 29.7% in 2018. The increase in the ratio is a result of higher costs for the Company’s 2019-2020 reinsurance program, compared to the expired program. Costs associated with each year’s reinsurance program are earned over the June 1 to May 31 coverage period. See the discussion above for the new 2019-2020 reinsurance program and “Part II-Item 8 - Note 4 (Reinsurance).”
Premiums earned, net of ceded premium earned, grew by 9.6%, or $74.1 million, to $842.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, reflecting the increase in direct premiums earned partially offset by increased costs of reinsurance.
Net investment income was $30.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $24.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $5.9 million, or 23.9%. The increase is driven by the combination of the growth in cash and invested assets compared to the prior year and benefits from higher yielding assets offset by a lower trend in yields on cash and short term investments during 2019. Total invested assets were $914.6 million with an average fixed income credit rating of A+ during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $908.2 million with an average fixed credit rating of A+ for the same period in 2018. The duration of fixed income securities was 3.8 years at December 31, 2019 compared to 3.6 years at December 31, 2018. Cash and cash equivalents were $182.1 million at December 31, 2019 compared to $166.4 million at December 31, 2018, an increase of 9.4%. Cash and cash equivalents are invested short term until needed to settle payments to reinsurers, loss and LAE payments and operating cash needs.
Yields from the fixed income portfolio are dependent on future market forces, monetary policy and interest rate policy from the Federal Reserve. In 2019, the Federal Reserve lowered interest rates, which impacted effective yields on new fixed income and overnight cash purchases. The impact from this trend in 2019 has been somewhat limited as investments mature over many future years based on the effective maturity of the portfolio, subjecting only the current year redemptions to the lower interest rate environment. The Company’s investment strategy is to invest in assets with multi-year effective maturities, locking in book yields for future years, which dampers the impact that market fluctuations have on current investment income.
We sell securities from our investment portfolio and real estate investments from time to time to meet our investment objectives. As further described in “Item 1 - Note 3 (Investments)”, we realize both gains and losses on the sale of securities and real estate. We sold securities and investment real estate during the year ended December 31, 2019. Net of realized gains, sales resulted in a net realized loss of $12.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to net realized loss of $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The realized losses during the year ended December 31, 2019 resulted primarily from the sale of equity securities, whereas the realized loss for the year ended December 31, 2018 resulted primarily from the sale of municipal securities, which were liquidated in light of their diminished after-tax returns following the enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the “Tax Act”). See “Part II-Item 8 - Note 3 (Investments).”
There was a $23.2 million favorable net unrealized gain in equity securities during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to a $17.2 million unfavorable net unrealized loss during the year ended December 31, 2018 Unrealized gains or losses are the result of changes in the fair market value of our equity securities during the period for securities still held and the reversal of unrealized gains or losses for securities sold during the period. See “Part II-Item 8 - Note 3 (Investments).”
Commission revenue is comprised principally of brokerage commissions we earn from reinsurers on reinsurance placed for the Insurance Entities. Commission revenue is earned pro-rata over the reinsurance policy period which runs from June 1 to May 31 of the following year. For the year ended December 31, 2019, commission revenue was $26.1 million, an increase of $3.7 million, or 16.3%, compared to $22.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Policy fees for the year ended December 31, 2019, were $21.6 million compared to $20.3 million for the same period in 2018. The increase of $1.3 million, or 6.3%, was the result of an increase in the number of new and renewal policies written during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the same period in 2018.
Other revenue, representing revenue from policy installment fees, premium financing and other miscellaneous income, was $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $7.2 million for the same period in 2018.
Losses and LAE, net of ceded losses for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $603.4 million compared to $414.5 million in the same period in 2018, an increase of $189.0 million, or 45.6%.
* Includes only weather events beyond expected. Items included in weather events for the year may differ from items included in quarterly reporting.
See “Part II-Item 8 - Note 17 (Liability for Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses)” for change in liability for unpaid losses and LAE.
Losses and LAE, net of ceded losses, increased during the year ended December 31, 2019 principally due to five key factors: (1) increased losses in connection with the growth in our underlying business; (2) reduced benefits from claim settlement fees ceded to reinsurers as hurricanes claims conclude; (3) an increase in our direct core loss ratio (as defined below) from 33.9% in 2018 to 38.9% in 2019; (4) an increase in weather events when compared to the prior year, and; (5) prior year adverse development.
The net calendar year loss ratio for the year ended December 31, 2019 was 71.6% compared to 53.9% in the prior year. The increase of 17.7 loss ratio points was a result of: (1) reduced financial benefit from the management of claims, including claims fees ceded to reinsurers (9.0 loss ratio points); (2) increased estimated core losses and LAE ratio for the current year (8.5 loss ratio points); and (3) increased weather in excess of plan (2.7 loss ratio points). The increase was partially offset by a lower level of prior year adverse development on prior years’ loss and LAE reserves (2.5 loss ratio points).
During the fourth quarter, the Company recorded adverse development on prior years’ loss estimates as claims from prior years continue to be resolved at higher-than-anticipated values notwithstanding prior efforts to review and re-estimate those amounts. The Company continues to experience increased costs for losses and LAE in the Florida market where an industry has developed around the personal residential claims process, resulting in historically high levels of represented claims and inflated claims. Active solicitation of personal residential claims in Florida by policyholder representatives, remediation companies and repair companies has led to a frequency and severity of personal residential claims in the state exceeding historical levels in Florida and levels seen in other jurisdictions.
Prior year adverse development was the result of the following factors:
•In the Florida market, claims understood to have been satisfactorily resolved and closed are being re-opened, sometimes years later, typically with representation from policyholder representatives or vendors who actively solicit policyholders for the purpose of filing claims.
•Both the frequency (number of claims) and severity (cost of a claim) of claims in Florida have risen beyond anticipated levels, largely driven by consumer behavior responding to the industry that has arisen around profiting from such
claims. This in turn is facilitated by Florida’s legal climate, including the one-way threat of attorneys’ fees against insurers and the relatively high cost of defending against inflated claims demands in relation to amounts in dispute.
•We have reduced our estimate for subrogation recoveries due to changes in the Florida claims and legal environment. Subrogation reduces an insurer’s net losses and results in recoveries of policyholders’ deductibles. Historically, the subrogation process often has resulted in a straightforward apportionment of losses based upon parties’ respective responsibilities. However, adverse conditions and claims-related behaviors in Florida have led to a proliferation of represented claims, claims that are inflated or of questionable merit, and claims that are reported or re-opened well after the purported dates of loss. Losses and LAE patterns associated with these claims differ from historical patterns from industry norms found in other states. Accordingly, we have reduced our estimate of subrogation recoveries to recognize that conditions in Florida likewise could impact the effectiveness of our subrogation efforts by reducing amounts otherwise owed to us and our policyholders and by increasing our subrogation costs. Losses are recorded, net of estimated subrogation recoveries in the financial statements. Estimated subrogation recoveries totaled $73.0 million at December 31, 2019 compared to $99.0 million at December 31, 2018. During 2019, we reduced our estimate of subrogation recoveries by $40.7 million.
•Direct and ceded losses include prior year reserve development on major hurricanes where the settlement of claims and the re-estimation of expected costs for losses and LAE remaining to be settled exceed previously carried reserves. In 2019, for Hurricanes Irma, Florence, Michael and Matthew, we recorded adverse development of $469.9 million of gross losses and $465.4 million of ceded losses resulting in $4.5 million net impact. This compares to only one hurricane having adverse development in 2018 of $513 million of gross losses and $513 million of ceded losses, resulting in zero net losses in 2018 from Hurricane Irma. In addition, we recorded $2.6 million in 2019, compared to$20.7 million in 2018, of contractually based costs for reinstatement premiums as a result of adverse development of ceded losses for Hurricane Irma recorded during 2019 and 2018.
In addition, loss trends for the current year indicate expected losses that are higher than previously anticipated, resulting in an increase to our estimate for current year losses recorded during the fourth quarter. “Core loss ratio” is a common operational metric used in the insurance industry to describe the ratio of current accident year expected losses to premiums earned. Our core loss ratio for direct losses occurring in the current year increased to 38.9% for the year to date period ended December 31, 2019. This compares to 33.9% for the year ended December 31, 2018. During 2019, we saw increases in severity and frequency of claims, especially those claims represented by third party vendors, and increased litigation. Overall, adverse market conditions in Florida as described above are increasing the cost to resolve claims, which then is reflected in our core loss ratio. In addition, as summarized above, we have reduced our estimated benefit of subrogation recoveries based on current actuarial projections. The increase in the underlying core loss and LAE ratio also reflects continued geographic expansion into states outside of Florida where non-catastrophe loss ratios are generally higher than in Florida.
These market trends in losses and LAE in Florida have led us to file, on February 7, 2020, for an overall 12.4% rate increase in Florida. This rate filing, if approved, would be effective as of May 25, 2020. We also continue to make changes to certain new business guidelines and to develop specialized claims and litigation management efforts to address market trends driving up claim costs.
The financial benefit from the management of claims ceded, including claim fees ceded to reinsurers, was $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $72.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2018. The reduction in the benefit was in line with the runoff of claims from hurricanes which occurred in 2017 and 2018. The financial benefit from the management of claims fees ceded to reinsurers was recorded in the condensed consolidated financial statements as a reduction to losses and LAE and included as a reduction to All other losses and loss adjustment expenses in the chart above.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, general and administrative expenses were $272.4 million, compared to $256.5 million during the same period in 2018, as detailed below (dollars in thousands):
General and administrative costs increased by $15.9 million, which was primarily the result of increases in policy acquisition costs of $20.2 million due to commissions associated with increased premium volume, and a $6.5 million non-recurring audit settlement benefit in 2018 related to premium taxes, offset by a decrease in other operating costs of $4.3 million. As a percentage of earned premiums, general and administrative costs decreased from 33.4% of earned premiums for the year ended December 31, 2018 to 32.3% of earned premiums for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in policy acquisition costs and ratio for the year ended December 31, 2019 was due to a non-recurring benefit of $6.5 million recorded in 2018 related to a refund of prior year premium taxes as a result of an audit settlement with the Florida Department of Revenue, which reduced the policy acquisition costs ratio by 0.8 percentage points in 2018. Excluding this benefit in the prior year, the overall total general and administrative expense ratio in 2019 would have improved 1.90 percentage points compared to the same period in 2018 before the impact of the premium tax refund. Other operating costs for the year ended December 31, 2019 decreased $4.3 million, reflecting lower amounts recorded for executive compensation and temporary employee expenses, offset by added costs to support the growth in business. Other operating costs as a percentage of earned premium decreased from 12.9% of net earned premium for the year ended December 31, 2018 compared to 11.2% of net earned premium for the same period in 2019.
Overall, the expense ratio for 2019 (general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net premiums earned) benefited from reduced executive compensation, a lower level of costs from reinstatement premiums impacting premiums earned and economies of scale as general and administrative expenses did not increase at the same rate as revenues when compared to the same period of 2018 excluding the non-recurring premium tax benefit.
Income tax expense decreased by $18.8 million, or 52.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2019, as a result of a 58.5% reduction in income before income taxes, when compared with the year ended December 31, 2018. Our effective tax rate increased to 26.8% for the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to 23.4% for the year ended December 31, 2018. The effective tax rate increased slightly as a result of permanent items relative to income before taxes, principally non-deductible compensation, offset by a lower level of excess tax benefit. See “Part II-Item 8 - Note 12 (Income Taxes)” for an explanation of the change in our effective tax rates.
Other comprehensive income, net of taxes for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $28.4 million of net unrealized gains related to debt securities available-for-sale compared to other comprehensive loss of $4.7 million related to net unrealized losses on debt securities available-for-sale for the same period in 2018. See “Part II-Item 8 - Note 14 (Other Comprehensive Income (Loss))” for additional information about the amounts comprising other comprehensive income and loss for these periods.
ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AS OF DECEMBER 31, 2020 COMPARED TO DECEMBER 31, 2019
We believe that cash flows generated from operations will be sufficient to meet our working capital requirements for at least the next twelve months. We invest amounts considered to be in excess of current working capital requirements.
The following table summarizes, by type, the carrying values of investments as of the dates presented (in thousands):
See “Part II-Item 8 - Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows” for explanations of changes in investments and “Item 8 - Note 3 (Investments).”
Restricted cash and cash equivalents increased $10.1 million to $12.7 million as of December 31, 2020 as a result of collateral held by a reinsurance captive arrangement with one of the Insurance Entities reported as a Variable Interest Entity (“VIE”) in the consolidated financial statements. See “Part II-Item 8 - Note 18 (Variable Interest Entities)” for more information.
Prepaid reinsurance premiums represent the portion of unearned ceded written premium that will be earned pro-rata over the coverage period of our reinsurance program, which runs from June 1st to May 31st of the following year. The increase of $40.5 million to $215.7 million as of December 31, 2020 was due to additional ceded written premium for the reinsurance costs relating to our 2020-2021 catastrophe reinsurance program beginning June 1, 2020, less amortization of prepaid reinsurance premiums recorded during 2020.
Reinsurance recoverable represents the estimated amount of paid and unpaid losses, LAE and other expenses that are expected to be recovered from reinsurers. The decrease of $32.8 million to $160.4 million as of December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the collection of amounts due from reinsurers relating to settled claims from hurricanes and other events covered by our reinsurance contracts.
Premiums receivable, net represents amounts receivable from policyholders. The increase in premiums receivable, net of $3.0 million to $66.9 million as of December 31, 2020 relates to growth and consumer payment behavior of our business. The amount of direct premiums written during a calendar year tends to increase just prior to the second quarter and tends to decrease approaching the fourth quarter.
Property and equipment, net increased by $12.2 million to $53.6 million as of December 31, 2020, primarily as the result of new spend on capitalized software expenditures and, to a lesser extent, the remaining capitalized costs to outfit a new office building in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, which will be used to meet the staffing needs of the Company as the business continues to expand, and new IT equipment to address work-from-home IT equipment needs during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Deferred policy acquisition costs (“DPAC”) increased by $18.7 million to $110.6 million as of December 31, 2020, which is consistent with the underlying premium growth. See “Part II-Item 8 - Note 5 (Insurance Operations)” for a roll-forward in the balance of our DPAC.
Income taxes recoverable represents the difference between estimated tax obligations and tax payments made to taxing authorities. As of December 31, 2020, the balance recoverable was $30.6 million, representing amounts due from taxing authorities at that date, compared to a balance recoverable of $34.3 million as of December 31, 2019. Income taxes recoverable as of December 31, 2020 will be applied to future periods to offset future federal and state income tax obligations.
Deferred income taxes represent the estimated tax asset or tax liability caused by temporary differences between the tax return basis of certain assets and liabilities and amounts recorded in the financial statements. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the deferred income tax asset, net increased by $2.9 million to $6.3 million. Deferred income taxes reverse in future years as the temporary differences between book and tax reverse.
See “Part II-Item 8 - Note 17 (Liability for Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses)” for a roll-forward in the balance of our unpaid losses and LAE. Unpaid losses and LAE increased by $54.7 million to $322.5 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase in unpaid losses and LAE was principally due to increased 2020 weather in excess of plan reduced by the settlement of claims from previous hurricane and storm events, as more newly reported and expected claims from 2020 exceeded prior year claim settlements. Overall unpaid losses and LAE increased, as new emerging claims exceeded claim settlements. Unpaid losses and LAE are net of estimated subrogation recoveries of $71 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to $73 million as of December 31, 2019.
Unearned premiums represent the portion of direct premiums written that will be earned pro-rata in the future. The increase of $121.9 million to $783.1 million as of December 31, 2020 reflects both organic growth and the seasonality of our business, which varies from month to month.
Advance premium represents premium payments made by policyholders ahead of the effective date of the policies. The increase of $18.6 million from December 31, 2019 to $49.6 million as of December 31, 2020 reflects customer payment behavior and organic growth.
We exclude net negative cash balances, if any, from cash and cash equivalents that we have with any single financial institution based on aggregating the book balance of all accounts at the institution which have the right of offset. If the aggregation results in a net negative book balance, that balance is reclassified from cash and cash equivalents in our Consolidated Balance Sheet to book overdraft. These amounts represent outstanding checks or drafts not yet presented to the financial institution in excess of amounts on deposit at the financial institutions. We maintain a short-term cash investment strategy sweep to maximize investment returns on cash balances. Book overdraft totaled $59.4 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to $90.4 million as of December 31, 2019. The decrease of $31.0 million is the result of lower cash balances available for offset as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019.
Reinsurance payable, net, represents the unpaid reinsurance premium installments owed to reinsurers, unpaid reinstatement premiums due to reinsurers and cash advances received from reinsurers, if any. On June 1st of each year, we renew our catastrophe reinsurance program and record the estimated annual cost of our reinsurance program. The annual cost initially increases reinsurance payable, which is then reduced as installment payments are made over the policy period of the reinsurance, which runs from June 1st to May 31st. The balance decreased by $112.3 million to $10.3 million as of December 31, 2020 as a result of an acceleration of payments in December 2020 for amounts typically paid in January and April of the following year relating to the 2020-2021 reinsurance program.
Other liabilities and accrued expenses increased by $30.7 million to $52.3 million as of December 31, 2020, primarily driven by an increase in the collection of advanced reinsurance commission of $15.4 million received by BARC, payable for unsettled security purchases of $8.8 million and an increase of $8.9 million due to timing of accrued obligations. Advance reinsurance commission represents the early collection of reinsurance commissions by BARC as a result of the Company settling its reinsurance obligations before the contractual due date. Payable for securities purchased represents payables relating to available-for-sale debt securities purchases which settled after December 31, 2020. There were payable for securities purchased totaling $8.8 million as of December 31, 2020. There were no payable for securities purchased as of December 31, 2019.
Capital resources, net decreased by $46.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, reflecting decreases in stockholders’ equity and long-term debt. The reduction in stockholders’ equity was principally the result of our treasury stock repurchases and dividends to shareholders offset by our 2020 net income and share-based compensation. In addition, accumulated other comprehensive income, net of taxes decreased by $17.0 million as a result of realized gains on the sale of available-for-sale debt securities during the period. See “Part II-Item 8 - Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity” and “Item 8 - Note 8 (Stockholders’ Equity)” for an explanation of changes in treasury stock. The reduction in long-term debt of $1.5 million was the result of principal payments on debt during 2020. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources” for more information.
Additional paid-in-capital increased by $7.4 million primarily from share-based compensation expense of $8.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was offset by the common stock value acquired and cancelled through tax withholdings on the intrinsic value of restricted stock vested, performance units vested, and restricted stock units vested for share-based payment transactions of $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Liquidity is a measure of a company’s ability to generate sufficient cash flows to meet its short- and long-term obligations. Funds generated from operations have been sufficient and we expect them to be sufficient to meet our current and long term liquidity requirements. We will continue to monitor liquidity as the economic consequences of COVID-19 continue to unfold. See discussion below regarding the COVID-19 pandemic’s impact. Also see the discussion above under “Overview-Trends-Impact of COVID-19” regarding our response to COVID-19, the financial impact to us in 2020, our general outlook and plans to monitor the economic consequences of COVID-19.
The balance of cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 was $167.2 million, compared to $182.1 million at December 31, 2019. See “Part II-Item 8 - Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows” for a reconciliation of the balance of cash and cash equivalents between December 31, 2020 and 2019. The decrease in cash and cash equivalents was driven by cash flows used in financing activities in excess of those generated from operating and investing activities. We have not experienced an adverse impact on our liquidity as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our cash investment strategy at times includes cash investments where the right of offset against other bank accounts does not exist. A book overdraft occurs when aggregating the book balance of all accounts at a financial institution for accounts which have the right of offset, and if the aggregation results in a net negative book balance, that balance is reclassified from cash and cash equivalents in our Consolidated Balance Sheet to book overdraft. Cash and cash equivalents balances are available to settle book overdrafts, and to pay reinsurance premiums, expenses and claims. Reinsurance premiums are paid in installments during the reinsurance policy period, which runs from
June 1st to May 31st of the following year. The FHCF reimbursement premiums are paid in three installments on August 1st, October 1st and December 1st, and third-party reinsurance are generally paid in four installments on July 1st, October 1st, January 1st and April 1st, resulting in significant payments at those times. See “Part II-Item 8 - Note 15 (Commitments and Contingencies)” and “-Contractual Obligations” for more information.
During 2020, there was one significant hurricane which occurred, Hurricane Sally, where estimated losses benefited from UPCIC’s reinsurance program. During 2019, there was one hurricane which occurred, Hurricane Dorian, where claims were within UPCIC’s retention under its reinsurance program. The Company’s reinsurance program provides sufficient liquidity in the form of cash advances for paid losses ceded to the reinsurers. During 2020, the Company routinely collected amounts ceded to reinsurers and, as in the past did not have to use funds in the Company’s investment portfolio. See “ Results of Operations” for more information.
The balance of restricted cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 represents cash equivalents on deposit with certain regulatory agencies in the various states in which our Insurance Entities do business and, in 2020, restricted cash and cash equivalents also includes collateral held by a reinsurance captive arrangement with one of the Insurance Entities reported as a VIE in the condensed consolidated financial statements. The amount of collateral held was $10.1 million as of December 31, 2020. See “Part II-Item 8 - Note 18 (Variable Interest Entities)” for more information.
Liquidity is required at the holding company for us to cover the payment of general operating expenses and contingencies, dividends to shareholders (if and when authorized and declared by our Board of Directors), payment for the possible repurchase of our common stock (if and when authorized by our Board of Directors), payment of income taxes, net of amounts received from affiliates, capital contributions to subsidiaries, if needed, and interest and principal payments on outstanding debt obligations of the holding company, if any. The declaration and payment of future dividends to our shareholders, and any future repurchases of our common stock, will be at the discretion of our Board of Directors and will depend upon many factors, including our operating results, financial condition, debt covenants and any regulatory constraints. Principal sources of liquidity for the holding company include dividends paid by our service entities generated from income earned on fees paid by the Insurance Entities to affiliated companies for general agency, inspections and claims adjusting services. Dividends are also paid from income earned from brokerage commissions earned on reinsurance contracts placed by BARC and policy fees. We also maintain high quality investments in our portfolio as a source of liquidity along with ongoing interest and dividend income from those investments. As discussed in “Item 8 - Note 5 (Insurance Operations),” there are limitations on the dividends the Insurance Entities may pay to their immediate parent company, Protection Solutions, Inc. (“PSI”, formerly known as Universal Insurance Holding Company of Florida).
The maximum amount of dividends that can be paid by Florida insurance companies without prior approval of the FLOIR is subject to restrictions as referenced below and in “Item 8 - Note 5 (Insurance Operations).” The maximum dividend that may be paid by the Insurance Entities to PSI without prior approval is limited to the lesser of statutory net income from operations of the preceding calendar year or statutory unassigned surplus as of the preceding year end. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 the Insurance Entities did not pay dividends to PSI.
Liquidity for the Insurance Entities is primarily required to cover payments for reinsurance premiums, claims payments including potential payments of catastrophe losses (offset by recovery of any reimbursement amounts under our reinsurance agreements), fees paid to affiliates for managing general agency services, inspections and claims adjusting services, agent commissions, premium and income taxes, regulatory assessments, general operating expenses, and interest and principal payments on debt obligations. The principal source of liquidity for the Insurance Entities consists of the revenue generated from the collection of premiums earned, net, interest and dividend income from the investment portfolio, the collection of reinsurance recoverable and financing fees.
Our insurance operations provide liquidity as premiums are generally received months or even years before potential losses are paid under the policies written. In the event of catastrophic events, many of our reinsurance agreements provide for “cash advance” whereby reinsurers advance or prepay amounts to us, thereby providing liquidity, which we utilize in the claim settlement process. In addition, the Insurance Entities maintain substantial investments in highly liquid, marketable securities, which would generate funds upon sale. The average credit rating on our available-for-sale securities was A+ as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. Credit ratings are a measure of collection risk on invested assets. Credit ratings are provided by third party nationally recognized rating agencies and are periodically updated. Management establishes guidelines for minimum credit rating and overall credit rating for all investments. The duration of our available-for-sale securities was 4.0 years as of December 31, 2020 compared to 3.8 years at December 31, 2019. Duration is a measure of a bond’s sensitivity to interest rate changes and is used by management to limit the potential impact of longer-term investments.
The Insurance Entities are responsible for losses related to catastrophic events in excess of coverage provided by the Insurance Entities’ reinsurance programs and retentions before our reinsurance protection commences. Also, the Insurance Entities are responsible for all other losses that otherwise may not be covered by the reinsurance programs and any amounts arising in the event of a reinsurer default. Losses or a default by reinsurers may have a material adverse effect on either of the Insurance Entities or on our business, financial condition, results of operations and liquidity.
Capital Resources
Capital resources provide protection for policyholders, furnish the financial strength to support the business of underwriting insurance risks and facilitate continued business growth. The following table provides our stockholders’ equity, total long-term debt, total capital resources, debt-to-total capital ratio and debt-to-equity ratio for the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
The debt-to-total capital ratio is total long-term debt divided by total capital resources, whereas debt-to-equity ratio is total long-term debt divided by stockholders’ equity. These ratios help management measure the amount of financing leverage in place in relation to equity and future leverage capacity.
The Insurance Entities are required annually to comply with the NAIC RBC requirements. RBC requirements prescribe a method of measuring the amount of capital appropriate for an insurance company to support its overall business operations in light of its size and risk profile. NAIC’s RBC requirements are used by regulators to determine appropriate regulatory actions relating to insurers who show signs of weak or deteriorating condition. As of December 31, 2020, based on calculations using the appropriate NAIC RBC formula, the Insurance Entities reported, and respective total adjusted capital was in excess of the requirements. Failure by the Insurance Entities to maintain the required level of statutory capital and surplus could result in the suspension of their authority to write new or renewal business, other regulatory actions, or ultimately, in the revocation of their certificate of authority by the FLOIR.
In 2006, UPCIC entered into a $25.0 million surplus note with the State Board of Administration of Florida (the “SBA”) under Florida’s Insurance Capital Build-Up Incentive Program (the “ICBUI”). The surplus note has a twenty-year term, with quarterly payments of interest based on the 10-year Constant Maturity Treasury Index. UPCIC is in compliance with each of the loan’s covenants as implemented by rules promulgated by the SBA. An event of default will occur under the surplus note, as amended, if UPCIC: (i) defaults in the payment of the surplus note; (ii) fails to submit quarterly filings to the FLOIR; (iii) fails to maintain at least $50 million of surplus during the term of the surplus note, except for certain situations; (iv) misuses proceeds of the surplus note; (v) makes any misrepresentations in the application for the program; (vi) pays any dividend when principal or interest payments are past due under the surplus note; or (vii) fails to maintain a level of surplus and reinsurance sufficient to cover in excess of UPCIC’s 1-in-100 year probable maximum loss as determined by a hurricane loss model accepted by the Florida Commission on Hurricane Loss Projection Methodology as certified by the FLOIR annually. To avoid a penalty rate, UPCIC must maintain either a ratio of net written premium to surplus of 2:1 or a ratio of gross written premium of 6:1 according to a calculation method set forth in the surplus note. As of December 31, 2020, UPCIC’s net written premium to surplus ratio and gross written premium to surplus ratio were in excess of the required minimums and, therefore, UPCIC is not subject to increases in interest rates. At December 31, 2020, UPCIC was in compliance with the terms of the surplus note. Total adjusted capital surplus, which includes the surplus note, was in excess of regulatory requirements for both UPCIC and APPCIC.
In addition to the liquidity generally provided from operations, we maintain a conservative, well-diversified investment portfolio, predominantly comprised of fixed income securities with an average credit rating of A+, that focuses on capital preservation and providing an adequate source of liquidity for potential claim payments and other cash needs. The portfolio’s secondary investment objective is to provide a total rate of return with emphasis on investment income. Historically, we have consistently generated funds from operations, allowing our cash and invested assets to grow. We have not had to liquidate investment holdings to fund either operations or financing activities. During March 2020, we initially saw extreme instability and dysfunction in the fixed income market, which settled down as the Federal Reserve provided liquidity to that marketplace in the latter part of March. Subsequent to March 2020, we took advantage of the market recovery and recognized $56.6 million of net realized gains on the sales of our available-for-sale debt securities that were in an unrealized gain position. In addition to monetizing an unrealized gain that was recognized in stockholders’ equity under the United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“U.S. GAAP”) on a consolidated basis for available-for-sale debt securities and carried at fair value, the realized gains served to increase surplus for UPCIC since available-for-sale debt securities are generally carried at amortized cost under statutory accounting rules.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
Although volatility in the markets remains a key risk as the world continues to navigate the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic, there has been significant recovery in values since the low point on or about March 23, 2020. The proceeds from the sales of available-for-sale debt securities discussed above are in the process of reinvestment which accounts for a temporary increase in cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020. The sales took advantage of increased market prices occurring on our available-for-sale debt investment portfolio. As a result of the sales and reinvestment of available-for-sale debt
securities, it is expected that future portfolio investment income will reflect current market rates which are below the book yield of the securities sold. We remain in regular contact with our advisors to monitor credit actions taken to issuers of our securities and discuss appropriate responses to those actions. We believe these measures, when combined with the inherent liquidity generated by our business model and in our investment portfolio, will allow us to continue to meet our short- and long-term obligations.
We implemented certain premium payment grace periods in Florida and other states to assist policyholders affected by COVID-19. In addition, we have waived late payment fees that otherwise would apply to those policyholders. To date we have not seen significant use of these grace periods. However, the effects of stay-at-home orders are still unfolding and some affected policyholders might not have yet had their next premium payments come due. We are not able at this time to estimate the number of policyholders who might avail themselves of an extended grace period. Generally, a significant number of our policies are subject to payment by mortgage companies, which are likely to continue remitting payments as scheduled. Our collection experience since March 2020 was consistent with our average experience. This reflects on the nature of homeowners’ insurance and the priority that mortgage companies and policyholders place on maintaining coverage for insured properties. We will monitor this as the impact of COVID-19 and its economic consequences are felt by our policyholders.
Looking Forward
We continue to monitor a range of financial metrics related to our business. Although we have not experienced material adverse impacts on our business or liquidity, conditions are subject to change depending on the duration of governmental stay-at-home directives, the extent of the economic downturn, and the pace and extent of an economic recovery. Significant uncertainties exist with the potential long-term impact of COVID-19, including unforeseen newly emerging risks that could affect us. We will continue to monitor the broader economic impacts of COVID-19 and its impact on our operations and financial condition including liquidity and capital resources.
Common Stock Repurchases
We may repurchase shares from time to time at our discretion, based on ongoing assessments of our capital needs, the market price of our common stock and general market conditions. We will fund the share repurchase program with cash from operations.
In total, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased an aggregate of 1,610,783 shares of our common stock in the open market at an aggregate purchase price of $28.9 million. Also see “Part II-Item 5 - Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities-Registrant Purchases of Equity Securities” for share repurchase activity during 2020 and the three months ended December 31, 2020.
Cash Dividends
The following table summarizes the dividends declared and paid by the Company during the year ended December 31, 2020:
Reinsurance Recoverable
The following table provides total unpaid loss and LAE, net of related reinsurance recoverable for the dates presented (in thousands):
Statutory Loss Ratios
Underwriting results of insurance companies are frequently measured by their combined ratios, which is the sum of the loss and expense ratios described in the following paragraph. However, investment income, federal income taxes and other non-underwriting income or expense are not reflected in the combined ratio. The profitability of property and casualty insurance companies depends on income from underwriting, investment and service operations. Underwriting results are considered profitable when the combined ratio is under 100% and unprofitable when the combined ratio is over 100%.
The following table provides the statutory loss ratios, expense ratios and combined ratios for the periods indicated for the Insurance Entities:
(1)The ratios are net of ceded premiums and losses and LAE, including premiums ceded to our catastrophe reinsurers which comprise a significant cost, and losses and LAE ceded to reinsurers. The expense ratio includes management fees and commissions, which are based on market rates, paid to an affiliate of the Insurance Entities in the amount of $118.1 million and $104.6 million for UPCIC for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and $0.9 million and $0.6 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, for APPCIC. The management fees and commissions paid to the affiliate are eliminated in consolidation.
Ratings
The Insurance Entities’ financial strength is rated by a rating agency to measure the Insurance Entities’ ability to meet their financial obligations to its policyholders. The agency maintains a letter scale Financial Stability Rating® system ranging from “A” (A double prime) to “L” (licensed by state regulatory authorities).
In November 2020, Demotech, Inc. affirmed the Financial Stability Rating® of “A” for the Insurance Entities. According to Demotech, Inc., the assigned rating represents a company’s continued positive surplus related to policyholders, liquidity of invested assets, an acceptable level of financial leverage, reasonable loss and LAE reserves, and realistic pricing. The ratings of the Insurance Entities are subject to at least annual review by Demotech, Inc., and may be revised upward or downward or revoked at the sole discretion of Demotech, Inc. Financial Stability Ratings® are primarily directed towards policyholders, and are not evaluations directed toward the protection of investors in a company, including holders of a company’s common stock, and are not recommendations to buy, sell or hold securities. See “Part I-Item 1A - Risk Factors-Risks Relating to Our Business and Operations-A downgrade in our Financial Stability Rating® may have an adverse effect on our competitive position, the marketability of our product offerings, and our liquidity, operating results and financial condition.”
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a material effect on the financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, or capital resources of the Company, except for multi-year reinsurance contract commitments for future years that will be recorded at the commencement of the coverage period. See “Part II-Item 8 - Note 15 (Commitments and Contingencies)” for more information.
Contractual Obligations
The following table represents our contractual obligations for which cash flows are fixed or determinable as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(1)The 1-3 years amount represents the payment of reinsurance premiums payable under multi-year commitments. See “Part II-Item 8 - Note 15 (Commitments and Contingencies).”
(2)There are generally no notional or stated amounts related to unpaid losses and LAE. Both the amounts and timing of future loss and LAE payments are estimates and subject to the inherent variability of legal and market conditions affecting the obligations and make the timing of cash outflows uncertain. The ultimate amount and timing of unpaid losses and LAE could differ materially from the amounts in the table above. Further, the unpaid losses and LAE do not represent all the obligations that will arise under the contracts, but rather only the estimated liability incurred through December 31, 2020. Unpaid losses and LAE are net of estimated subrogation recoveries. In addition, these balances exclude amounts recoverable from our reinsurance program. See “Part II-Item 8 - Note 4 (Reinsurance).”
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
The financial statements and related data presented herein have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which require the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without considering changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. Our primary assets are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates have a more significant impact on our performance than the effects of the general levels of inflation. Interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or with the same magnitude as the cost of paying losses and LAE.
Insurance premiums are established before we know the amount of loss and LAE and the extent to which inflation may affect such expenses. Consequently, we attempt to anticipate the future impact of inflation when establishing rate levels. While we attempt to charge adequate rates, we may be limited in raising premium levels for competitive and regulatory reasons. Inflation also affects the market value of our investment portfolio and the investment rate of return. Any future economic changes which result in prolonged and increasing levels of inflation could cause increases in the dollar amount of incurred loss and LAE and thereby materially adversely affect future liability requirements.
Arrangements with Variable Interest Entities
We entered into a reinsurance captive arrangement with a VIE in the normal course of business, and consolidated the VIE since we are the primary beneficiary.
For a further discussion of our involvement with the VIE, see “Part II-Item 8 - Note 2 (Summary of Significant Accounting Policies)” and “Item 8 - Note 18 (Variable Interest Entities).”
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods.
Liability for Unpaid Losses and LAE
A liability, net of estimated subrogation, is established to provide for the estimated costs of paying losses and LAE under insurance policies the Insurance Entities have issued. Underwriting results are significantly influenced by an estimate of a liability for unpaid losses and LAE. The liability is an estimate of amounts necessary to settle all outstanding claims, including claims that have been incurred, but not yet reported as of the financial statement date. The process of estimating loss reserves requires significant judgment due to a number of variables, such as the type, severity and jurisdiction of loss, economic conditions including inflation, social attitudes, judicial decisions and legislative development and changes in claims handling procedures. These variables will inherently result in an ultimate liability that will differ from initial estimates. See “Part I-Item 1A - Risk Factors-Risks Relating to Our Business and Operations-Actual claims incurred have exceeded, and in the future may exceed, reserves established for claims, adversely affecting our operating results and financial condition.” We revise our reserve for unpaid losses as additional information becomes available, and reflect adjustments, if any, in our earnings in the
periods in which we determine the adjustments are necessary. We estimate and accrue our right to subrogate reported or estimated claims against other parties. Subrogated claims are recorded at amounts estimated to be received from the subrogated parties, net of expenses and netted against unpaid losses and LAE.
See “Part II-Item 8 - Note 17 (Liability for Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses)” for a discussion of the Company’s basis and methodologies used to establish its liability for unpaid losses and LAE along with the following quantitative disclosures:
•Five-year accident year table on incurred claim and allocated claim adjustment expenses, net of reinsurance including columns of:
◦IBNR-Total of Incurred-but-not-reported liabilities plus expected development (redundancy) on reported claims by accident year, and
◦Claim counts-cumulative number of reported claims by accident year.
•Five-year accident year table on cumulative paid claims and allocated claim adjustment expenses, net of reinsurance,
•Reconciliation of net incurred and paid claims development tables to the liability for unpaid losses and LAE in the consolidated balance sheet,
•Duration-a table of the average historical claims duration for the past five years, and
•Reconciliation of the change in liability for unpaid losses and LAE presented in the consolidated financial statements.
We utilize independent actuaries to help establish liabilities for unpaid losses, anticipated loss recoveries and LAE. We do not discount the liability for unpaid losses and LAE for financial statement purposes. In establishing the liability for unpaid losses and LAE, actuarial judgment is relied upon in order to make appropriate assumptions to estimate a best estimate of ultimate losses. There are inherent uncertainties associated with this estimation process, especially when a company is undergoing changes in its claims settlement practices, when a company has limited experience in a certain area or when behaviors of policyholders are influenced by external factors and/or market dynamics. As an example, a dramatic change occurred during calendar year 2015 when we realigned our adjusting teams as well as launched our Fast Track initiative, reducing settlement costs and strengthening case reserve adequacy for claims reported during the year. These changes have had a meaningful influence on development pattern selections applied to 2013 through 2017 accident year claims in the reserving estimates for each of the methods described in “Item 8 - Note 17 (Liability for Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses).” More recently, since 2016 there has been a significant increase in efforts to pursue subrogation against third parties responsible for property damage losses to our insureds. As a result, anticipated subrogation recoveries are reviewed and estimated on a stand-alone basis in the Company’s reserve analysis. Market dynamics in Florida include the use of assignments of benefits (“AOB”) and the resulting increase in litigation against the Company. As a result of the use of AOBs, as well as the continued overall increase in represented claims and claims-related abuses in Florida, we have increased our estimates of ultimate losses for the most recent and prior accident years.
Factors Affecting Reserve Estimates
Reserve estimates are developed based on the processes and historical development trends discussed in “Item 8 - Note 17 (Liability for Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses)” to the consolidated financial statements. These estimates are considered in conjunction with known facts and interpretations of circumstances and factors including our experience with similar cases, actual claims paid, differing payment patterns and pending levels of unpaid claims, loss management programs, product mix and contractual terms, changes in law and regulation, judicial decisions, and economic conditions. When these types of changes are experienced, actuarial judgment is applied in the determination and selection of development factors in order to better reflect new trends or expectations. For example, if a change in law is expected to have a significant impact on the development of claim severity, actuarial judgment is applied to determine appropriate development factors that will most accurately reflect the expected impact on that specific estimate. This example appropriately describes the reserving methodology selection for use in estimating sinkhole liabilities after the passing of legislation, as noted in “Item 8 - Note 17 (Liability for Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses)” to the consolidated financial statements. Another example would be when a change in economic conditions is expected to affect the cost of repairs to property; actuarial judgment is applied to determine appropriate development factors to use in the reserve estimate that will most accurately reflect the expected impacts on severity development.
Changes in homeowners current year claim severity are generally influenced by inflation in the cost of building materials, the cost of construction and property repair services, the cost of replacing home furnishings and other contents, the types of claims that qualify for coverage, the presence of third party representation, such as legal or repair contractors (which serve to inflate claim expenses) and other economic and environmental factors. We employ various loss management programs to mitigate the effects of these factors.
Key assumptions that may materially affect the estimate of the reserve for loss and LAE relate to the effects of emerging claim and coverage issues. As industry practices and legal, judicial, social and other environmental conditions change, unexpected and unintended issues related to claims and coverages may emerge. These issues may adversely affect our business by either extending coverage beyond our underwriting intent, lengthening the time to final settlement, or by increasing the number or size of claims. Key assumptions that are premised on future emergence that are inconsistent with historical loss reserve development patterns include but are not limited to:
•Adverse changes in loss cost trends, including inflationary pressures in home repair costs;
•Judicial expansion of policy coverage and the impact of new theories of liability; and
•Plaintiffs targeting property and casualty insurers in purported class action litigation related to claims-handling and other practices.
As loss experience for the current year develops for each type of loss, the reserves for loss and LAE are monitored relative to initial assumptions until they are judged to have sufficient statistical credibility. From that point in time and forward, reserves are re-estimated using statistical actuarial processes to reflect the impact loss trends have on development factors incorporated into the actuarial estimation processes.
Causes of Reserve Estimate Uncertainty
Since reserves are estimates of the unpaid portions of claims and claims expenses that have occurred, the establishment of appropriate reserves, including reserves for catastrophes, requires regular reevaluation and refinement of estimates to determine ultimate loss and LAE estimates.
At each reporting date, the highest degree of uncertainty in reserve estimates arises from claims remaining to be settled for the current accident year and the most recent preceding accident year, and claims that have occurred but have not been reported. The estimate for the current accident year contains the greatest degree of uncertainty because it contains the greatest proportion of losses that have not been reported or settled but must be estimated as of the current reporting date. During the first year after the end of an accident year, a large portion of the total losses for that accident year are settled. When accident year losses paid through the end of the first year following the initial accident year are incorporated into updated actuarial estimates, the trends inherent in the settlement of claims emerge more clearly. Consequently, this is the point in time at which the largest re-estimates of losses for an accident year can occur. After the second year, the losses paid for the accident year typically relate to claims that are more difficult to settle, such as those involving litigation.
Reserves for Catastrophe Losses
Loss and LAE reserves also include reserves for catastrophe losses. Catastrophe losses are an inherent risk of the property-casualty insurance industry that have contributed, and will continue to contribute, to potentially material year-to-year fluctuations in results of operations and financial position. A catastrophe is an event that produces significant insured losses before reinsurance and involves multiple first party policyholders, or an event that produces a number of claims in excess of a preset, per-event threshold of average claims in a specific area, occurring within a certain amount of time following the event. Catastrophes are commonly caused by various natural events including high winds, tornadoes, wildfires, winter storms, tropical storms and hurricanes.
The estimation of claims and claims expense reserves for catastrophes also comprises estimates of losses from reported and unreported claims, primarily for damage to property. In general, estimates for catastrophe reserves are based on claim adjuster inspections and the application of historical loss development factors as described previously and in “Item 8 - Note 17 (Liability for Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses)” to the consolidated financial statements. However, depending on the nature of the catastrophe, as noted above, the estimation process can be further complicated. For example, for hurricanes, complications could include the inability of insureds to be able to promptly report losses, limitations placed on claims adjusting staff affecting their ability to inspect losses, determining whether losses are covered by our homeowners policy (generally for damage caused by wind or wind driven rain) or specifically excluded coverage caused by flood, estimating additional living expenses or assessing the impact of demand surge and exposure to mold damage. The effects of numerous other considerations, include the timing of a catastrophe in relation to other events, such as at or near the end of a financial reporting period, which can affect the availability of information needed to estimate reserves for that reporting period. In these situations, practices are adapted to accommodate these circumstances in order to determine a best estimate of losses from a catastrophe.
Key Actuarial Assumptions That Affect the Loss and LAE Estimate
The aggregation of estimates for reported losses and IBNR forms the reserve liability recorded in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
At any given point in time, the recorded loss and LAE reserves represent our best estimate of the ultimate settlement and administration cost of insured claims incurred and unpaid. Since the process of estimating loss and LAE reserves requires significant judgment due to a number of variables, such as fluctuations in inflation, judicial decisions, legislative changes and changes in claims handling procedures, ultimate liability may exceed or be less than these estimates. Reserves for losses and LAE are revised as additional information becomes available, and adjustments, if any, are reflected in earnings in the periods in which they are determined.
In selecting development factors and averages described in “Item 8 - Note 17 (Liability for Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses)” to the consolidated financial statements, due consideration is given to how the historical experience patterns change from one year to the next over the course of several consecutive years of recent history. Predictions surrounding these patterns drive the estimates that are produced by each method, and are based on statistical techniques that follow standard actuarial practices.
In compliance with annual statutory reporting requirements, our appointed independent actuary provides a Statement of Actuarial Opinion (“SAO”) indicating that carried loss and LAE reserves recorded at each annual balance sheet date make a reasonable provision for all of the Insurance Entities’ unpaid loss and LAE obligations under the terms of contracts and agreements with our policyholders. Recorded reserves are compared to the indicated range provided in the actuary’s report accompanying the SAO. At December 31, 2020, the recorded amount for net loss and LAE falls within the range determined by the appointed independent actuaries and approximates their best estimate.
Potential Reserve Estimate Variability
The methods employed by actuaries include a range of estimated unpaid losses, each reflecting a level of uncertainty. Projections of loss and LAE liabilities are subject to potentially large variability in the estimation process since the ultimate disposition of claims incurred prior to the financial statement date, whether reported or not, is subject to the outcome of events that have not yet occurred. Examples of these events include jury decisions, court interpretations, legislative changes, public attitudes and social/economic conditions such as inflation. Any estimate of future costs is subject to the inherent limitation on one’s ability to predict the aggregate course of future events. It should therefore be expected that the actual emergence of losses and LAE will vary, perhaps materially, from any estimate.
In selecting the range of reasonable estimates, the range of indications produced by the various methods is evaluated, the relative strengths and weaknesses of each method are considered, and from those inputs a range of estimates can be selected. For reasons cited above, this range of estimated ultimate losses is typically smaller for older, more mature accident periods and greater for more recent, less mature accident periods. The greatest level of uncertainty is associated with the most recent accident years, and particularly years during which catastrophe events occurred.
The inherent uncertainty associated with our loss and LAE liability is magnified due to our concentration of property business in catastrophe-exposed and litigious states, primarily Florida. In 2018, for example, loss and expense payments for Hurricane Irma claims exceeded initial liability estimates that were established at year-end 2017, which was shortly after the event occurred. This unexpected development was partially due to the influence of plaintiff attorneys in the claim filing process; both at initial contact prior to coverage validation or damage assessment, and after claims were settled and closed which resulted in a large number of claims being reopened during the year. In 2019, UPCIC continued to experience unanticipated unfavorable development on losses from claims being reopened and new claims being opened due to public adjusters encouraging policyholders to file new claims. Due to the relatively low frequency and inherent uncertainty of catastrophe events, the parameters utilized in loss estimation methodologies are updated whenever new information emerges.
Adequacy of Reserve Estimates
We believe our net loss and LAE reserves are appropriately established based on available methodology, facts, technology, laws and regulations. We calculate and record a single best reserve estimate, in conformance with generally accepted actuarial standards, for reported and unreported losses and LAE losses and as a result we believe no other estimate is better than our recorded amount.
Due to the uncertainties involved, the ultimate cost of losses and LAE may vary materially from recorded amounts, which are based on our best estimates. The liability for unpaid losses and LAE at December 31, 2020 is $322.5 million.
Reinsurance
In the normal course of business, we seek to reduce the risk of loss that may arise from catastrophes or other events that cause unfavorable underwriting results by reinsuring certain levels of risk in various areas of exposure with other insurance enterprises or reinsurers. While ceding premiums to reinsurers reduces our risk of exposure in the event of catastrophic losses, it also reduces our potential for greater profits in the event that such catastrophic events do not occur. We believe that the extent of our reinsurance level of protection is typical of, or exceeds, that of other insurers actively writing in the Florida homeowners insurance market. Amounts recoverable from reinsurers are estimated in a manner consistent with the provisions of the reinsurance agreement and consistent with the establishment of our gross liability. The Insurance Entities’ reinsurance policies do not relieve them from their obligations to policyholders. Failure of reinsurers to honor their obligations could result in losses; consequently, allowances are established for amounts deemed uncollectible from reinsurers. No such allowance was deemed necessary as of December 31, 2020.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
In December 2019, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) revised U.S. GAAP with the issuance of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740). The amendments in this ASU simplify the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions and clarifying certain requirements regarding franchise taxes, goodwill, consolidated tax expenses and annual effective tax rate calculations. The ASU is effective for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. We do not believe this standard will have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.