Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors. The consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any future period. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Form 10-K and in conjunction with the “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Business Overview
Second Sight Medical Products, Inc. (NASDAQ: EYES) has developed, manufactured and marketed implantable visual prosthetics that are intended to deliver useful artificial vision to blind individuals. We are a recognized global leader in neuromodulation devices for blindness, and are committed to developing new technologies to treat the broadest population of sight-impaired individuals.
Leveraging our 20 years of experience in neuromodulation for vision, we are developing the Orion® Visual Cortical Prosthesis System (“Orion”), an implanted cortical stimulation device intended to provide useful artificial vision to individuals who are blind due to a wide range of causes, including RP, glaucoma, diabetic retinopathy, optic nerve injury or disease and eye injury. Orion is intended to convert images captured by a miniature video camera mounted on glasses into a series of small electrical pulses. The device is designed to bypass diseased or injured eye anatomy and to transmit these electrical pulses wirelessly to an array of electrodes implanted on the surface of the brain’s visual cortex, where it is intended to provide the perception of patterns of light. We are conducting a six-subject Early Feasibility Study of the Orion device at the Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center in Los Angeles (“UCLA”) and Baylor College of Medicine in Houston (“Baylor”) Although regularly scheduled visits are on hold due to the coronavirus outbreak, sites continue to see patients if needed for any potential medical issues that may arise including any suspected adverse events. Our 12 month results for the subjects indicate to us that:
•We have a good safety profile. Four subjects experienced a total of eleven adverse events (AEs) related to the device or to the surgery, through the latest independent medical safety monitor meeting in March 2020. One was considered a serious adverse event (SAE), and all of the adverse events were in the expected category. The one SAE was resolved quickly and did not require a hospital stay.
•The efficacy data is encouraging. We measure efficacy by looking at three measures of visual function: The first is square localization, where Orion subjects sit in front of a touch screen and are asked to touch within the boundaries of a square when it appears. The second is direction of motion, where subjects are asked to identify the direction and motion of lines on a screen. The third is grating visual acuity, a measure of visual acuity that is adapted for very low vision. On square localization, five of the six subjects in our feasibility study performed significantly better with the system on than off. On direction of motion, all six performed better on than off; and on grating visual acuity, three had measurable visual acuity on the scale of this test (versus none who can do it with the device off). Another efficacy measurement of day-to-day functionality and benefit is FLORA, which stands for Functional Low-Vision Observer Rated Assessment. FLORA is an assessment performed by an independent, third-party low vision orientation and mobility specialist who spends time with each of the subjects in their homes. The specialist asks each of the subjects a series of questions and also observes them performing 15 or more daily living tasks, such as finding light sources, following a sidewalk, or sorting laundry. The specialist then determines if the system is providing a benefit, if it is neutral, or if it is actually hurting the abilities of subjects to perform these tasks. Our FLORA results show that for five of the six subjects, the Orion system is providing benefit. We reached agreement with the FDA in the fourth quarter of 2019 to utilize a revised version of FLORA as our primary efficacy endpoint in our pivotal trial for Orion, pending successful validation of the instrument.
No peer-reviewed data is available yet for the Orion system. We are currently evaluating whether to enroll additional feasibility subjects while simultaneously negotiating the clinical and regulatory pathway to commercialization with the FDA as part of the Breakthrough Devices Program.
Our principal offices are located in Los Angeles, California.
Our first commercially approved product, the Argus® II Retinal Prosthesis System (“Argus II”), treats outer retinal degenerations, such as retinitis pigmentosa, also referred to as RP. The Argus II was the only retinal prosthesis
approved in the United States by the Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”), and was the first approved retinal prosthesis in the world. RP is a hereditary disease, affecting an estimated 1.5 million people worldwide including about 100,000 people in the United States, that causes a progressive degeneration of the light-sensitive cells of the retina, leading to significant visual impairment and ultimately blindness. A subset of these patients would be eligible for the Argus II since the approved baseline vision for the Argus II is worse than legally blind (20/200). We commissioned 3rd party market research to estimate the size of the RP market that resulted in an estimate of approximately 1,500 patients in the US with advanced RP that could be treated with the Argus II given the eligibility criteria of our label.
We began selling the Argus II System in Europe at the end of 2011, Saudi Arabia in 2012, the United States and Canada in 2014, Turkey in 2015, Iran, Taiwan, South Korea and Russia in 2017, and Singapore in 2018. Given the limited addressable market of Argus II, we no longer market the Argus II and have focused all of our resources on the development of Orion.
We are also researching multiple technologies that we believe to be complimentary to artificial vision and could potentially provide significant enhancements to the Orion user experience. In most cases, we collaborate with 3rd party firms to advance and integrate these innovative technologies with our artificial vision systems. Examples of technologies that we believe will be complimentary to our products include: eye tracking, object recognition and localization, thermal imaging and depth-based decluttering.
In March 2020, we were severely adversely impacted by the unprecedented economic shock caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and its related effects on our ability to secure financing for our planned activities. As a result, we significantly reduced our staff and expenses and conserved liquidity as we continue operations and explore strategic options. These options include securing additional funding and exploring business alternatives that may include partnering, acquiring, investing in or combining with businesses that may or may not be in a related industry. We are actively seeking opportunities to develop partnerships or collaborations with others to advance further Orion development, conduct pivotal trials and bring the product to market for the treatment of blindness. No assurances can be given that any of these initiatives will occur.
In early March 2020, we commenced clinical validation activities for the FLORA-20 instrument, the primary efficacy endpoint we have selected for our future pivotal clinical trial of Orion. In mid-March 2020, our validation activities were suspended as a result of public health concerns and related social distancing due to COVID-19. We are in the process of evaluating when activities related to the validation study can be resumed.
On March 27, 2020, the Board of Directors appointed Matthew Pfeffer, a member of our Board and Chairman of the Audit Committee of the Board, as acting Chief Executive Officer.
In furtherance of our decision to withdraw Argus II from the market, we have terminated two post-market studies for Argus II in Germany and the U.S., terminated an extended non-significant risk study in the U.S. for Argus 2s, and suspended our technical support of Argus II worldwide.
In May 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 7,500,000 shares of common stock at an offering price of $1.00 per share for aggregate gross proceeds of $7.5 million, and net proceeds of approximately $6.7 million after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and other offering expenses. Based on our current plans, existing cash and cash equivalents can sustain our operations into June 2021.
In May 2020, we entered into a Letter Agreement with Sylmar Biomedical Park, LLC (the “Landlord”) to terminate our facility leases in which we agreed to vacate the premises by June 18, 2020 and pay $210,730 to bring our leases current and pay a one-time early termination fee of $150,000. Prior to the early termination, we were obligated to pay aggregate base rent of approximately $0.9 million and common area maintenance expenses for the respective remaining terms of our leases in February 2022 and April 2023.
We completed our offer to rescind certain purchases of shares under our ESPP plan on May 27, 2020. We voluntarily offered to rescind the sale of shares of our common stock to employees who purchased those shares under the ESPP and to reimburse any losses upon the sale of our shares of our common stock for certain purchase periods because these shares may not have been exempt from registration under the Securities Act of 1933. The rescission of these share purchases resulted in the repurchase and cancelation of 39,467 shares of our common stock. The total cost
for the repurchase of these shares and the reimbursement of any losses from the sale of such shares totaled approximately $270,000.
In June 2020, we commenced a process to dissolve our Swiss subsidiary which is expected to take approximately one year.
On July 7, 2020, we entered into a lease with Sylmar Biomedical Park, LLC, to lease a smaller portion of our present facility. The new lease allowed us to significantly reduce our rent while maintaining operations and the current address. The term of the lease was from June 16, 2020 until December 31, 2020. We have terminated this lease and moved effective February 1, 2021.
On December 8, 2020, we borrowed $1 million from Gregg Williams, Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Company and $1.2 million from two unaffiliated shareholders. Each promissory note is unsecured and accrues interest at a rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum beginning on receipt of the loan amounts. Principal and accrued interest under the promissory notes, are payable on December 31, 2021.
On January 5, 2021, we entered into a Memorandum of Understanding with Pixium Vision, a publicly held French company (“Pixium”). Pursuant to the terms of the Memorandum of Understanding, which sets forth the framework of the principal actions to be taken, (i) we will raise additional working capital of at least $25,000,000 in a private placement of equity securities of Second Sight to accredited investors (the “Fund Raising”); (ii) Pixium will contribute to us certain assets in exchange for newly issued common stock of Second Sight (the “Contribution”); and (iii) we will transfer our Orion assets to a newly formed subsidiary (“SpinCo”), the share capital of which would be partially spun-off to our shareholders (the “Spin-Off” and, together with the Fund Raising and the Contribution, the “Business Combination”). See Note 14 for further discussion.
On January 22, 2021, we entered into a lease agreement, effective February 1, 2021, to lease office space to replace our existing headquarters. We will pay $17,000 per month, increasing to $17,500 per month on February 1, 2022, plus operating expenses, to lease 17,290 square feet of office space at 13170 Telfair Avenue, Sylmar CA 91342. Additionally, we receive full rent abatement for March 2021, and half rent abatement for March 2022. The sub-lease is for two years and two months. We nor any affiliates are related to, or otherwise have any other relationship with, the other parties, other than the lease.
By letter dated February 26, 2021, the Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the Argus 2s Retinal Prosthesis System developed by Second Sight Medical Products, Inc. Argus 2s is a redesigned set of external hardware (glasses and video processing unit) to be used in combination with previously implanted Argus II systems for the treatment of retinitis pigmentosa (RP). We issued a press release on March 5, 2021 entitled Second Sight Medical Products, Inc. Receives FDA Approval for the Argus 2s Retinal Prosthesis System. Argus II, and now Argus 2s, are approved under a humanitarian device exemption (HDE). The approval is contingent upon the Company filing periodic reports with CDRH, use only under prescription, under the supervision of an institutional review board (IRB), and taking all other required actions under FDA rules. We expect that the Argus 2s will be adapted to be the external system for the next generation Orion Visual Cortical Prosthesis System currently under development
We are actively developing multiple technologies that we believe to be complimentary to artificial vision and could potentially provide significant enhancements to the Orion user experience. In most cases, we collaborate with third-party firms to advance and integrate these innovative technologies with our artificial vision systems. Examples of technologies that we are currently researching include: eye tracking, object recognition and localization, thermal imaging and depth-based image decluttering.
We are subject to the risks and uncertainties associated with a business without revenues, including limitations on our operating capital resources and uncertain future demand for our product. We have incurred recurring operating losses and negative operating cash flows since inception, and we expect to continue to incur operating losses and negative operating cash flows for the foreseeable future. Based on our current plans, we do not have sufficient funds to continue operating our business at current levels for at least twelve months from the date of issuance of this report. However, our operating plan may change as a result of many factors currently unknown to us, and we may need to seek additional funds sooner than planned, through public or private equity offerings, debt financings, grants, collaborations, strategic partnerships or other sources. However, we may be unable to raise additional capital or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. If we are unable to obtain funding on a timely basis, we may be required to significantly curtail, delay or discontinue one or more of our research or development programs, or we may be unable to expand our operations, maintain our current organization and employee base or
otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities, as desired, which could materially affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Capital Funding
Capital Funding
From inception, our operations have been funded primarily through the sales of our common stock and warrants, as well as from the issuance of convertible debt, research and clinical grants, and limited product revenue generated from the sale of our Argus II product. We have funded our business since 2018 has been primarily through the following transactions:
•
On December 8, 2020, we borrowed $1 million from Gregg Williams, Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Company and $1.2 million from two unaffiliated shareholders
•
On May 5, 2020, we closed our underwritten public offering of 7,500,000 shares of common stock at an offering price of $1.00 per share for aggregate net proceeds of approximately $6.7 million
•
A Rights offering of common stock and warrants in February 2019 which provided $34.4 million of net cash proceeds
•
Issuances of common stock through our At Market Issuance Sales Agreement during the fourth quarter of 2019 which provided $0.1 million of net cash proceeds
•
Revenue of $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 generated by sales of our Argus II product.
We received a $1.6 million grant (with the intent to fund $6.4 million over five years subject to annual review and approval) from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) to fund the “Early Feasibility Clinical Trial of a Visual Cortical Prosthesis” that commenced in January 2018. Our second year award of $1.4 million was recently approved under this grant. As of December 31, 2020 we recorded $0.9 million of deferred grant costs which will be offset with the related grant funds when received. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, we received a total of $0.4 million of grant funds primarily from this grant.
On September 17, 2019, we received a $2.4 million, four-year grant from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) to develop spatial localization and mapping technology (“SLAM”). This grant involves a joint collaboration with the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, and is intended to speed the integration of SLAM into future generations of Orion. The goal is to give Orion users the ability to localize objects and navigate landmarks in unfamiliar surroundings in real time. APL is the primary recipient of the grant. We have suspended our activities on the project until we clarify our future plans.
In a rights offering completed on February 22, 2019 we sold approximately 5,976,000 units, each priced at $5.792 for net cash proceeds of approximately $34.4 million. Each unit consisted of one share and one immediately exercisable warrant having an exercise price of $11.76 per share. Entities controlled by Gregg Williams, our Chairman of the Board of Directors, acquired approximately 5,180,000 units in the offering for an aggregate investment of approximately $30 million.
In November 2017 we entered into an At Market Issuance Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with B. Riley FBR Inc. and H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC, as agents (“Agents”) pursuant to which we offered and sold, from time to time through either of the Agents, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price as set forth in the Sales Agreement and a related prospectus supplement filed with the SEC. We agreed to pay the Agents a cash commission of 3.0% of the aggregate gross proceeds from each sale of shares under the Sales Agreement. During January and February 2018, we sold 278,000 shares of common stock for additional net proceeds of $4.0 million under the Sales Agreement. During December 2019, we sold approximately 17,000 shares of common stock which provided net proceeds of $0.1 million under the Sales Agreement. This agreement was terminated in April 2020.
On May 5, 2020, we closed our underwritten public offering of 7,500,000 shares of common stock at an offering price of $1.00 per share for aggregate net proceeds of approximately $6.7 million.
On December 8, 2020, we borrowed $1 million from Gregg Williams, Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Company and $1.2 million from two unaffiliated shareholders. Each promissory note is unsecured and accrues interest
at a rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum beginning on receipt of the loan amounts. Principal and accrued interest under the promissory notes are payable on December 31, 2021.
We are subject to the risks and uncertainties associated with a business with no revenue that is developing a novel medical device. We have incurred recurring operating losses and negative operating cash flows since inception, and we expect to continue to incur operating losses and negative operating cash flows for the foreseeable future. Based on our current plans, we do not have sufficient funds to continue operating our business at current levels for at least twelve months from the date of issuance of this report. To finance our operations beyond that point, we will need to raise additional capital, which cannot be assured. Our operating plan may change as a result of many factors currently unknown to us, and we will need to seek additional funds during that period, through public or private equity offerings or debt financings, grants, collaborations, strategic partnerships or other sources. However, we may be unable to raise additional capital or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. If we are unable to obtain funding on a timely basis, we may be required to significantly curtail, delay or discontinue one or more of our research or development programs, or we may be unable to expand or maintain our operations, maintain our current organization and employee base or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities, as desired, which could materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. Accordingly, these factors among others raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our independent registered public accounting firm, in its report on our 2020 consolidated financial statements, has raised substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. See “Risk Factors.”
Insurance Reimbursement
Obtaining reimbursement from governmental and private insurance companies is critical to our commercial success. Due to the price of the Orion system, our future sales would be limited without the availability of third-party reimbursement. In the U.S., coding, coverage, and payment are necessary for the surgical procedure and Orion system to be reimbursed by payors. Coding will need to be established for the device and the surgical procedure. Coverage and payment vary by payor. The majority of Argus II were patients are eligible for Medicare, and coverage is primarily provided through traditional Medicare, sometimes referred to as Medicare Fee-for-Service (“FFS”) or Medicare Advantage. A small percentage of patients are covered by commercial insurers.
•
Medicare FFS patients - Coverage is determined by Medicare Administrative Contractors (MACs) that administer various geographic regions of the U.S.
•
Medicare Advantage patients - Medicare Advantage plans are required to cover the same benefits as those covered by the MAC in that jurisdiction. For example, if a MAC in a jurisdiction has favorable coverage for Orion, then typically Medicare Advantage plans in that MAC jurisdiction offer the same coverage. Individual hospitals and ASCs may negotiate contracts specific to that individual facility. In addition, procedural payment is variable and can be based on a percentage of billed charges, payment groupings or other individually negotiated payment methodologies. Medicare Advantage plans also allow providers to confirm coverage and payment for the procedure in advance of implantation.
•
Commercial insurer patients - Commercial insurance plans make coverage and payment rate decisions independent of Medicare, and contracts are individually negotiated with facility and physician providers.
Currently, we are in the process of evaluating potential reimbursement pathways for Orion in the U.S. market. Compared to Argus II, which was largely catering to the Medicare patient population, Orion is expected to address a patient population with a more diverse and balanced payor mix due to our potential indications profile and expected younger patient population, on average. As Orion is a part of the FDA’s Breakthrough Devices program, we are closely evaluating a variety of fast-track reimbursement programs, including recent encouraging announcements from CMS proposing modernization of payment policies for medical devices that meet FDA’s Breakthrough Devices designation. We have also approached some commercial payors and CMS to get their feedback to ensure our overall reimbursement strategy for Orion therapy will cater to their key data requirements.
Product and Clinical Development Plans
Orion. By further developing our visual cortical prosthesis, Orion, we believe we may be able to significantly expand our market to include nearly all profoundly blind individuals. The principle notable exceptions for potential
use of the Orion are those who are blind due to otherwise currently treatable diseases, individuals who are born blind, or blindness due to direct damage of the visual cortex, which is rare. However, of the estimated 36 million blind people worldwide, there are approximately 5.8 million people who are legally blind due to causes that are not otherwise treatable (including RP) or age-related macular degeneration (“AMD”). We continue to develop and refine our estimates of the potential addressable market size as we evaluate the commercial prospects for Orion using a combination of published sources, third party market research, and physician feedback. We currently estimate over 500,000 individuals in the US are legally blind due to retinitis pigmentosa, glaucoma, diabetic retinopathy, optic nerve disease and eye injury. Of this population, we estimate the potential US addressable market is between 50,000 and 100,000 individuals with bi-lateral blindness at the light-perception level or worse. Our marketing approvals by the FDA and other regulatory agencies will ultimately determine the subset of these patients who are eligible for the Orion based on our clinical trials and the associated results.
Our objective in designing and developing the Orion visual prosthesis system is to bypass the optic nerve and directly stimulate the part of the brain responsible for human vision. A six-subject Early Feasibility Study of the Orion device is currently underway at UCLA and Baylor. Regularly scheduled visits at both sites were placed on hold in mid-March due to Covid-19, however visits at UCLA resumed mid-September 2020. Regularly scheduled visits at Baylor are still on hold but the site is preparing to resume the study soon. Our 12 month results for the six subjects indicate a good safety profile with encouraging efficacy data and benefits in helping subjects perform their daily living tasks. We believe these data are encouraging and support advancement of Orion into a larger pivotal clinical study. Early promising results are not necessarily indicative of results which may be obtained in large clinical trials. No assurance can be given that we will achieve similar results in our larger Orion clinical trials. No peer-reviewed data is available yet for the Orion system.
In November 2017, the FDA granted Breakthrough Devices Program designation for the Orion. This designation is given to a few select medical devices in order to provide more effective treatment of life-threatening or irreversibly debilitating diseases or conditions. This program is intended to help patients have more timely access to these medical devices by expediting their development, assessment, and review.
COVID-19 Pandemic
In accordance with local and state guidelines regarding the COVID-19 pandemic, we are requiring all of our employees to work remotely unless they cannot perform their essential functions remotely, and have also suspended all non-essential travel for our employees. While many of our employees are accustomed to working remotely, much of our workforce has not historically been remote. Although we continue to monitor the situation and may adjust our current policies as more information and public health guidance becomes available, temporarily suspending travel and restricting the ability to do business in person may create operational or other challenges, any of which could harm our business, financial condition and results of operations.
In addition, our clinical trials have been affected by the COVID-19 outbreak. Patient visits in ongoing clinical trials have been delayed, for example, due to prioritization of hospital resources toward the COVID-19 outbreak, travel restrictions imposed by governments, and the inability to access sites for initiation and monitoring. Also, some of our suppliers of certain materials used in the development of our product candidates are located in areas impacted by COVID-19 which could limit our ability to obtain sufficient materials for our product candidates. COVID-19 has and will continue to adversely affect global economies and financial markets, and may result in an economic downturn that could affect demand for our product candidates, if approved, and impact our operating results. Even after the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided, we may continue to experience an adverse impact to our business as a result of the continued global economic impact of the pandemic. We cannot anticipate all of the ways in which health epidemics such as COVID-19 could adversely impact our business. Although we are continuing to monitor and assess the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic or a similar health epidemic is highly uncertain and subject to change. See the Risk Factors section for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
ASU No. 2018-07, Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting. was issued with an effective date for public companies fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018, and interim periods within those fiscal years. For all other entities, the effective date is fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019. Previously, share-based payments to nonemployees were accounted for under Subtopic 505-50, which significantly differs from
the guidance for share-based payments to employees under Topic 718. This ASU supersedes Subtopic 505-50 by expanding the scope of Topic 718 to include nonemployee awards and generally aligning the accounting for nonemployee awards with the accounting for employee awards. We adopted this ASU on January 1, 2019 with no material impact on our results of operations, financial position and cash flows.
We adopted ASU No. 2016-02-Leases (Topic 842), as amended, as of January 1, 2019, using the modified retrospective approach. The modified retrospective approach provides a method for recording existing leases at the period of adoption without restating prior comparative periods which is the method we have chosen. In addition, we elected the package of practical expedients permitted under the transition guidance within the new standard, which among other things, allowed us to carry forward the historical lease classification. Adoption of the new standard resulted in the recording of right-of-use assets and operating lease liabilities of approximately $2.6 million and $2.8 million, respectively, as of January 1, 2019. The difference of $0.2 million between the right-of-use assets and operating lease liabilities, net of the deferred tax impact, was recorded as an adjustment to accumulated deficit at January 1, 2019. The standard did not materially impact our consolidated net earnings and had no impact on cash flows.
We believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, authoritative guidance, if currently adopted, would not have a material impact on our financial statement presentation or disclosures.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Certain accounting policies and estimates are particularly important to the understanding of our financial position and results of operations and require the application of significant judgment by our management or can be materially affected by changes from period to period in economic factors or conditions that are outside of our control. As a result, they are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. In applying these policies, our management uses their judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of certain estimates. Those estimates are based on our historical operations, our future business plans and projected financial results, the terms of existing contracts, our observance of trends in the industry, information provided by our customers and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. See Note 2 of notes to our consolidated financial statements for a more complete description of our significant accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition.  We generated our revenue from sales of our Argus II Retinal Prosthesis Systems, which include the implant and wearable components. Our product sales generally consisted of the implant and related surgical supplies and may include a performance obligation related to post-surgical support. We have discontinued sales of this product to focus on development of Orion.
We sold our products through two main sales channels: 1) directly to customers who use our products (the “Direct Channel”) and 2) to distribution partners who resell our products (the “Indirect Channel”).
Under the Direct Channel, we sold our systems to and we received payment directly from customers who implanted our products. Under our Indirect Channel, we entered into distribution agreements that allowed the distributors to sell our systems and fulfill performance obligations for surgical support and post-surgical support.
We determined revenue recognition through the following steps:
•
Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer
•
Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
•
Determination of the transaction price
•
Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
•
Recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation
Revenue was generally recognized upon surgical implant, unless we had a significant performance obligation for post-surgical support. We recognized revenue when a material reversal was no longer probable. Conditions that precluded us from recognizing revenue generally involved new customers with no reimbursement or reimbursement history, and depended on third-party behavior beyond our control, uncertain payment cycles over an extended period of time, and our limited historical experience with these arrangements.
Stock-Based Compensation. Pursuant to Financial Accounting Standards Board ASC 718 Share-Based Payment (“ASC 718”), we record stock-based compensation expense for all stock-based awards. Under ASC 718, we estimate the fair value of stock options granted using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The fair value for awards that are expected to vest is then amortized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award, which is generally the option vesting term.
•
The grant price of the issuances is determined based on the fair value of the shares at the date of grant.
•
The risk free interest rate for periods within the contractual life of the option is based on the U.S. treasury yield in effect at the time of grant.
•
We calculate the expected term of options using a weighted average of option vesting periods and an estimate of one-half of the period between vesting and expiration of the option.
•
Volatility is determined based on our average historical volatilities since our trading history began in November 2014, and supplemented with average historical volatilities of comparable companies in our industry.
•
Expected dividend yield is based on current yield at the grant date or the average dividend yield over the historical period. We have never declared or paid dividends and have no plans to do so in the foreseeable future.
Patent Costs. We have over 300 domestic and foreign patents. Due to the uncertainty associated with the successful development of one or more commercially viable products based on our research efforts and any related patent applications, all patent costs, including patent-related legal, filing fees and other costs, including internally generated costs, are expensed as incurred. Patent costs are included in general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations.
Results of Operations
Net sales. Our net sales were derived primarily from the sale of our Argus II product. We began selling the Argus II in Europe at the end of 2011, Saudi Arabia in 2012, the United States and Canada in 2014, Turkey in 2015, Iran, Taiwan, South Korea and Russia in 2017, and Singapore in 2018. Given the limited addressable market of the Argus II, we made the decision in 2018 to maximize capital efficiency with our Argus commercial and clinical activities and increase our investment of resources with our Orion clinical and R&D programs. In October 2018, we announced a restructuring of our international commercial activities and personnel. This restructuring resulted in a decision to no longer support new implants of Argus II in Turkey, Iran, Singapore and Russia. Our sales were also impacted by our decision in May 2019 to suspend Argus II production and focus on our Orion platform. We expect no further sales of Argus II.
Cost of sales. Cost of sales includes the salaries, benefits, material, overhead, third-party costs, warranty, charges for excess and obsolete inventory, and other costs required to make our Argus II system at our Los Angeles, California facility. Our product involves technologically complex materials and processes. We record cost of sales when products are implanted, which may differ from the period we are able to record revenue. Such timing differences may cause our reported results of operations to be difficult to compare from period to period.
Operating Expenses. We generally recognize our operating expenses as incurred in four general operational categories: research and development, clinical and regulatory, sales and marketing, and general and administrative. Our operating expenses also include a non-cash component related to the amortization of stock-based compensation for research and development, clinical and regulatory, sales and marketing and general and administrative personnel. From time-to-time we have received grants from institutions or agencies, such as the National Institutes of Health, to
help fund the some of the cost of our development efforts. We have recorded these grants as reductions to operating expenses.
•
Research and development expenses consist primarily of employee compensation and consulting costs related to the design, development, and enhancements of our current and potential future products, offset by grant revenue received in support of specific research projects. We expense our research and development costs as they are incurred. We expect research and development expenses to increase in the future as we pursue further enhancements of our existing product and develop technology for our potential future products, such as the Orion Visual Cortical Prosthesis. We also expect to receive additional grants in the future that will be offset primarily against research and development costs.
•
Clinical and regulatory expenses consist primarily of salaries, travel and related expenses for personnel engaged in clinical and regulatory functions, as well as internal and external costs associated with conducting clinical trials and maintaining relationships with regulatory agencies. We expect clinical and regulatory expenses to increase as we conduct clinical studies of potential future products such as the Orion Visual Cortical Prosthesis.
•
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries, commissions, travel and related expenses for personnel engaged in sales, marketing and business development functions, as well as costs associated with promotional and other marketing activities, including the cost of units consumed as demos or samples. We have suspended sales activities until such time as we are ready to market Orion.
•
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related expenses for executive, legal, finance, human resources, information technology and administrative personnel, as well as recruiting and professional fees, patent filing and annuity costs, insurance costs and other general corporate expenses, including rent. We expect general and administrative expenses to increase as we add personnel and incur additional costs related to the growth of our business and operate as a public company.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Worldwide commercial implant volume for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was as follows:
Net Sales. There were no net sales in 2020 compared to $3.4 million in 2019. There were no implants in 2020 as compared to 2019 when 26 implants were recognized. We ceased sales of Argus II to focus on our new product Orion.
Cost of sales. Cost of sales decreased from $2.2 million in 2019 to a negative $0.5 million in 2020. In 2020, we ceased sales of Argus II, thus a significant portion of our manufacturing activity related to Orion prototypes were reported in our research and development expenses. In addition, we revised our expected warranty expenses due to our cessation of Argus II production and the related peripherals which resulted in a reduction of our warranty liability of $0.5 million.
Research and development expense. Research and development expense decreased from $13.1 million in 2019 to $4.8 million in 2020, a decrease of $8.3 million, or 63%. The decrease from the prior year was primarily due to decreased headcount and outside services.
Clinical and regulatory expense. Clinical and regulatory expense decreased from $3.4 million in 2019 to $1.7 million in 2020, a decrease of $1.7 million, or 50%. The decrease primarily related to costs associated with the Orion
feasibility study which were higher in 2019 at the times of the implants and our reduced costs due to the pandemic restricting our patient access. We expect clinical and regulatory costs to increase in the future as we conduct additional clinical trials, such as the future pivotal study with Orion and if we enroll additional subjects.
Selling and marketing expense. Selling and marketing expense decreased from $6.1 million in 2019 to $0.7 million in 2020, a decrease of $5.4 million or 89%. This decrease in spending is the result of our cancelation of our commercial activities associated with the Argus II until such time as we produce a commercial product from our Orion platform.
General and administrative expense. General and administrative expense decreased from $9.2 million in 2019 to $5.9 million in 2020, a decrease of $3.3 million, or 36%. The decrease is primarily related to reduced personnel costs which includes a reduction in non-cash stock compensation expense.
Restructuring charges. We recorded non-cash restructuring charges of $1.2 million in 2020 comprised of $0.5 million to fully reserve our inventory in connection with our decision to no longer market Argus II and $0.7 million to write-down our fixed assets that are not directly involved in the development of Orion. We recorded a cash charge of $0.2 million in material and overhead costs associated with Argus II and a $0.8 million for severance compensation and other associated costs all of which was substantially settled by December 31, 2020.We recorded a non-cash restructuring charge of $2.6 million in 2019 to our reserve for excess and obsolete inventory in connection with our plans to suspend Argus II production. In addition, we recognized $0.8 million of pre-tax restructuring charges in 2019 consisting of severance and other employee termination benefits, substantially all of which was settled in cash during 2019.
Net loss. The net loss was $14.9 million in 2020, as compared to $33.6 million in 2019. The $18.7 million decrease in net loss from 2019 to 2020 was primarily attributable to a $19.8 million decrease in operating expenses due to cessation of Argus II commercial activities offset by a $0.7 million decrease in gross profit.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have experienced recurring operating losses and negative operating cash flows since inception and have financed our working capital requirements through the recurring sale of our equity securities in both public and private offerings.
Based on our current plans, we do not have sufficient funds to continue operating our business at current levels for at least 12 months from the date of issuance of this Form 10K. However, our operating plan may change as a result of many factors currently unknown to us, and we may need to seek additional funds sooner than planned, through public or private equity offerings or debt financings, grants, collaborations, strategic partnerships or other sources. However, we may be unable to raise additional capital or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. If we are unable to obtain funding on a timely basis, we may be required to significantly curtail, delay or discontinue one or more of our research or development programs or the commercialization of Argus II or any other approved product candidates, or we may be unable to expand our operations, maintain our current organization and employee base or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities, as desired, which could materially affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. As a result, management has concluded that there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern, and the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm, in its report on the Company’s 2020 consolidated financial statements, has raised substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
On December 8, 2020, we borrowed $1 million from Gregg Williams, Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Company and $1.2 million from two unaffiliated shareholders. Each promissory note is unsecured and accrues interest at a rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum beginning on receipt of the loan amounts. Principal and accrued interest under the promissory notes, are payable on December 31, 2021.
On May 5, 2020, we closed our underwritten public offering of 7,500,000 shares of common stock at an offering price of $1.00 per share for aggregate net proceeds of approximately $6.7 million.
In the period from January 1, 2018 to February 28, 2018, we sold approximately 278,000 additional shares through our At Market Issuance Sales agreement, raising gross proceeds of approximately $4.1 million and net proceeds of approximately $4.0 million after expenses. During December 2019, we sold approximately 17,000 shares of common stock through the same agreement which provided net proceeds of $0.1 million. In April 2020, we terminated the Sales Agreement with the Agents.
In a Rights Offering completed on February 22, 2019 we sold approximately 5,976,000 units, each priced at $5.792 for net proceeds of approximately $34.4 million. Each unit consisted of one share and one immediately exercisable warrant having a strike price of $11.76 per share. Entities controlled by Gregg Williams, our Chairman of the Board of Directors, acquired approximately 5,180,000 units in the offering for an aggregate investment of approximately $30 million.
Working capital was a negative $0.9 million at December 31, 2020, as compared to $6.2 million at December 31, 2019, a decrease of $7.1 million.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
During 2020, we used $16.8 million of cash in operating activities, consisting primarily of a net loss of $14.9 million, offset by non-cash charges of $1.8 million for depreciation and amortization of property and equipment, stock-based compensation, restructuring charges for inventory impairment, and $3.7 million from a net change in operating assets and liabilities.
During 2019, we used $27.6 million of cash in operating activities, consisting primarily of a net loss of $33.6 million, offset by non-cash charges of $5.9 million for depreciation and amortization of property and equipment, stock-based compensation, restructuring charges for inventory impairment, and $0.1 million from a net change in operating assets and liabilities.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Investing activities in 2020 and 2019 used $0.3 million and $0.5 million, respectively, of cash for the purchase of equipment. In 2020 the sale of assets held for sale provided cash of $0.4 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Financing activities provided $8.6 million of cash in 2020, including 6.7 million from the net proceeds from the issuance of common stock and warrants and $2.2 million from the issuance of debt offset by the repurchase of ESPP shares and fractional shares of $0.3 million.
Financing activities provided $35.0 million of cash in 2019, including $34.5 million from the net proceeds from the issuance of common stock and warrants and $0.5 million from the issuance of common stock for ESPP purchases
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020, we did not have any transactions, obligations or relationships that could be considered off-balance sheet arrangements.