Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Some of the numbers included herein have been rounded for the convenience of presentation. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under Part I., “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a global medical technology company primarily focused on the development and commercialization of our proprietary High Velocity Therapy products that are used to treat patients of all ages suffering from respiratory distress. Our High Velocity Therapy products deliver non-invasive ventilatory support by providing heated, humidified and oxygenated air at a high velocity to patients through a comfortable small-bore nasal interface. Our Precision Flow systems, which use High Velocity Therapy technology, are clinically validated alternatives to, and address many limitations of, the current standard of care for the treatment of respiratory distress in a hospital setting. As of December 31, 2020, more than 2.6 million patients have been treated with our Precision Flow systems, and we have a global installed base of over 28,000 capital units, an increase of 72.8% compared to December 31, 2019.
The efficacy of our products is supported by a significant body of clinical evidence across multiple patient populations suffering from respiratory distress. We have developed the only high velocity nasal insufflation device clinically validated as an alternative to NiPPV while addressing many of its limitations, evidenced in part by our sponsored 204 patient, multisite randomized controlled trial in the ED which was published in the July 2018 issue of Annals of Emergency Medicine. Additionally, in April 2020 Heart and Lung, the Journal of Cardiopulmonary and Acute Care, published a subgroup analysis from this ED study that showed High Velocity Therapy may provide ventilatory support similar to NiPPV in patients presenting with acute hypercapnic respiratory failure.
Our business was significantly transformed during 2020 due to increased demand for our High Velocity Therapy technology for treatment of COVID-19 patients, as evidenced by year over year revenue growth of 161.4% from 2019 to 2020. The COVID-19 pandemic contributed to this transformation in at least two primary ways: First, it resulted in increased awareness of high flow therapy, including recognition by the CDC, WHO, NIH, Society for Critical Care Medicine, American College of Emergency Physicians, and the Chinese, German, Italian, and Australian thoracic societies of high flow therapy as an appropriate first line therapy for those suffering from low oxygen levels. Second, many respiratory distress patients who require ventilatory support are initially treated in a hospital’s ED with the goal of stabilizing these patients with a non-invasive ventilation therapy so their underlying condition can be treated. Our existing focus on hospital emergency departments as an effective entry point for our products resulted in our systems being in the right place at the right time when the COVID-19 pandemic hit. This exposed a significant number of new physicians to the efficacy of our High Velocity Therapy technology, especially as they were able to see patients moved out of the emergency room and into lower acuity settings in the hospital after receiving our High Velocity Therapy. We expect that increased awareness among physicians of the efficacy of our High Velocity Therapy to treat respiratory distress will result in expanded use of our products to treat all forms of Type 1 and Type 2 respiratory distress in a variety of settings.
We currently offer four versions of our Precision Flow systems: Precision Flow Hi-VNI, Precision Flow Plus, Precision Flow Classic and Precision Flow Heliox. In certain countries outside of the United States we currently offer our Oxygen Assist Module, which was fully launched in the United Kingdom, select European markets, and Israel in late 2020. The Oxygen Assist Module can be used with all versions of our Precision Flow systems except for the Precision Flow Heliox. The Oxygen Assist Module is designed to help clinicians maintain a patient’s pulse oxygen saturation (“SpO2”) within a target SpO2 range over a greater period of time while requiring significantly fewer manual adjustments to the equipment. Maintenance of the prescribed oxygen saturation range may reduce the health risks associated with dosing too much, or too little, oxygen. In neonates, these risks include visual or developmental impairment or death.
In February 2021, we upgraded the software on approximately 45 Oxygen Assist Module units outside of the United States from software version 2.2.0 to software version 2.5.0. Subsequently, a bug in software version 2.5.0 was discovered by one of our employees. Although there have been no reports of patient injury associated with this bug and we believe risk of patient injury is unlikely, out of an abundance of caution, we immediately notified our users and undertook a field action to remove software version 2.5.0 from all upgraded units and downgrade these units to software version 2.2.0 until the issue is resolved. All software downgrades have been completed.
We are in the process of seeking FDA approval of our Oxygen Assist Module and are working with FDA to obtain an investigational device exemption for pediatric evaluation of the Oxygen Assist Module in the United States. The Oxygen Assist Module was granted Breakthrough Device Designation by the FDA on April 2, 2020 for the following indication: Oxygen Assist Module is an optional module used only with the Vapotherm Precision Flow and is indicated for on-demand titration of oxygen into warm humidified breathing gases delivered to spontaneously breathing patients based on continuous non-invasive monitoring of pulse oxygen saturation. Oxygen Assist Module is intended to treat pediatric patients (neonates and infants ≥1000g) in monitored clinical environments (e.g., the NICU).
We are also in the process of seeking FDA clearance for our High Velocity Therapy 2.0 (“HVT 2.0”) as the next generation of our Precision Flow system. Subject to receipt of FDA clearance, the HVT 2.0 is targeted to be released in the United States in the second half of 2021. The HVT 2.0 represents the next generation of High Velocity Therapy. The system retains the core competencies of the current Precision Flow platform and, with an internal blower, is designed to eliminate the need for wall air. With a variable oxygen connection (tank, wall or concentrator) the HVT 2.0 system is designed to support patients wherever they need respiratory support, including outside of the hospital in a home or future use in a field transport setting. A large intuitive display with touchscreen operation, on screen troubleshooting guidance, and a fully assembled disposable are designed to minimize clinician time spent on operating the equipment so they can focus on their patient. Despite not yet having received 510(k) clearance from the FDA, on February 12, 2021, the FDA notified us that, under FDA Emergency Use Authorization (“EUA”) issued on March 24, 2020, the HVT 2.0 was authorized for emergency use in healthcare settings to treat patients during the COVID-19 pandemic, subject to the conditions set forth in the EUA.
Historically, we have generated revenue primarily from sales of the disposable products utilized with our proprietary Precision Flow systems and our Oxygen Assist Module, and to a lesser extent, from the sale or lease of the capital units themselves. However, due to demand for our High Velocity Therapy technology during the COVID-19 pandemic, we generated revenue primarily from sales of our Precision Flow systems in 2020, which although put pressure on our margins also resulted in a 72.8% increase in our installed base, which we expect will drive future recurring disposable revenue. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will impact our business during 2021 and beyond will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 and variants of the virus, and the actions taken to treat or contain COVID-19 or to otherwise limit its impact, the availability and effectiveness of vaccines, among other factors. For example, as COVID-19 hospitalizations continue to decrease and vaccinations continue to increase, we expect our product mix to normalize back to historical levels and the overall demand for our products may be negatively impacted. Also, worldwide precautionary measures taken to reduce the spread of COVID-19 infections, have impacted, and may continue to impact, flu and flu-related illnesses, which could negatively impact our future revenue.
We sell our Precision Flow systems to hospitals through a direct sales organization in the United States and in the United Kingdom and we sell our Precision Flow systems through distributors in other select countries outside of the United States and the United Kingdom. Our Oxygen Assist Module is sold through a direct sales organization in the United Kingdom and through distributors in Europe and the Middle East. We intend to expand the commercial launch of our Oxygen Assist Module throughout the United Kingdom, Europe, and the Middle East in the first quarter of 2021 through a direct sales organization in the United Kingdom and through distributors in other select countries in Europe and the Middle East. In addition, we employ field-based clinical educators who focus on medical education and training in the effective use of our products and help facilitate increased adoption and utilization. We focus on physicians, respiratory therapists and nurses who work in acute hospital settings, including the ED and adult, pediatric and neonatal ICUs. Our relationship with these clinicians is particularly important, as it enables our products to follow patients through the care continuum. As of December 31, 2020, we have sold our Precision Flow systems to over 1,600 hospitals across the United States, where they have been primarily deployed in the ICU setting.
We assemble our Precision Flow systems in our facility in New Hampshire and we rely on third-party suppliers for a majority of the components of our products, including many single source suppliers. Historically we maintained, and as of the present date we maintain, higher levels of inventory to protect ourselves from supply interruptions, and, as a result, we have been and are currently subject to the risk of inventory obsolescence and expiration, which could lead to inventory impairment charges. At times during the past nine months, however, as we sought to fulfill increased demand in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, there were times when we were not able to carry higher levels of inventory, and as a result, we experienced and potentially in the future may again experience supply interruptions. As a result of increased product demand in 2020, we significantly increased our production capacity. As a result, if demand for our products declines in future periods, we may have excess production capacity which may negatively impact our gross margin. We currently ship our Precision Flow systems from our facility in New Hampshire directly to our United States customers and many of our international distributors on a purchase order basis. Warehousing and shipping operations for some of our international distributors are handled by a
third-party vendor with facilities located in the Netherlands. While our customers have the right to return purchased products subject to a restocking fee, our historical return experience has been immaterial. However, although we have priority shipping status with our carriers, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have experienced, and may in the future experience, shipping delays throughout the United States and internationally, and as a result, there have been and may in the future be delays in our ability to ship our product to customers and distributors in a timely manner, which may potentially result in a greater percentage of returned product than we have historically experienced.
Since inception, we have financed our operations primarily through sales of our equity securities, including most recently a public offering in April 2020, sales of our Precision Flow systems and their associated disposables, and amounts borrowed under our credit facilities, which we amended in 2020. We have devoted the majority of our resources to research and development activities related to our Precision Flow systems and our Oxygen Assist Module, including regulatory initiatives and sales and marketing activities. We have invested heavily in our sales and marketing function by increasing the number of sales representatives and clinical educators to facilitate adoption and increase utilization of our High Velocity Therapy products and expanded our digital marketing initiatives and medical education programs, including our Vapotherm Academy which was instrumental during the pandemic and used to train more than 23,000 caregivers during 2020.
We intend to continue to make significant investments in our sales and marketing organization by increasing the number of U.S. sales representatives, expanding the number of clinical educators internationally along with our international marketing programs and expanding worldwide direct to clinician digital marketing efforts to help facilitate further adoption among existing hospital accounts as well as broaden awareness of our products to new hospitals. We also expect to continue to make investments in research and development, regulatory affairs and clinical studies to develop future generations of our High Velocity Therapy products, support regulatory submissions and demonstrate the clinical efficacy of our new products. In addition, as we seek to maintain our current increased production capacity, we expect to continue to make investments in our production capabilities related to future generations of High Velocity Therapy products. Because of these and other factors, we expect to continue to incur net losses for the next several years and we expect to require additional funding, which may include future equity and debt financings.
On November 13, 2020, we acquired HGE Health Care Solutions LLC. We undertook the acquisition to expand our capabilities by providing a remote monitoring platform designed to empower respiratory patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and providers to manage day-to-day symptoms, prevent exacerbations, lower costs and improve patient quality of life. The purchase price, net of cash acquired, of $21.6 million was funded with an initial cash payment of $8.4 million and $13.2 million of contingent consideration. We have included the financial results of HGE in the consolidated financial statements from the date of acquisition. Net revenue and net loss related of HGE since the date of acquisition totaled $0.4 million and $0.4 million, respectively.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Net Revenue
Our net revenue consists primarily of the sale of products, leases and services.
Product Revenue
We primarily derive our revenue from the sale of our products to hospitals in the United States and United Kingdom and through distributors in select countries outside of the United States. Product sales consist of the following:
•
Capital Revenue - Our capital revenue is derived from the sale of our capital equipment, which consists of the Precision Flow High Velocity technology, Precision Flow Plus, Precision Flow Classic, Precision Flow Heliox and Q50 compressor. Capital equipment sales include a one-year warranty. We offer different options to our hospital customers for acquiring Precision Flow capital units, ranging from the purchase of the Precision Flow capital units with payment in full at the time of purchase, to financed purchases of the Precision Flow capital units, to bundled
discounts involving the placement of Precision Flow capital units for use by the customer at no upfront charge in connection with the customer’s ongoing purchase of disposable products.
•
Disposable Revenue - Our disposable revenue is derived from the sale of single-use disposables, nasal interfaces, or cannulas, and adaptors used in conjunction with the Precision Flow capital units.
Lease Revenue
We enter into agreements to lease our capital equipment. We assess and classify these transactions as sales-type or operating leases based on whether the lease transfers ownership of the equipment to the lessee. Equipment included in arrangements which provide for the transfer of title at, or shortly after, the end of the lease term are accounted for as a sales-type lease. We record the present value of future lease payments as a component of prepaid expenses and other current assets in our consolidated balance sheets and recognize the present value of the lease payments due over the lease term as revenue at the inception of the lease. Equipment included in arrangements that do not transfer title are accounted for as operating leases and we recognize revenue on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Service Revenue
This revenue consists of service, component part and freight revenue offset by rebates and fees payable to GPOs, IDNs and distributor partners. Service revenue consists of fees associated with routine service of capital units and the sale of extended service contracts and preventative maintenance plans. In addition, we sell small quantities of component parts in the United States, United Kingdom, and to third-party international service centers who service Precision Flow capital units outside of the United States and United Kingdom. Freight revenue is based upon actual freight costs plus a percentage markup of these costs associated with the shipment of products domestically, and to a lesser extent, internationally.
Recent revenue growth has been driven by, and we expect continued growth as a result of, increasing revenue from product sales due to our growing installed base of Precision Flow systems and related disposables sales. Our revenue has fluctuated, and we expect our revenue to continue to fluctuate, from quarter to quarter due to a variety of factors including seasonality. We have historically experienced seasonality in our first quarter due to the impact of the flu season in the Northern Hemisphere and in our fourth quarter, which coincides with our customers’ fiscal year-end and often drives higher purchases of capital equipment as previously approved but unspent capital budgets typically expire at year-end. However, decreased U.S. flu hospitalizations being experienced thus far this year could adversely affect our future revenues. We also expect our future revenue to be dependent upon other factors, such as continued market awareness and acceptance of our High Velocity Therapy technology, favorable clinical data and outcomes using our products, introduction of new products, and continued international expansion. In addition, we have expanded our sales and marketing infrastructure to help us drive and support revenue growth and we intend to continue this expansion.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue consists primarily of costs incurred in the production process, including costs of component materials, assembly labor and overhead, warranty, provisions for slow-moving and obsolete inventory, facilities-related expenses, depreciation and freight costs for items sold. Within the overhead costs we include personnel-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, benefits and stock-based compensation for our procurement, quality control and operations personnel. We provide a one-year warranty on capital equipment, and we establish a reserve for warranty repairs based on historical warranty repair costs incurred. Provisions for warranty obligations, which are included in cost of revenue, are provided for at the time of shipment. Cost of revenue in absolute dollars will increase as our sales volume increases.
We calculate gross margin as gross profit divided by revenue. Our gross margin has been, and we expect it will continue to be, affected by a variety of factors, including manufacturing costs, the average selling prices of our products, the implementation of disposable cost-reduction initiatives, sales volume and inventory obsolescence costs. Sales mix also impacts our gross margins as our average selling price in the United States is typically higher than for our international sales given our distribution model. In addition, sales of our single-use disposables carry a higher margin than that of our capital equipment sales. Our gross margin may increase over the long-term to the extent our production volumes increase, we launch new products and we continue to experience cost savings derived from supply chain and manufacturing efficiencies. However, our gross margin may fluctuate from quarter to quarter due to seasonality.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of product development, engineering, regulatory expenses, testing, laboratory supplies, consulting services and other costs associated with future generations of products using our High Velocity Therapy technology. These expenses include personnel-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, benefits and stock-based compensation for employees in our research and development, regulatory, quality assurance and innovation functions. We expect research and development expenses to increase in the future as we develop future generations of products using our High Velocity Therapy technology and companion products. We expect research and development expenses as a percentage of revenue to vary over time depending on the level and timing of new product development initiatives.
Sales and Marketing
Our sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, commissions and bonuses, travel expenses, benefits and stock-based compensation for employees in our sales and marketing, customer service and medical education functions. Other sales and marketing expenses include consulting services, education, training, tradeshows, digital marketing, medical education and clinical studies. We expect sales and marketing expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to expand our sales and marketing organization to both drive and support our planned growth in revenue. Over time, we expect sales and marketing expenses to continue to decrease as a percentage of revenue primarily as, and to the extent, our revenue grows.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation, for employees in our finance, administration, human resources, information technology, and legal functions. Other general and administrative expenses include professional services fees, audit fees, travel expenses, insurance costs and general corporate expenses including facilities-related expenses. We expect our general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars as we expand our headcount to support our anticipated future growth and operations as a public company, upgrade our director and officer insurance coverage to be commensurate with other publicly listed companies and incur additional expenses related to audit, legal, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements, especially in light of the loss of our emerging growth company status. Over time, we expect general and administrative expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue primarily as, and to the extent, our revenue grows.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net consists primarily of interest expense related to our credit facilities offset by interest income driven by the interest accruing on cash and cash equivalents. Other expense, net also includes the gain on litigation settlement, loss on the extinguishment of debt, and foreign currency gains or losses arising from transactions denominated in foreign currencies.
Benefit for Income Taxes
The benefit for income taxes represents a benefit for net deferred income tax assets deemed more likely than not to be realized by our foreign subsidiary. We have not recorded any federal or state income tax benefits related to domestic operating losses due to uncertainty about future taxable income.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net Revenue
Revenue increased $77.6 million, or 161.4%, to $125.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $48.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in revenue was primarily attributable to a $48.9 million and $21.7 million increase in capital equipment and disposable revenue, respectively. Capital equipment revenue increased 524.0% during the year ended 2020 due to increased sales of our Precision Flow units as a result of increased demand related to the COVID-19 pandemic and increased average selling prices in the United States. Disposable revenue increased 61.8% during the year ended 2020 primarily driven by an increase in the worldwide installed base of Precision Flow units and higher utilization due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Lease revenue also increased primarily due to a higher volume of leases of our Precision Flow units and, to a lesser extent, due to higher utilization of disposables for Precision Flow units under placement arrangements.
Revenue information by geography is summarized as follows:
Revenue generated in the United States increased $62.6 million, or 171.1%, to $99.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $36.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Revenue generated in our International markets increased $15.1 million, or 130.6%, to $26.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $11.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Both United States and International revenue growth was primarily driven by an increase in the number of Precision Flow units sold year over year due to the COVID-19 pandemic as well as an increase in single-use disposable sales due to higher installed bases of Precision Flow units and higher disposable utilization.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue increased $35.9 million, or 134.0%, to $62.7 million in fiscal year 2020 compared to $26.8 million in fiscal year 2019. The increase was primarily due to higher material and labor costs due to a rapid increase in sales volumes of our Precision Flow units and disposables in order to meet demand related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross margin increased to 50.1% in fiscal year 2020 compared to 44.3% in fiscal year 2019. Gross profit was positively impacted by improved overhead absorption due to higher production volumes, partially offset by higher labor costs, increased supplier freight and expediting fees to meet the rapid increase in production capacity, and a higher mix of Precision Flow system sales. Gross profit was also positively impacted by higher average selling prices of capital equipment in the United States, partially offset by lower average selling prices of disposables in International markets.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased $3.6 million, or 26.8%, to $17.0 million in fiscal year 2020 compared to $13.4 million in fiscal year 2019. As a percentage of revenue, research and development expenses decreased to 13.5% in fiscal year 2020 compared to 27.8% in fiscal year 2019. The increase in research and development expenses was due to increased product development, prototype, and patent-related costs associated with the development of our future generation High Velocity systems and increased employee-related expenses and stock-based compensation.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased $27.4 million, or 72.6%, to $65.1 million in fiscal year 2020 compared to $37.7 million in fiscal year 2019. As a percentage of revenue, sales and marketing expenses decreased to 51.7% in fiscal year 2020 compared to 78.3% in fiscal year 2019. The increase in sales and marketing expenses was primarily due to increased sales commissions as a result of increased revenue due to the COVID-19 pandemic along with increases in the size of the sales and marketing organization and increased stock-based compensation, partially offset by a reduction in travel and marketing initiatives, such as trade shows and training costs, due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $5.6 million, or 30.6%, to $24.0 million in fiscal year 2020 compared to $18.4 million in fiscal year 2019. As a percentage of revenue, general and administrative expenses decreased to 19.1% in fiscal year 2020 compared to 38.3% in fiscal year 2019. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to increases in employee-related expenses, stock-based compensation, audit and compliance related costs, insurance, increased bank services charges, legal costs and rent, partially offset by a reduction in travel expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net increased by $5.4 million, or 179.1%, to $8.5 million in fiscal year 2020 compared to $3.0 million in fiscal year 2019. The increase in other expense, net was primarily due to one-time items recorded in each fiscal year. Other expense, net, in fiscal year 2020 included a $4.2 million loss on extinguishment of debt. Other expense, net, in fiscal year 2019 included a $1.2 million gain on litigation settlement.
Benefit for Income Taxes
The benefit for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled $0.1 million and related to a benefit for net deferred income tax assets deemed more likely than not to be realized by our foreign subsidiary. There was no such benefit recorded in 2020 by our foreign subsidiary. We have not recorded any federal or state income tax benefits related to domestic operating losses due to uncertainty about future taxable income.
Seasonality
Historically, we have experienced seasonality in our first and fourth quarters, and we expect this trend to continue. We have experienced and may in the future experience higher sales in the fourth quarter as a result of increased sales from hospitals nearing their fiscal year-end that have not fully utilized the funds allocated to purchases of our Precision Flow systems. In the first quarter of each year we have experienced and may in the future experience higher sales in direct correlation with the number of patients presenting with respiratory distress due to the severity of the flu season, especially in the Northern Hemisphere.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of $115.5 million and an accumulated deficit of $316.9 million. Our primary sources of capital to date have been from sales of our equity securities, sales of our Precision Flow systems and their associated disposables and amounts borrowed under credit facilities. Since inception, we have raised a total of $162.6 million in net proceeds from sales of our equity securities.
On December 20, 2019, we entered into an Open Market Sales Agreement (the “ATM Agreement”) with Jefferies LLC (“Jefferies”) under which we may offer and sell its common stock having aggregate sales proceeds of up to $50.0 million from time to time through Jefferies as its sales agents. During April 2020, we sold 511,648 shares of common stock pursuant to the ATM Agreement for gross proceeds of $10.2 million, or $9.8 million net of commissions and offering expenses. As of December 31, 2020, there was approximately $39.8 million in remaining capacity under this program.
In May 2020, we completed a public offering of 3,852,500 shares of common stock, which included the full exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase 502,500 shares of common stock, at a price of $26.00 per share, which raised net proceeds of $93.8 million after deducting the underwriting discount of $6.0 million and offering expenses of $0.3 million.
On October 21, 2020, we entered into the Loan and Security Agreement which provides for a revolving loan facility of $12.0 million (the “Revolving Facility”) and a term loan facility of $40.0 million (the “Term Facility” and, together with the Revolving Facility, the “Facilities”). The proceeds of the Facilities were used to repay our existing revolving loan facility and term loan facility. As of December 31, 2020, we had $4.9 million of outstanding borrowings and $7.1 million of availability under our Revolving Facility. As of December 31, 2020, we had $40.0 million of term debt outstanding under our Term Facility.
We believe that our existing cash resources and availability under our Revolving Facility will be sufficient to meet our capital requirements and fund our operations for at least the next 12 months. If these sources are insufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements, we may seek to sell additional equity or enter new debt financing arrangements. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders would experience dilution. Additional debt financing, if available, may involve covenants restricting our operations or our ability to incur additional debt. Any debt financing or additional equity that we raise may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. Additional financing may not be available at all or may be available only in amounts or on terms unacceptable to us. If we are unable to obtain additional financing, we may be required to delay the development, commercialization and marketing of our Precision Flow systems and Oxygen Assist Module.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our cash flow for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
The net cash used in operating activities was $39.5 million in 2020 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $51.5 million and an increase of $4.7 million in net operating assets, partially offset by $16.7 million in non-cash charges. Non-cash charges consisted primarily of stock-based compensation expense, depreciation and amortization, loss on extinguishment of debt and non-cash lease expense.
The net cash used in operating activities was $39.7 million in 2019 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $51.1 million, partially offset by a decrease of $5.5 million in net operating assets and $5.9 million in non-cash charges. Non-cash charges consisted primarily of stock-based compensation expense and depreciation and amortization.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for 2020 and 2019 consisted of purchases of property and equipment of $9.8 million and $4.7 million, respectively. Net cash used in investing activities in 2020 also included $8.4 million to acquire HGE. In addition, net cash used in investing activities in 2019 also included $1.6 million to acquire Solus Medical.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $99.7 million in 2020 and consisted of proceeds from the issuance of common stock in connection with public and at-the-market offerings of $94.2 million and $9.9 million, respectively and proceeds from common stock issuances in connection with our Employee Stock Purchase Plan and stock option exercises of $0.8 million and $0.6 million, respectively, partially offset by payments of debt extinguishment costs of $3.8 million, net repayments of $1.4 million under our credit facilities, debt issuance costs of $0.5 million and common stock offering costs of $0.5 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $59.4 million in 2019 and consisted of proceeds from the issuance of common stock in connection with a public offering of $48.7 million, net proceeds from borrowings of $10.8 million under our credit facilities, and proceeds from common stock issuances in connection with stock option exercises and purchases of restricted stock awards of $0.4 million, partially offset by common stock offering costs of $0.4 million.
Indebtedness
Revolving Lines of Credit
On November 16, 2016, we entered a Business Financing Agreement (the “Revolver Agreement”) with Western Alliance Bank, an Arizona Corporation, which replaced our then existing revolving line of credit. The Revolver Agreement made available $7.0 million of revolving credit upon the closing date. Availability under the Revolver Agreement was calculated based upon 80% of the eligible receivables (net of pre-paid deposits, pre-billed invoices, other offsets, and contras related to each specific account debtor). The original maturity date was September 30, 2018. We refinanced the Revolver Agreement in April 2018, increasing the credit line to $7.5 million and extending the maturity date to September 30, 2020. We entered into an amendment to the Revolver Agreement on September 30, 2020, extending the maturity date to April 6, 2023. The principal was due upon maturity. At December 31, 2019, the outstanding balance under the Amended Revolver Agreement was $3.5 million.
On October 21, 2020 (the “Closing Date”), we entered into the Loan and Security Agreement with Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce Innovation Banking (“CIBC”) which provides for a revolving loan facility of $12.0 million (the “Revolving Facility”) and a term loan facility of $40.0 million (the “Term Facility” and, together with the Revolving Facility, the “Facilities”). The proceeds of the Facilities were used to repay our existing revolving loan facility and term loan facility.
The Revolving Facility will mature on October 21, 2022 and may be renewed on an annual basis thereafter by mutual agreement of us and CIBC. The Revolving Facility bears interest at a floating rate per annum equal to the Wall Street Journal (“WSJ”) Prime Rate plus 1.0% and is subject to a floor of 3.25%. At December 31, 2020, the interest rate was 4.25%. The outstanding balance under the Revolving Facility was $4.9 million at December 31, 2020 and the remaining availability based on eligible receivables was $7.1 million.
Term Loans
On April 6, 2018, we entered into a Credit Agreement and Guaranty (the “Credit Agreement and Guaranty”) with Perceptive Credit Holdings II, LP (“Perceptive”). Pursuant to the Credit Agreement and Guaranty, a total of $42.5 million was available in three tranches. The first tranche was drawn down in the amount of $20.0 million on the closing date, April 6, 2018,
which paid off our prior financing arrangement in full. In connection with this draw down, we granted Perceptive warrants to purchase 37,693 shares of Series D preferred stock which were converted into warrants to purchase shares of common stock at the time of the initial public offering. The warrants had an exercise price of $15.92 per share, were fully vested upon issuance, were exercisable at the option of the holder, in whole or in part, and expire in April 2028.
On July 20, 2018, pursuant to the Credit Agreement and Guaranty, we drew down the second tranche of $10.0 million. In connection with this draw down, we granted Perceptive warrants to purchase 18,846 shares of Series D preferred stock which were converted into warrants to purchase shares of common stock at the time of the initial public offering. The warrants had an exercise price of $15.92 per share, were fully vested upon issuance, were exercisable at the option of the holder, in whole or in part, and expire in July 2028.
On September 27, 2018, we entered into the first amendment to the Credit Agreement and Guaranty (the “Amendment”, together with the Credit Agreement and Guaranty, the “Amended Credit Agreement and Guaranty”) with Perceptive. Pursuant to the Amended Credit Agreement and Guaranty, we were permitted to draw the final $12.5 million of availability at any time through March 31, 2019 and the minimum 2018 revenue requirement of $43.2 million that was required to draw down the final tranche was eliminated. Concurrently with the closing of the Amendment, we drew down $2.0 million of the remaining $12.5 million available. In connection with this draw down, we granted to Perceptive warrants to purchase 3,769 shares of its Series D preferred stock which were converted into warrants to purchase shares of common stock at the time of the initial public offering. The warrants had an exercise price of $15.92 per share, were fully vested upon issuance, were exercisable at the option of the holder, in whole or in part, and expire in September 2028.
On March 22, 2019, we drew the remaining $10.5 million. In connection with this draw down, we granted Perceptive warrants to purchase 19,790 shares of common stock. The warrants had an exercise price of $15.92 per share, were fully vested upon issuance, were exercisable at the option of the holder, in whole or in part, and expire in March 2029. The estimated fair value at the time of issuance was approximately $0.3 million, is recorded as a discount against the principal owed on the related debt and is being amortized over the contractual term of the debt instrument. On June 10, 2020, Perceptive exercised all of its outstanding warrants.
Pursuant to the Amended Credit Agreement and Guaranty, the outstanding principal amount accrues interest at an annual rate equal to 9.06% plus the greater of (a) one-month LIBOR or (b) 1.75% per year. At December 31, 2019, the interest rate was 10.81%. The outstanding balance, including accretion of the additional final payment due upon maturity and described below, was $42.6 million at December 31, 2019 and there was no remaining availability.
The Amended Credit Agreement and Guaranty, which was scheduled to mature in 2023, required that upon maturity, in addition to the payment of principal and accrued interest, we make a payment of 0.5% of the total amount borrowed under the Amended Credit Agreement and Guaranty unless we had already made such a payment in connection with an acceleration or prepayment of borrowings under the agreement. In the event we prepaid all or part of this term loan facility prior to the maturity date, we were subject to additional prepayment fees which decreased as the time to maturity decreased.
On October 21, 2020, we refinanced our debt with CIBC and used $40 million of the Term Facility, approximately $4.9 million of the Revolving Facility and approximately $6.3 million of cash on hand to pay off all obligations owing under, and to terminate, both the Amended Credit Agreement and Guaranty and the Revolver Agreement, which included a prepayment penalty and exit fees of $3.7 million. As a result of the termination of the Amended Credit Agreement and Guaranty and the Revolver Agreement, we recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of $4.2 million, which included the prepayment penalty, exit fees, write-off of the remaining unamortized deferred financing costs, and legal fees.
The Term Facility will mature on October 21, 2025. Advances under the Term Facility bear interest at a floating rate equal to the WSJ Prime Rate plus 2.5% and is subject to a floor of 3.25%. At December 31, 2020, the interest rate was 5.75%. The outstanding balance was $40.0 million at December 31, 2020 and there was no remaining availability. The Loan and Security Agreement provides for interest-only payments on the Term Facility for the first thirty-six months following the Closing Date. Thereafter, amortization payments on the Term Facility will be payable monthly in twenty-four equal installments. The Term Facility may not be prepaid prior to the first anniversary of the Closing Date without prepaying all of the interest that otherwise would have been payable on the Term Facility during the period commencing on the Closing Date and ending on the first anniversary of the Closing Date plus a prepayment charge of 2.0%. Thereafter, the Term Facility may be prepaid in full, subject to a prepayment charge of (i) 2.0%, if such prepayment occurs after the first anniversary of the Closing Date but on or prior to the second anniversary of the Closing Date, and (ii) 1.0%, if such prepayment occurs after the second anniversary of the Closing Date but on or prior to the third anniversary of the Closing Date. The Term Facility and Revolving Facility are secured by a lien on substantially all of our assets, including intellectual property.
The Loan and Security Agreement contains customary covenants and representations, including, without limitation, a minimum revenue covenant equal to 80% of each year’s annual operating plan (tested on a trailing twelve month basis at the
end of each fiscal quarter) and other financial covenants, reporting obligations, and limitations on dispositions, changes in business or ownership, mergers or acquisitions, indebtedness, encumbrances, distributions and investments, transactions with affiliates and capital expenditures.
The events of default under the Loan and Security Agreement include, without limitation, and subject to customary grace periods, (1) our failure to make any payments of principal or interest under the Loan and Security Agreement or other loan documents, (2) our breach or default in the performance of any covenant under the Loan and Security Agreement, (3) the occurrence of a material adverse effect or an event that is reasonably likely to result in a material adverse effect, (4) the existence of an attachment or levy on a material portion of our or our subsidiaries’ funds, (5) our insolvency or bankruptcy, or (6) the occurrence of certain material defaults with respect to any other of our indebtedness in excess of $500,000. If an event of default occurs, CIBC is entitled to take enforcement action, including acceleration of amounts due under the Loan and Security Agreement. The Loan and Security Agreement also contains other customary provisions, such as expense reimbursement and confidentiality. CIBC has indemnification rights and the right to assign the Facilities, subject to customary restrictions.
As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined by applicable regulations of the SEC, that are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies and Practices
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the audited financial statements and accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Management believes that such estimates have been based on reasonable and supportable assumptions and the resulting estimates are reasonable for use in the preparation of the audited financial statements. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Critical accounting policies and practices are a company's accounting policies and practices that are most important to the portrayal of the company's financial condition and results of operations and include the following:
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue consists primarily of the sale of products, leases and services. Product revenue consists of capital equipment and disposables that are shipped and billed to customers both domestically and internationally. Our main capital equipment products are the Precision Flow systems, the Vapotherm Transfer Unit 2.0 and Q50 compressor. Our main disposable products are the single-use disposables and nasal interfaces, or cannulas. Lease revenue consists of two components which include capital equipment that we lease to our customers and, in certain situations, an allocation from disposable revenue to other lease revenue upon the sale of disposable products in bundled arrangements involving the placement of Precision Flow capital units for use by the customer at no upfront charge in connection with the customer’s ongoing purchase of disposable products. Service revenue consists of fees associated with routine service of capital units and the sale of extended service contracts and preventative maintenance plans, which are purchased by a small portion of our customer base. In addition, we sell small quantities of component parts in the United States, United Kingdom and to third-party international service centers who provide service on Precision Flow capital units outside of the United States and United Kingdom. Freight revenue is based upon actual freights costs plus a percentage markup of these costs associated with the shipment of products domestically, and to a lesser extent, internationally, and is included in service revenue. Rebates and fees consist of contractually obligated administrative fees and percentage-of-sales rebates paid to GPOs, IDNs and distributor partners and accounted for as a reduction of service revenue.
Under Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”), revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of ASC 606, we performed the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct and determine those that
are performance obligations. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied. Sales, value-added, and other taxes collected on behalf of third parties are excluded from revenue. Our standard payment term is generally 30 days from date of sale.
Contracts with customers may contain multiple performance obligations. For such arrangements, the transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation based on the estimated relative stand-alone selling prices of the promised products or services underlying each performance obligation. We determined stand-alone selling prices based on the price at which the performance obligation is sold separately. If the stand-alone selling price is not observable through past transactions, we estimate the stand-alone selling price taking into account available information such as market conditions and internally approved pricing guidelines related to the performance obligations.
We recognize revenue on product sales and service of capital equipment and product sales of disposables. In each instance, revenue is generally recognized when the customer obtains control of our product, which generally occurs at a point in time upon shipment based on the contractual shipping terms of a contract.
Product and service revenue are measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring products or services to a customer. To the extent the transaction price includes variable consideration, we estimate the amount of variable consideration that should be included in the transaction price utilizing the expected value amount method to which we expect to be entitled. As such, revenue on sales are recorded net of prompt pay discounts and payments made to GPOs, IDNs and distributors. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price if, in our judgment, it is probable that a significant future reversal of cumulative revenue under the contract will not occur. Determination of whether to include estimated amounts in the transaction price are based largely on an assessment of our anticipated performance and all information (historical, current and forecasted) that is reasonably available. We believe that the estimates we have established are reasonable based upon current facts and circumstances. Applying different judgments to the same facts and circumstances could result in the estimated amounts to vary.
When determining the transaction price of a contract, an adjustment is made if payment from a customer occurs either significantly before or significantly after performance, resulting in a significant financing component. We do not assess whether a significant financing component exists if the period between when we perform our obligations under the contract and when the customer pays is one year or less. None of our contracts contained a significant financing component as of December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Our contracts with our customers have a duration of less than one year. Therefore, we have elected to apply a practical expedient and recognize the incremental costs of obtaining contracts as an expense. These costs are included in sales and marketing expense in the consolidated statements of comprehensive loss.
Lease Revenue
We also enter into agreements to lease our capital equipment. For such sales, we account for revenue under ASC 842, Leases (“ASC 842”), and assess and classify these transactions as sales-type or operating leases based on whether the lease transfers ownership of the equipment to the lessee by the end of the lease term. This criterion is met in situations in which the lease agreement provides for the transfer of title at, or shortly after, the end of the lease term. Equipment included in arrangements including the transfer of title are accounted for as sales-type leases and we recognize the present value of the lease payments due over the lease term as revenue at the inception of the lease. We record the present value of future lease payments in the prepaid expenses and other current assets in our consolidated balance sheets. Equipment included in arrangements that do not include transfer of title, nor any of the sales-type or direct finance lease criteria, are accounted for as operating leases and revenue is recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. Prior to the adoption of ASC 842 effective January 1, 2020, we accounted for such transactions under ASC 840, Leases (“ASC 840”) and there was no change in our accounting for such transactions upon the adoption of ASC 842.
Stock-Based Compensation
We maintain an equity incentive plan to provide long-term incentives for employees, consultants, and members of the board of directors. The plan allows for the issuance of non-statutory and incentive stock options to employees and non-statutory stock options to consultants and non-employee directors. We recognize stock-based compensation expense for awards of equity instruments to employees and non-employees based on the grant date fair value of those awards in accordance with ASC Topic 718, Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”). ASC 718 requires all equity-based compensation awards, including grants of restricted shares and stock options, to be recognized as expense in the consolidated statements of comprehensive loss based on their grant date fair values.
The fair value of each option grant is estimated on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The fair value is then amortized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the awards, which is generally the vesting period. For performance-based awards, the related compensation cost is amortized over the performance period on an accelerated attribution basis. Compensation cost associated with performance awards is based on fair value on the date of grant and the number of units expected to be earned after assessing the probability that certain performance criteria will be met and the associated targeted payout level that is forecasted will be achieved. Cumulative adjustments are recorded each quarter to reflect estimated outcomes of the performance-related conditions until the results are determined and settled. Use of a valuation model requires management to make certain assumptions with respect to selected model inputs, including the expected life (weighted average period of time that the options granted are expected to be outstanding), the volatility of our common stock and an assumed risk-free interest rate. Expected volatility is calculated based on historical volatility of a group of publicly traded companies that we consider a peer group. The expected life is estimated using the simplified method for “plain vanilla” options. The risk-free interest rate is based on U.S. Treasury rates with a remaining term that approximates the expected life assumed at the date of grant. No dividend yield is assumed as we do not pay, and do we expect to pay, dividends on our common stock. We estimate forfeitures based on historical experience with pre-vested forfeitures. To the extent actual forfeitures differ from the estimate, the difference is recorded to compensation expense in the period of the forfeiture.
We recognize stock-based expense for shares issued pursuant to our 2018 Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”) on a straight-line basis over the related offering period. We estimate the fair value of shares to be issued under the ESPP based on a combination of options valued using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The expected life is determined based on the contractual term. Dividend yield and forfeiture rates are estimated in a manner similar to option grants described above and expected volatility is based on our historical volatility.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in the consolidated financial statements or in our tax returns. Deferred taxes are determined based on the difference between the financial reporting and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect in the years in which the differences are expected to reverse. Changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded in the provision for income taxes. We assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income and, to the extent we believe, based upon the weight of available evidence, that it is more likely than not that all or a portion of deferred tax assets will not be realized, a valuation allowance is established through a charge to income tax expense. Potential for recovery of deferred tax assets is evaluated by estimating the future taxable profits expected and considering prudent and feasible tax planning strategies.
We account for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in the consolidated financial statements by applying a two-step process to determine the amount of tax benefit to be recognized. First, the tax position must be evaluated to determine the likelihood that it will be sustained upon external examination by the taxing authorities. If the tax position is deemed more likely-than-not to be sustained, the tax position is then assessed to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the consolidated financial statements. The amount of the benefit that may be recognized is the largest amount that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. The provision for income taxes includes the effects of any resulting tax reserves, or unrecognized tax benefits, that are considered appropriate as well as the related net interest and penalties.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Critical accounting estimates that involve a significant level of uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations include the following:
Contingent Consideration
Management is responsible for determining the appropriate valuation model and estimated fair value of contingent consideration. To estimate the fair value, management considers a number of factors, including information provided by a third-party valuation advisor. Contingent consideration liabilities are reported at their estimated fair values based on probability-adjusted present values of the consideration expected to be paid, using significant inputs and estimates. Key assumptions used in these estimates include probability assessments with respect to the likelihood of achieving certain milestones and discount rates consistent with the level of risk of achievement. The fair value of the contingent consideration liability is remeasured at each reporting period, with changes in the fair value included in current operations. The remeasured liability amount could be significantly different from the amount estimated at the acquisition date, resulting in material charges or credits in future reporting periods.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A discussion of recent accounting pronouncements is included in Note 2 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
JOBS Act and Filing Status
Prior to December 31, 2020, we qualified as an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the JOBS Act. An emerging growth company may take advantage of reduced reporting requirements that are otherwise applicable to public companies. These provisions include:
•
not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
•
reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and in our periodic reports, proxy statements and registration statements; and
•
exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
Effective December 31, 2020, we no longer qualify as an emerging growth company and have transitioned to a large accelerated filer status as a result of the market value of the common stock held by our non-affiliates as of June 30, 2020. As a result, we will adopt new or revised accounting pronouncements at dates applicable to public companies. Additionally, as a result of losing emerging growth company status, we are required to have our independent registered public accounting firm issue an attestation report on the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting on an annual basis beginning with the year ended December 31, 2020. We also lost our “smaller reporting company” status as a result of our public float as of June 30, 2020; although, pursuant to those rules, there is a transition period that allows us to provide scaled disclosures in this report.