ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with “Item 6. Selected Financial Data” and our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that are subject to certain risks and uncertainties and are based on certain assumptions that we believe are reasonable but may prove to be inaccurate. Certain risks, uncertainties and other factors, including those set forth in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, may cause actual results to differ materially from those projected results discussed in the forward-looking statements appearing in this discussion and analysis. We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a Texas state banking organization with corporate offices in Dallas, Texas. Through our wholly owned subsidiary, Veritex Community Bank, a Texas state chartered bank, we provide relationship-driven commercial banking products and services tailored to meet the needs of small to medium-sized businesses and professionals. Beginning at our inception in 2010, we initially targeted customers and focused our acquisitions primarily in the Dallas metropolitan area, which we consider to be Dallas and the adjacent communities in North Dallas. Our current primary market includes the broader Dallas-Fort Worth metroplex and the Houston metropolitan area. As we continue to grow, we may expand to other metropolitan banking markets in Texas.
Our business is conducted through one reportable segment, community banking, which generates the majority of our revenues from interest income on loans, customer service and loan fees, gains on sale of government guaranteed loans and mortgage loans and interest income from securities. We incur interest expense on deposits and other borrowed funds and noninterest expense, such as salaries and employee benefits and occupancy expenses. We analyze our ability to maximize income generated from interest earning assets and interest expense of our interest-bearing liabilities through net interest margin. Net interest margin is a ratio calculated as net interest income divided by average interest earning assets. Net interest income is the difference between interest income on interest-earning assets, such as loans and securities, and interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings, which are used to fund those assets.
Changes in the market interest rates and interest rates we earn on interest-earning assets and pay on interest-bearing liabilities, as well as the volume and types of interest-earning assets, and interest-bearing and noninterest-bearing liabilities, are usually the largest drivers of periodic changes in net interest spread, net interest margin and net interest income. Fluctuations in market interest rates are driven by many factors, including governmental monetary policies, inflation, deflation, macroeconomic developments, changes in unemployment, the money supply, political and international conditions and conditions in domestic and foreign financial markets. Periodic changes in the volume and types of loans in our loan portfolio are affected by, among other factors, economic and competitive conditions in Texas and, specifically, in the Dallas-Fort Worth metroplex and Houston metropolitan area, as well as developments affecting the real estate, technology, financial services, insurance, transportation, manufacturing and energy sectors within our target market and throughout the state of Texas.
Recent Developments
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has created a global public health crisis that has resulted in unprecedented uncertainty, volatility and disruption in financial markets and in governmental, commercial and consumer activity in the United States and globally, including the markets that we serve. Governmental responses to the pandemic have included orders closing businesses not deemed essential and directing individuals to observe social distancing and shelter in place. These actions, together with responses to the pandemic by businesses and individuals, have resulted in rapid decreases in commercial and consumer activity, temporary closures of many businesses that have led to a loss of revenues and a rapid increase in unemployment, material decreases in business valuations, disrupted global supply chains, market downturns and volatility, changes in consumer behavior related to pandemic fears, related emergency response legislation and an expectation that the policy of the Federal Reserve will maintain a low interest rate environment for the foreseeable future. Possible additional waves of COVID-19 and the uncertainty of the timing of a widely-available vaccine may adversely affect the re-opening process.
We have taken deliberate actions to ensure that we have the balance sheet strength to serve our clients and communities during the COVID-19 pandemic, including increasing our liquidity and reserves supported by a strong capital position. Our commercial and consumer customers are experiencing varying degrees of financial distress due to the pandemic and related governmental actions taken in response to the pandemic. In order to protect the health of our customers and employees, and to comply with applicable governmental directives, we have implemented our operational response and preparedness plan, which includes, among other things, dispersion of critical operation processes, increased monitoring focused on higher risk operations, enhanced remote access security and further restricted internet access, enhanced security around wire transfer execution and flexible scheduling provided to employees who are unable to work from home.
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was enacted. The CARES Act contains substantial tax and spending provisions intended to address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the SBA PPP, a loan program administered by the SBA. Under the PPP, small businesses, sole proprietorships, independent contractors and self-employed individuals may apply for forgivable loans from existing SBA lenders and other approved regulated lenders that enroll in the program, subject to numerous limitations and eligibility criteria. Congress appropriated an additional $310 billion for PPP commitments on April 24, 2020, and amended the PPP on June 5, 2020 to make the terms of the PPP loans and loan forgiveness more flexible. The Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, provided additional funding for the PPP of approximately $284.0 billion and allows eligible borrowers, including certain borrowers who already received a PPP loan, to apply for PPP loans through March 31, 2021. Additionally, in the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, Congress appropriated $25.0 billion for existing PPP borrowers to obtain a second round of PPP funding. The SBA began accepting applications for these "second draw" PPP loans on January 13, 2021.Beginning in early April 2020, we began processing loan applications under the PPP, and in January 2021 we began processing applications under this latest round of the SBA’s PPP. The Company believes that the majority of these loans will ultimately be forgiven by the SBA in accordance with the terms of the program. If a loan is fully forgiven, SBA will repay the lending bank in full. If a loan is partially forgiven or not forgiven at all, a bank must look to the borrower for repayment of unforgiven principal and interest. If the borrower defaults, the loan is guaranteed by SBA. In order to obtain loan forgiveness, a PPP borrower must submit a forgiveness application to us, which we must review and forward to the SBA. The SBA began approving forgiveness applications on October 2, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had funded approvals for approximately 2,114 clients totaling approximately $358.0 million in PPP loans carried at fair value.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have also implemented a loan deferment program to provide temporary payment relief to certain of our borrowers who meet the program's qualifications. This program allows for a deferral of principal and/or interest payments for 90 days (“Round 1 Deferments”), which we may extend for an additional 90 days (“Round 2 Deferments”), for a maximum of 180 days on a cumulative basis. The deferred payments along with interest accrued during the deferral period are due and payable on the maturity date of the existing loan. The CARES Act, as amended by the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, specified that COVID-19 related loan modifications executed between March 1, 2020 and the earlier of (i) 60 days after the date of termination of the national emergency declared by the President and (ii) January 1, 2022, on loans that were current as of December 31, 2019 are not TDRs. Additionally, under guidance from the federal banking agencies, other short-term modifications made on a good faith basis in response to the COVID-19 pandemic to borrowers that were current prior to any relief are not TDRs under ASC Subtopic 310-40, “Troubled Debt Restructuring by Creditors.” These modifications include short-term (e.g., up to six months) modifications such as payment deferrals, fee waivers, extensions of repayment terms, or delays in payment that are insignificant. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had 754 modifications of loans with aggregate principal balances $1.1 billion that qualified for temporary suspension of TDR requirements under Section 4013 of the CARES Act, as amended by the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, and the interagency guidance. As of February 18, 2021, we had $26.1 million in loans with remaining deferments.
Significant uncertainties as to future economic conditions exist, and we have taken deliberate actions in response to these uncertainties, including increased levels of on balance sheet liquidity and increased capital ratio levels. Additionally, the economic pressures, coupled with our implementation in January 2020 of the current expected credit loss (“CECL”) methodology for determining our provision for credit losses, have contributed to an increased provision for credit losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. We continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 closely, as well as any effects that may result from the CARES Act; however, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will impact our operations and financial results during 2021 is highly uncertain.
Financial position and results of operations
The COVID-19 pandemic had a material impact on our allowance for credit losses during 2020. Given that forecasted economic scenarios have deteriorated significantly since the pandemic was declared in early March of 2020, our need for additional reserve for credit loss increased significantly. Refer to our further discussion of the allowance for credit losses below as well as in Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” and Note 6, “Loans and Allowance for Credit Losses,” in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements. Should economic conditions worsen, we could experience further increases in our allowance for credit losses and record additional credit loss expense. We could also see an increase in our ratio of past due loans to total loans, although the execution of our loan deferment program might temporarily improve this ratio. It is possible that our asset quality measures could worsen at future measurement periods if the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic are further prolonged.
Our fee income could be reduced due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In keeping with guidance from regulators, we are working with customers affected by the COVID-19 pandemic to waive fees from a variety of sources, including, but not limited to, insufficient funds and overdraft fees, ATM fees and account maintenance fees. These reductions in fees are thought, at this time, to be temporary in conjunction with the length of the expected economic crisis related to the COVID-19 pandemic. At this time, we are unable to project the materiality of such an impact, but recognize the breadth of the economic impact is likely to impact our fee income in future periods.
Our interest income could also be reduced due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In keeping with guidance from regulators, we are actively working with borrowers affected by the COVID-19 pandemic to defer their payments, interest, and fees. While interest and fees will still accrue to income, should eventual credit losses on these deferred payments emerge, our interest income and fees accrued would need to be reversed. In such a scenario, interest income in future periods could be negatively impacted. At this time, we are unable to project the materiality of such an impact, but recognize the breadth of the economic impact may affect our borrowers’ ability to repay in future periods.
Capital and liquidity
As of December 31, 2020, all of our and the Bank's capital ratios were in excess of all regulatory requirements. While we believe that we have sufficient capital to withstand an extended economic recession brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic, our reported and regulatory capital ratios could be adversely impacted by further credit losses. We rely on cash on hand as well as dividends from the Bank to service our debt. If our capital deteriorates such that the Bank is unable to pay dividends to us for an extended period of time, we may not be able to service our debt.
We maintain access to multiple sources of liquidity, including the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (“PPPLF”) which is a lending facility offered by the Federal Reserve to extend credit to financial institutions that originate PPP loans, while taking the PPP loans as collateral. As of December 31, 2020, we have not utilized the PPPLF. Wholesale funding markets have remained open to us with stable and low rates for short term funding. If funding costs are elevated for an extended period of time, it could have an adverse effect on our net interest margin. If an economic recession caused large numbers of our deposit customers to withdraw their funds, we might become more reliant on volatile or more expensive sources of funding.
Asset valuation
Currently, we do not expect the COVID-19 pandemic to affect our ability to account timely for the assets on our balance sheet; however, this could change in future periods. While certain valuation assumptions and judgments will change to account for pandemic-related circumstances such as widening credit spreads, we do not anticipate significant changes in methodology used to determine the fair value of assets measured in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”).
Credit
The following loan portfolios represent our material at-risk portfolios identified by management impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic as of December 31, 2020:
Hospitality Exposure
The Company’s exposure to hospitality at December 31, 2020 was $369.6 million, or 6.3% of total loans held for investment, excluding MW and PPP loans. The weighted average loan to value for this portfolio was 60.0% at origination date.
Retail Commercial Real Estate (“CRE”) Exposure
The Company’s exposure to retail CRE at December 31, 2020 was $533.9 million, or 9.1% of total loans held for investment, excluding MW and PPP loans. The weighted average loan to value for this portfolio was 58.0% at origination date.
Restaurant Exposure
The Company’s exposure to restaurants at December 31, 2020 was $122.8 million, or 2.1% of total loans held for investment, excluding MW and PPP loans. 61% of the Company’s restaurant borrowers are quick service restaurants and 39% are full service restaurants. A total of 80% of the portfolio is secured by real estate assets with an average loan to value of 60.0% at origination date.
Adoption of New Accounting Standard for Allowance for Credit Losses
On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Update 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”), which replaces the incurred loss methodology with an expected loss methodology that is referred to as CECL. The measurement of expected credit losses under the CECL methodology is applicable to financial assets measured at amortized cost, including loan receivables and held-to-maturity debt securities. It also applies to off-balance sheet (“OBS”) credit exposures not accounted for as insurance (loan commitments, standby letters of credit, financial guarantees, and other similar instruments) and net investments in leases recognized by a lessor. In addition, ASU 2016-13 made changes to the accounting for available-for-sale debt securities. One such change is to require credit losses to be presented as an allowance rather than as a write-down on available-for-sale debt securities management does not intend to sell or believes that it is more likely than not they will be required to sell.
A summary of the impact of the adoption of ASU 2016-13 on our financial statements is as follows:
•Net decrease in retained earnings of $15.5 million as of January 1, 2020 for the cumulative effect of adopting ASC 326.
•On January 1, 2020, the amortized cost basis of assets purchased with credit deterioration were adjusted to reflect the addition of $19.7 million to the allowance for credit losses. The remaining noncredit discount (based on the adjusted amortized cost basis) will be accreted into interest income at the effective interest rate as of January 1, 2020.
•Increase in the allowance for credit losses of $39.1 million as of January 1, 2020.
•Increase in our allowance for credit losses on unfunded commitments of $840 thousand as of January 1, 2020. The allowance for credit losses on unfunded commitments is recorded in accounts payable and other liabilities in the condensed consolidated balance sheets.
Anticipated 2021 Trends
This discussion of trends expected to impact our business in 2021 is based on information presently available and reflects certain assumptions, including the current economic and interest rate environment. Differences in actual economic conditions compared with our assumptions could have an adverse impact on our results. See “Special Cautionary Notice Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional factors that could cause results to differ materially from those contemplated by the following forward-looking statements. We anticipate the following trends or events related to our business in fiscal year 2021:
•Continued return of capital through quarterly dividends and share repurchases.
•Continued emphasis on credit quality and relationship banking.
•Continued focus on net interest margin and the impact of interest rates on loans and deposit repricing
•Continued leverage of our strong capital through accretive organic growth and possible strategic acquisition opportunities.
•Expected improvement in economic forecasts, specifically Texas unemployment and year over year Texas GDP growth, which are significant inputs into our CECL model driving the allowance for credit loss.
•Potential branch restructures, consolidations or closures to continue with our branch-light business model.
Results of Operations for the Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
General
Net income available to common stockholders for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $73.9 million, a decrease of $16.9 million, or 18.6%, from net income available to common stockholders of $90.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Basic earnings per share (“EPS”) for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.48, a decrease of $0.23 from $1.71 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Diluted earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.48, a decrease of $0.20 from $1.68 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net Interest Income
Our operating results depend primarily on our net interest income, calculated as the difference between interest income on interest-earning assets, such as loans and securities, and interest expense on interest-bearing liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings. Fluctuations in market interest rates impact the yield and rates paid on interest sensitive assets and liabilities. Changes in the amount and type of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities also impact net interest income. The variance driven by the changes in the amount and mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities is referred to as a “volume change.” Changes in yields earned on interest-earning assets and rates paid on interest-bearing deposits and other borrowed funds are referred to as “rate changes.”
To evaluate net interest income, we measure and monitor (1) yields on our loans and other interest-earning assets, (2) the costs of our deposits and other funding sources, (3) our net interest spread and (4) our net interest margin. Net interest spread is the difference between rates earned on interest-earning assets and rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities. Net interest margin is a ratio calculated as net interest income divided by average interest-earning assets. Because noninterest-bearing sources of funds, such as noninterest-bearing deposits and stockholders’ equity, also fund interest-earning assets, net interest margin includes the benefit of these noninterest-bearing sources.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net interest income totaled $265.8 million compared to net interest income of $285.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $19.3 million, or 6.8%. This decrease was due to a $56.9 million, or 15.0%, decrease in interest income offset by a $37.6 million decrease in interest expense. Interest income was $321.9 million, compared to $378.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The primary drivers of decreased interest income was a $54.2 million decrease in interest income on loans held for investment, including MW and PPP. Interest earned on average loans outstanding for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $54.2 million, or 15.9%. The decline in interest earned on average loans was the result of a decrease in yields earned on loan balances. Average loan balances, excluding PPP loans, grew from $5.9 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $6.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $204.5 million, or 3.5%. In the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, Congress appropriated $25.0 billion for existing PPP borrowers to obtain a second round of PPP funding. The SBA began accepting applications for these "second draw" PPP loans on January 13, 2021.
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $56.1 million, compared to $93.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $37.6 million, or 40.2%. The year-over-year decrease was due to decreases in the averages rates paid on interest-bearing demand and savings deposits and certificates and other time deposits and a change in deposit mix.
Net interest margin and net interest spread were 3.39% and 3.08%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 3.97% and 3.48%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net interest margin by 58 basis points and decrease in net interest spread by 40 basis points were due to a decrease in the average yield earned on interest-bearing assets by 117 basis points, offset by a decrease in the average yield paid on interest-bearing liabilities by 77 basis points. The average interest earned on interest-bearing assets decreased to 4.10% during the year ended December 31, 2020 from 5.27% for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to a decrease in yields earned on loan balances. The average interest paid on interest-bearing liabilities decreased to 1.02% during the year ended December 31, 2020 from 1.79% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The following table presents, for the periods indicated, an analysis of net interest income by each major category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, the average amounts outstanding and the interest earned or paid on such amounts. The table also sets forth the average rate earned on interest-earning assets, the average rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities, and the net interest margin on average total interest-earning assets for the same periods. Interest earned on loans that are classified as nonaccrual is not recognized in income; however, the balances are reflected in average outstanding balances for the period. For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, interest income not recognized on nonaccrual loans, excluding purchased credit deteriorated (“PCD”) loans, was $3.4 million and $1.7 million, respectively. Any nonaccrual loans have been included in the table as loans carrying a zero yield.
(1) Includes average outstanding balances of loans held for sale of $15,315 and $8,762 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(2) Net interest rate spread is the average yield on interest-earning assets minus the average rate on interest-bearing liabilities.
(3) Net interest margin is equal to net interest income divided by average interest-earning assets.
The following table presents the changes in interest income and interest expense for the periods indicated for each major component of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and distinguishes between the changes attributable to changes in volume and changes attributable to changes in interest rates. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume that cannot be segregated have been allocated to rate.
Provision for Credit Losses
Our provision for credit losses is a charge to income in order to bring our allowance for credit losses to a level deemed appropriate by management. For a description of the factors taken into account by management in determining the allowance for credit losses see “-Financial Condition-Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans Held for Investment.” The provision for credit losses was $56.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $21.5 million for the same period in 2019, an increase of $35.1 million, or 163.3%. The increase in provision expense was primarily attributable to changes in the Texas economic forecasts used in the CECL model during the year ended December 31, 2020 to reflect the expected impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we also recorded a $9.0 million provision for credit losses on unfunded commitments, which was attributable to an increase in unfunded balances and the change in the economic forecasts as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Allowance for credit losses as a percentage of loans held for investments, excluding MW and PPP loans, was 1.80% and 0.52% at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Noninterest Income
Our primary sources of recurring noninterest income are service charges and fees on deposit accounts, loan fees, gain (loss) on the sale of investment securities, gains on the sale of mortgage loans, government guaranteed loan income, net and other income. Noninterest income does not include loan origination fees, which are generally recognized over the life of the related loan as an adjustment to yield using the interest method.
The following table presents, for the periods indicated, the major categories of noninterest income:
Noninterest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $17.2 million, or 57.4%, to $47.3 million compared to noninterest income of $30.1 million for the same period in 2019. The primary components of the increase were as follows:
Service charges and fees on deposit accounts. We earn service charges and fees from our customers for deposit-related activities. The income from these deposit activities constitutes a significant and predictable component of our noninterest income. Service charges and fees on deposit accounts were $13.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $631.0 thousand, or 4.4%, over the same period in 2019. This decrease was primarily due a decrease in certain specialty finance lending relationships with corresponding deposit accounts, resulting in lower service charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019.
Loan fees. We earn certain loan fees in connection with funding and servicing loans. Loan fees were $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $7.8 million for the same period in 2019. The decrease of $3.2 million was primarily attributable to a decrease in late charges and prepayment fees as a result of the Company's deferment program in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gain (loss) on sales of securities. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred a gain on sales of securities of $2.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a $1.9 million loss on sales of securities during the same period in 2019. The increase in net gain from sales of securities was primarily due to a decrease in market interest rates on debt securities during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Gain on sales of mortgage loans. We realized gains on loans sold of $1.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $475.0 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase in the volume of mortgage loans sold in 2020 compared 2019.
Government guaranteed loan income, net. Government guaranteed loan income, net includes non-interest income earned on PPP loans as well as income related to the sales of government guaranteed loans. The increase in government guaranteed loan income, net of $9.4 million was primarily due to the increase in PPP loans originated and the impact of the fair value option election on these loans during the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company earned fee income of 5%, or $7.0 million, on PPP loans with balances under $350 thousand, 3%, or $4.4 million, on PPP loans with balances between $350 thousand and $2 million and 1%, or $1.1 million, on PPP loans with balances greater than $2 million. This income was recognized upon origination as the Company elected the fair value option for PPP loan income. The increase in government guaranteed loan income, net was partially offset by a $2.3 million fair value remeasurement adjustment for government guaranteed and PPP loans elected to be accounted for under the fair value option and a decrease on gains on sale of non-PPP SBA loans of $1.0 million.
Other. Other noninterest income was $8.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $6.4 million, or 261.9%, compared to the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily due to increases in derivative income of $2.1 million, gain on sale of bank premises, furniture and equipment of $358 thousand, service fee income of $204 thousand and changes in the market value of equity method investments of $157 thousand.
Noninterest Expense
Noninterest expense is composed of all employee expenses and costs associated with operating our facilities, acquiring and retaining customer relationships and providing bank services. The major component of noninterest expense is salaries and employee benefits. Noninterest expense also includes operational expenses, such as occupancy expenses, depreciation and amortization of office equipment, professional fees and regulatory fees, data processing expenses, merger and acquisition expenses and marketing expenses.
The following table presents, for the periods indicated, the major categories of noninterest expense:
Noninterest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $18.4 million, or 10.4%, to $159.4 million compared to noninterest expense of $177.8 million for the same period in 2019. The most significant components of the increase were as follows:
Salaries and employee benefits. Salaries and employee benefits include payroll expenses, the cost of incentive compensation, benefit plans, health insurance and payroll taxes. These expenses are impacted by the amount of direct loan origination costs, which are required to be deferred in accordance with ASC 310-20 (formerly FAS91). Salaries and employee benefits were $79.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $6.7 million, or 9.2%, compared to the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to increases in compensation costs of $2.4 million, stock based compensation of $2.3 million, payroll taxes of $832 thousand, severance of $771 thousand and 401(k) contribution match of $314 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Merger and acquisition expense. Merger and acquisition expense includes legal, professional, audit, regulatory and other expenses incurred in connections with a merger or acquisition. No merger and acquisition expenses were incurred for the year ended December 31, 2020, as our acquisition of Green was completed in 2019. These expenses incurred in 2019 were primarily driven by a $17.1 million increase in stock-based compensation due to the accelerated vesting of outstanding restricted stock units and stock options related to the Green acquisition, a $9.0 million increase in severance and change-in-control payments, a $3.1 million increase in professional services expenses and a $1.6 million increase in data processing expense as a result of our system conversions in connection with our acquisition of Green.
COVID expenses. This category of expenses includes expenses related to the COVID-19 pandemic such as PPP incentive compensation of $500 thousand, CRA donations of $471 thousand, employee salaries of $273 thousand for employees impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and increased cleaning expenses of $30 thousand.
Debt extinguishment costs. This category includes pre-payment fees as a result of structured FHLB advances paid off early in the amount of $11.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 with no corresponding pre-payments of FHLB advances made during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense is a function of our pre-tax income, tax-exempt income and other nondeductible expenses. Deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect current statutory income tax rates in effect for the period in which the deferred tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. As changes in tax laws or rates are enacted, deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted through the provision for income taxes. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company did not believe a valuation allowance was necessary.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, income tax expense totaled $14.2 million, a decrease of $10.9 million, or 43.5%, compared to $25.1 million for the same period in 2019. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 16.1%, a decrease as compared to the effective tax rate of 21.7% for the same period in 2019. The decrease in the effective tax rate was primarily driven by (i) a net tax benefit of $1.8 million as a result of the Company amending a prior year Green tax return to carry back a net operating loss ("NOL") incurred by Green Bancorp, Inc. on January 1, 2019, (ii) a net tax benefit of $1.4 million primarily associated with the recognition of excess tax benefit realized on share-based payment awards during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a $205 thousand excess tax expense realized on share-based payment award during the year ended December 31, 2019 and (iii) a $1.2 million tax benefit as a result of a deferred tax liability true-up during the year ended December 31, 2020 with no corresponding true-up in 2019.
Results of Operations for the Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018
Discussion of the results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 are included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 28, 2020.
Financial Condition
Our total assets were $8.8 billion and $8.0 billion as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Assets increased $865.9 million, or 10.9%, from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. Our asset growth was due to the continued execution of our strategy to establish deep relationships in the Dallas-Fort Worth metroplex and the Houston metropolitan area as well as our PPP loan portfolio, with which we serve small businesses impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe these relationships will continue to bring in new customer accounts and grow balances from existing loan and deposit customers.
Loan Portfolio
Our primary source of income is interest on loans to individuals, professionals, small to medium-sized businesses and commercial companies located in the Dallas-Fort Worth metroplex and Houston metropolitan area. Our loan portfolio consists primarily of commercial loans and real estate loans secured by commercial real estate ("CRE") properties located in our primary market areas. Our loan portfolio represents the highest yielding component of our interest-earning asset base.
As of December 31, 2020, total loans held for investment were $6.8 billion, an increase of $864.9 million, or 14.6%, compared to $5.9 billion as of December 31, 2019. This increase was the result of the continued execution and success of our loan growth strategy as well as our PPP loan portfolio, with which we serve our small businesses impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition to these amounts, loans classified as held for sale were $21.4 million and $14.1 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Total loans held for investment, excluding MW and PPP loans, as a percentage of deposits were 89.8% and 97.3% as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Total loans held for investment, excluding MW and PPP loans, as a percentage of total assets were 66.3% and 72.1% as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
The following table summarizes our loan portfolio by type of loan as of the dates indicated:
Commercial. Our commercial loans are underwritten after evaluating and understanding the borrower’s ability to operate profitably and effectively. These loans are primarily made based on the identified cash flows of the borrower, and secondarily, on the underlying collateral provided by the borrower. Most commercial loans are secured by the assets being financed or other business assets, such as accounts receivable or inventory, and generally include personal guarantees.
Commercial loans decreased $153.3 million, or 8.9%, to $1.6 billion as of December 31, 2020 from $1.7 billion as of December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to normal fluctuations in the commercial loan portfolio and to elevated early payoffs during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Mortgage warehouse. Our MW loans consist of ownership interests purchased in single-family residential mortgages funded through our warehouse lending group. These loans are typically on our balance sheet for 10 to 25 days or less. We have agreements with mortgage lenders and purchase legal ownership interests in individual loans they originate. All loans are underwritten consistent with established programs for permanent financing with financially sound investors. Substantially all loans are conforming loans or loans eligible for sale to federal agencies or government sponsored entities. However, for accounting purposes, these loans are deemed to be loans to the originator and, as such, are classified as loans held for investment.
We acquired the MW line of business as part of the acquisition of Green in 2019 and as of December 31, 2020 we had $577.6 million of MW loans, accounting for approximately 9.0% of our total funded loans. The growth is due to bringing on more mortgage originators and a decrease in mortgage rates, which has resulted in more originations and refinancings of MW loans.
Commercial Real Estate. Our CRE loans include owner occupied and non-owner occupied properties, and are underwritten primarily based on projected cash flows and, secondarily, as loans secured by real estate. These loans may be more adversely affected by conditions in the real estate markets or in the general economy. The properties securing the portfolio are located throughout Texas and are generally diverse in terms of type. This diversity helps reduce the exposure to adverse economic events that affect any single industry.
OOCRE loans increased $10.7 million, or 1.5%, to $717.5 million as of December 31, 2020 from $706.8 million as of December 31, 2019. NOOCRE loans increased $119.9 million, or 6.7%, to $1.9 billion as of December 31, 2020 from $1.8 billion as of December 31, 2019. The increases are due to continued demand within our primary market areas.
Construction and land. Our construction and land development loans consist of loans to fund construction, land acquisition and land development construction. The properties securing the portfolio are primarily located throughout Texas and are generally diverse in terms of type.
Construction and land loans increased $63.7 million, or 10.1%, to $693.0 million as of December 31, 2020 from $629.4 million as of December 31, 2019. This increase was due to the robust business environment in the Dallas-Fort Worth metroplex and the Houston metropolitan area, even amidst the COVID-19 pandemic disruption.
1-4 family residential. Our 1-4 family residential loans consist of loans secured by single family homes, which are both owner-occupied and investor owned. Our 1-4 family residential loans have a relatively small balance spread between many individual borrowers.
1-4 family residential loans decreased $25.5 million, or 4.6%, to $524.3 million as of December 31, 2020 from $549.8 million as of December 31, 2019. This decrease is a result of normal fluctuations in the 1-4 family residential loan portfolio.
PPP loans. PPP loans increased $358.0 million, or 100.0%, as of December 31, 2020. These PPP loans were originated through the SBA as a result of the CARES Act, are 100% forgivable if certain criteria are met by the borrowers, and are 100% guaranteed by the SBA. As of December 31, 2020, we have no reason to believe that any of the Company’s PPP loans would not qualify for loan forgiveness or the SBA guarantee.
Other loan categories. Other categories of loans in our loan portfolio include farmland and agricultural loans made to farmers and ranchers relating to their operations, multi-family residential loans, consumer loans and purchased receivables financing. None of these categories of loans represents a significant portion of our total loan portfolio.
The contractual maturity ranges of loans in our loan portfolio, excluding MW and PPP loans, and the amount of such loans with fixed and floating interest rates in each maturity range as of date indicated are summarized in the following tables:
Nonperforming Assets
The following table presents information regarding nonperforming loans at the dates indicated:
(1) At December 31, 2020, nonaccrual loans included PCD loans of $1,508 not accounted for on a pooled basis. At December 31, 2018, nonaccrual loans included performing and non-pooled purchased credit impaired ("PCI") loans of $16,902 for which discount accretion have been suspended because the extent and timing of cash flows from these PCI loans could no longer be reasonably estimated. There were no PCI loans classified as nonaccrual at December 31, 2019, 2017, or 2016.
Loans are considered past due if the required principal and interest payments have not been received as of the date such payments were due. Loans are placed on nonaccrual status when, in management’s opinion, the borrower may be unable to meet payment obligations as they become due, as well as when required by regulatory provisions. Loans may be placed on nonaccrual status regardless of whether or not such loans are considered past due. When interest accrual is discontinued, all unpaid accrued interest is reversed. Interest income is subsequently recognized only to the extent cash payments are received in excess of principal due. Loans are returned to accrual status when all principal and interest amounts contractually due are brought current and future payments are reasonably assured.
We have several procedures in place to assist us in maintaining the overall quality of our loan portfolio. We have established underwriting guidelines to be followed by our bankers, and we also monitor our delinquency levels for any negative or adverse trends. Nevertheless, our loan portfolio could become subject to increasing pressures from deteriorating borrower credit due to general economic conditions.
We believe our conservative lending approach and focused management of nonperforming assets, which consist of nonaccrual loans, accruing loans 90 or more days past due excluding pooled PCD loans and other real estate owned, has resulted in sound asset quality and timely resolution of problem assets. We had $87.6 million in nonperforming assets as of December 31, 2020 compared to $39.4 million in nonperforming assets as of December 31, 2019. We had $85.3 million in nonperforming loans as of December 31, 2020 compared to $33.4 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase of $48.2 million in nonperforming assets compared to December 31, 2019 was primarily due to the a $51.3 million increase in nonaccrual loans offset by $199 thousand decrease in other real estate owned. One NOOCRE loan relationship in amount of $16.1 million along with an overall $23.6 million increase in commercial loans account for the majority of new nonaccrual loans.
The following table presents nonaccrual loans by category at the dates indicated:
Potential Problem Loans
From a credit risk standpoint, we classify loans in one of four categories: pass, special mention, substandard or doubtful. Loans classified as loss are charged-off. Loans not rated special mention, substandard, doubtful, or loss are classified as pass loans. The classifications of loans reflect a judgment about the risks of default and loss associated with the loan. We review the ratings on credits monthly. Ratings are adjusted to reflect the degree of risk and loss that is felt to be inherent in each credit as of each monthly reporting period. All classified credits are evaluated for impairments. If impairment is determined to exist, a specific reserve is established. Our methodology is structured so that specific allocations are increased in accordance with deterioration in credit quality (and a corresponding increase in risk and loss) or decreased in accordance with improvement in credit quality (and a corresponding decrease in risk and loss).
Credits rated special mention show clear signs of financial weaknesses or deterioration in credit worthiness, however, such concerns are not so pronounced that we generally expect to experience significant loss within the short-term. Such credits typically maintain the ability to perform within standard credit terms and credit exposure is not as prominent as credits with a lower rating.
Credits rated substandard are those in which the normal repayment of principal and interest may be, or has been, jeopardized by reason of adverse trends or developments of a financial, managerial, economic or political nature, or important weaknesses which exist in collateral. A protracted workout on these credits is a distinct possibility. Prompt corrective action is therefore required to strengthen our position, and/or to reduce exposure and to assure that adequate remedial measures are taken by the borrower. Credit exposure becomes more likely in such credits and a serious evaluation of the secondary support to the credit is performed.
Credits rated doubtful are those in which full collection of principal appears highly questionable, and in which some degree of loss is anticipated, even though the ultimate amount of loss may not yet be certain and/or other factors exist which could affect collection of debt. Based upon available information, positive action by the Company is required to avert or minimize loss. Credits rated doubtful are generally also placed on nonaccrual.
Credits classified as PCD, previously called PCI loans prior to the adoption of ASU 2016-13, are those that, at acquisition date prior to adoption of ASU 2016-13, had credit deterioration and it was probable that all contractually required principal and interest payments would not be collected. The Company evaluates these loans on a projected cash flow basis with this evaluation performed quarterly.
The following table summarizes our internal loan ratings, including PCD loans, as of the dates indicated.
Allowance for credit losses on loans held for investment
We maintain an ACL that represents management’s best estimate of the credit losses and risks inherent in the loan portfolio. In determining the ACL, we estimate losses on specific loans, or groups of loans, where the probable loss can be identified and reasonably determined. The balance of the ACL is based on internally assigned risk classifications of loans, historical loan loss rates, changes in the nature of the loan portfolio, overall portfolio quality, industry concentrations, delinquency trends, current economic factors and the estimated impact of current economic conditions on certain historical loan loss rates. For additional discussion of our methodology, please refer to “-Critical Accounting Policies-Loans and Allowance for Credit Losses.”
In connection with our review of the loan portfolio, we consider risk elements attributable to particular loan types or categories in assessing the quality of individual loans. Some of the risk elements we consider include:
•for commercial and industrial loans, the operating results of the commercial, industrial or professional enterprise, the borrower’s business, professional and financial ability and expertise, the specific risks and volatility of income and operating results typical for businesses in that category and the value, nature and marketability of collateral;
•for commercial mortgage loans and multifamily residential loans, the debt service coverage ratio (income from the property in excess of operating expenses compared to loan payment requirements), operating results of the owner in the case of owner occupied properties, the loan to value ratio, the age and condition of the collateral and the volatility of income, property value and future operating results typical of properties of that type;
•for 1-4 family residential mortgage loans, the borrower’s ability to repay the loan, including a consideration of the debt to income ratio and employment and income stability, the loan to value ratio, and the age, condition and marketability of the collateral; and
•for construction, land development and other land loans, the perceived feasibility of the project, including the ability to sell developed lots or improvements constructed for resale or the ability to lease property constructed for lease, the quality and nature of contracts for presale or prelease, if any, experience and ability of the developer and loan to value ratio.
As of December 31, 2020, the ACL totaled $105.1 million, or 1.80%, of total loans, excluding MW and PPP loans. As of December 31, 2019, the ACL totaled $29.8 million, or 0.52%, of total loans, excluding MW loans. The increase in the percentage of ACL to total loans compared to December 31, 2019 was attributable to the adoption of ASU 2016-13 which on January 1, 2020, adoption date, the Company recorded an increase of $39.1 million to the ACL. Additionally, the increase in the required ACL was due to significant deterioration in projected Texas economic forecasts during 2020 to calculate expected losses. This deterioration was brought on by the projected economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s loss drivers over the reasonable and supportable forecast period and resulted in the need for additional ACL.
The following table presents, as of and for the periods indicated, an analysis of the ACL and other related data:
(1)Excluding loans held for sale.
Although we believe that we have established our allowance for credit losses in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”) and that the allowance for credit losses was adequate to provide for known and inherent losses in the portfolio at all times shown above, future provisions will be subject to ongoing evaluations of the risks in our loan portfolio. If we experience economic declines or if asset quality deteriorates, material additional provisions could be required.
The following table shows the allocation of the allowance for credit losses among our loan categories and certain other information as of the dates indicated. The allocation of the allowance for credit losses as shown in the table should neither be interpreted as an indication of future charge-offs, nor as an indication that charge-offs in future periods will necessarily occur in these amounts or in the indicated proportions. The total allowance is available to absorb losses from any loan category.
Equity Securities
As of December 31, 2020, we held equity securities with a readily determinable fair value of $11.4 million compared to $11.1 million. as of December 31, 2019. These equity securities represent investments in a publicly traded Community Reinvestment Act fund and are subject to market pricing volatility, with changes in fair value recorded in earnings.
The Company held equity securities without a readily determinable fair values and measured at cost of $3.6 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company measures equity securities that do not have readily determinable fair values at cost minus impairment, if any, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for the identical or a similar investment of the same issuer.
FHLB Stock and FRB Stock
As of December 31, 2020, we held FHLB stock and FRB stock of $71.2 million compared to $68.3 million as of December 31, 2019. The Bank is a member of its regional Federal Reserve Bank and of the FHLB system. FHLB members are required to own a certain amount of stock based on the level of borrowings and other factors, and may invest in additional amounts. Both FRB and FHLB stock are carried at cost, restricted for sale, and periodically evaluated for impairment based on ultimate recovery of par value. Both cash and stock dividends are reported as income. Other non-marketable equity securities are carried at their cost, which approximates fair value.
Debt Securities
We use our debt securities portfolio to provide a source of liquidity, provide an appropriate return on funds invested, manage interest rate risk, meet collateral requirements and meet regulatory capital requirements. As of December 31, 2020, the carrying amount of debt securities totaled $1.1 billion, an increase of $57.9 million, or 5.8%, compared to $997.3 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase in our debt securities in 2020 were primarily due to purchases of debt securities of $1.2 billion and net unrealized gains $32.8 million, offset by maturities, calls and paydowns of $1.0 billion, and sales of $113.8 million. Debt securities represented 12.0% and 12.1% of total assets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Our investment portfolio consists of debt securities classified as available for sale and held to maturity. As a result, the carrying values of our available for sale debt securities are adjusted for unrealized gain or loss, and any gain or loss is reported on an after-tax basis as a component of other comprehensive income in stockholders’ equity. Our held to maturity debt securities are recorded at their amortized cost. The following table summarizes the amortized cost and estimated fair value of our available for sale debt securities, excluding held-to-maturity debt securities, as of the dates shown:
All of our mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations are issued and/or guaranteed by U.S. government agencies or U.S. government-sponsored entities. We do not hold any Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac preferred stock, corporate equity, collateralized debt obligations, collateralized loan obligations, structured investment vehicles, private label collateralized mortgage obligations, subprime, Alt-A or second lien elements in our investment portfolio. As of December 31, 2020, our investment portfolio did not contain any securities that are directly backed by subprime or Alt-A mortgages.
Management evaluates available for sale debt securities in unrealized loss positions to determine whether the impairment is due to credit-related factors or noncredit-related factors. Consideration is given to (1) the extent to which the fair value is less than cost, (2) the financial condition and near-term prospects of the issuer, and (3) the intent and ability of the Company to retain its investment in the security for a period of time sufficient to allow for any anticipated recovery in fair value. As of December 31, 2020, management believes that available for sale debt securities in a unrealized loss position are due to noncredit-related factors, including changes in interest rates and other market conditions, and therefore no allowance for credit losses have been recognized in the Company’s condensed consolidated balance sheets. The Company also recorded no allowance for credit losses for its held to maturity debt securities as of December 31, 2020.
The following table sets forth the fair value and amortized cost for available for sale debt securities and held to maturity debt securities, respectively, maturities and approximated weighted average yield based on estimated annual income divided by the average fair value of available for sale debt securities and amortized cost of held to maturity debt securities as of the dates indicated. The contractual maturity of a mortgage-backed security is the date at which the last underlying mortgage matures.
The contractual maturity of mortgage-backed securities, collateralized mortgage obligations and asset-backed securities is not a reliable indicator of their expected life because borrowers have the right to prepay their obligations at any time. Mortgage-backed securities, collateralized mortgage obligations and asset-backed securities are typically issued with stated principal amounts and are backed by pools of mortgage loans and other loans with varying maturities. The term of the underlying mortgages and loans may vary significantly due to the ability of a borrower to prepay amounts outstanding. Monthly pay downs on mortgage-backed securities tend to cause the average life of the securities to be much different than the stated contractual maturity. During a period of increasing interest rates, fixed-rate mortgage-backed securities do not tend to experience heavy prepayments of principal, and consequently, the average life of this security will be lengthened. If interest rates begin to fall, prepayments may increase, thereby shortening the estimated life of these securities. The weighted average life of our investment portfolio was 5.83 years with an estimated effective duration of 4.1 years as of December 31, 2020. The average yield of the securities portfolio was 2.84% during 2020 compared to 3.02% during 2019.
As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we did not own securities of any one issuer other than U.S. government agency securities, for which aggregate adjusted cost exceeded 10.0% of the consolidated stockholders’ equity as of such respective dates.
Intangible Assets and Goodwill
Intangible assets and goodwill as of December 31, 2020 were $61.7 million and $370.8 million, respectively, a decrease of intangible assets of $10.5 million compared to December 31, 2019. The decrease in intangible assets was primarily due to amortization of $9.8 million on core deposit intangibles.
Deposits
We offer a variety of deposit products having a wide range of interest rates and terms, including demand, savings, money market and time accounts. We rely primarily on competitive pricing policies, convenient locations and personalized service to attract and retain these deposits.
Total deposits as of December 31, 2020 were $6.5 billion, an increase of $618.5 million, or 10.5%, compared to $5.9 billion as of December 31, 2019, due primarily to increases of $218.5 million and $540.6 million in money market accounts and noninterest-bearing deposit accounts, offset by a decrease of $225.6 million in certificates of deposit, respectively. Our deposit growth was primarily related to our continued penetration in our primary market areas, the increase in commercial lending relationships for which we also seek deposit balances and increases in our financial institution money market accounts.
Average deposits for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $6.1 billion, a decrease of $22.1 million, or 0.4% over average deposits of $6.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. The average rate paid on total interest-bearing deposits decreased from 1.70% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 0.86% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in the average rate paid on interest-bearing deposits was due to the overall market condition, and a decrease in the prime rate during 2020.
The following table presents the daily average balances and weighted average rates paid on deposits for the periods indicated:
Our ratio of average noninterest-bearing deposits to average total deposits was 29.9% and 24.2% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Factors affecting the cost of funding of our interest-bearing assets include the volume of noninterest- and interest-bearing deposits, changes in market interest rates (including increases in fed fund rates) and economic conditions in our target markets and their impact on interest paid on our deposits, change in deposit mix, as well as the ongoing execution of our balance sheet management strategy. Our cost of funds was 0.60% in 2020 and 1.29% in 2019. Average rates on interest-bearing deposits were 0.86% in 2020 and 1.70% in 2019.
Borrowings
We utilize short-term and long-term borrowings to supplement deposits to fund our lending and investment activities, each of which is discussed below.
FHLB Advance
The FHLB allows us to borrow on a blanket floating lien status collateralized by certain securities and loans. As of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, total borrowing capacity of $766.4 million, $752.7 million and $1.0 billion, respectively, was available under this arrangement and $777.7 million, $677.9 million and $28.0 million, respectively, was outstanding, with an average interest rate of 1.04% as of December 31, 2020, 1.99% as of December 31, 2019 and 1.95% as of December 31, 2018. We utilize these borrowings to meet liquidity needs and to fund certain fixed rate loans in our portfolio. The following table presents our current FHLB advances based on year of maturity as of December 31, 2020.
The following table presents our FHLB borrowings at the dates indicated. Other than FHLB borrowings, we had no other short-term borrowings at the dates indicated.
FRB. The FRB has an available borrower in custody arrangement, which allows us to borrow on a collateralized basis. Certain commercial and consumer loans are pledged under this arrangement. We maintain this borrowing arrangement to meet liquidity needs pursuant to our contingency funding plan. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, $871.5 million and $1.0 billion, respectively, were available under this arrangement based on collateral values of pledged commercial and consumer loans. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $94.2 million in commercial loans were pledged as collateral. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, no borrowings were outstanding under this arrangement.
Junior subordinated debentures and subordinated notes.
The table below details our junior subordinated debentures and subordinated notes. Refer to Note 14 "Borrowed Funds" for further discussion on the details of our junior subordinated debentures and subordinated notes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Liquidity management involves our ability to raise funds to support asset growth and acquisitions or reduce assets to meet deposit withdrawals and other payment obligations, to maintain reserve requirements and otherwise to operate on an ongoing basis and manage unexpected events. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, our liquidity needs were primarily met by core deposits, wholesale borrowings, security and loan maturities and amortizing investment and loan portfolios. Use of brokered deposits, purchased funds from correspondent banks and overnight advances from the FHLB and the FRB are available and have been utilized to take advantage of the cost of these funding sources. We maintained five lines of credit with commercial banks that provide for extensions of credit with an availability to borrow up to an aggregate amount of $175.0 million as of December 31, 2020, three lines of credit with commercial banks with an availability to borrow up to an aggregate amount of $150.0 million as of December 31, 2019 and two lines of credit with commercial banks with an availability to borrow up to an aggregate of $75.0 million as of December 31, 2018. There were no advances under these lines of credit outstanding as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
In addition, $359.8 million was available in conjunction with the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (“PPPLF”) which is a lending facility offered by the Federal Reserve to extend credit to financial institutions that originate PPP loans, while taking the PPP loans as collateral. As of December 31, 2020, we have not utilized the PPPLF.
The following table illustrates, during the periods presented, the mix of our funding sources and the average assets in which those funds are invested as a percentage of our average total assets for the period indicated. Average assets totaled $8.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, $8.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019 and $3.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Our primary source of funds is deposits, and our primary use of funds is loans. We do not expect a change in the primary source or use of our funds in the foreseeable future. Our average loans, including MW and PPP, net of allowance for credit loss increased 7.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 and an increase of 147.5% for the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the acquisition of Green compared to the same period in 2018. We invest excess deposits in interest-bearing deposits at other banks, the FRB or liquid investments securities until these monies are needed to fund loan growth.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $2.7 billion in outstanding commitments to extend credit, $354.6 million in MW commitments and $44.4 million in commitments associated with outstanding standby and commercial letters of credit. As of December 31, 2019, we had $1.6 billion in outstanding commitments to extend credit, $347.5 million in MW commitments and $27.2 million in commitments associated with outstanding standby and commercial letters of credit. Since commitments associated with letters of credit and commitments to extend credit may expire unused, the total outstanding may not necessarily reflect the actual future cash funding requirements.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $230.8 million, compared to $251.6 million at December 31, 2019.
Analysis of Cash Flows
Cash Flows Provided by Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities increased by $3.7 million from $104.0 million to $107.7 million representing a minimal change in operating cash flows year over year
Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities increased by $828.2 million compared to the same period in 2019. The increase in cash used in investing activities was primarily attributable to an increase in net originations of loans held for investment of $745.9 million and $112.7 million of cash received in excess of cash paid for the acquisition of Green in 2019 with no corresponding cash received in excess of cash paid in 2020.
Cash Flows Provided by Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities increased by $636.7 million compared to the same period in 2019. The increase in cash provided by financing activities was primarily attributable to a $815.1 million increase in deposits, a $48.0 million increase in issuance of subordinated notes, net of debt issuance costs paid and a decrease in share repurchases of $37.1 million, slightly offset by a $250.0 million decrease in advances from the FHLB for the year ending December 31, 2019.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had no exposure to future cash requirements associated with known uncertainties or capital expenditures of a material nature.
Share Repurchases
On January 28, 2019, our Board of Directors originally authorized a stock buyback program (the "Stock Buyback Program") pursuant to which we could, from time to time, purchase up to $50.0 million of our outstanding common stock in the aggregate. Our Board of Directors authorized increases of $50.0 million in September 2019 and $75.0 million in December 2019, resulting in authorization to purchase an aggregate of up to $175.0 million of shares. Our Board of Directors also authorized an extension of the original expiration date of the Stock Buyback Program from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020, and a further extension to March 31, 2021. The shares may be repurchased in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions from time to time, depending upon market conditions and other factors, and in accordance with applicable regulations of the SEC and capital and dividend guidelines of the Federal Reserve. The Stock Buyback Program does not obligate us to purchase any shares and may be terminated or amended by our Board of Directors at any time prior to its expiration date. During the year ended December 31, 2020, 2,349,639 shares of our common stock were repurchased through the Stock Buyback Program and held as treasury stock at an average price of $24.51 per share. During the year ended December 31, 2019, 3,802,711 shares were repurchased through the Stock Buyback Program and held as treasury stock at an average price of $24.86 per share.
Capital Resources
Total stockholders’ equity was $1.20 billion as of December 31, 2020, compared to $1.19 billion as of December 31, 2019, an increase of $12.6 million, or 1.1%. The increase from December 31, 2019 was primarily the result of $73.9 million in net income, $37.2 million of other comprehensive income, and $8.0 of stock based compensation offset by $57.5 million in stock buybacks, $34.1 million in dividends declared and paid and $15.5 million in CECL transition during the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we declared and paid $34.1 million in cash dividends. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we declared and paid $26.8 million in cash dividends. For the year ended December 31, 2018, we neither declared nor paid dividends. For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we purchased 2.3 million and 3.8 million shares of our common stock under the Stock Buyback Program, respectively. We did not purchase any of our common stock during the year ended December 31, 2018.
Capital management consists of providing equity to support our current and future operations. Our regulators view capital levels as important indicators of an institution’s financial soundness. As a general matter, FDIC-insured depository institutions and their holding companies are required to maintain minimum capital relative to the amount and types of assets they hold. We are subject to regulatory capital requirements at the bank holding company and bank levels. See “Item 1. Business-Regulation and Supervision-Regulatory Capital Requirements and Capital Adequacy” and “Item 1. Business-Regulation and Supervision-Prompt Corrective Action” for additional discussion regarding the regulatory capital requirements
applicable to us and the Bank. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we and the Bank were in compliance with all applicable regulatory capital requirements, and the Bank was classified as “well capitalized” for purposes of the prompt corrective action regulations. As we employ our capital and continue to grow our operations, our regulatory capital levels may decrease depending on our level of earnings. However, we expect to monitor and control our growth in order to remain in compliance with all regulatory capital standards applicable to us.
The following table presents the actual capital amounts and regulatory capital ratios for us and the Bank as of the dates indicated.
Contractual Obligations
The following tables summarize our contractual obligations and other commitments to make future payments as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, which consist of our non-cancelable future operating leases, time deposits, future cash payments associated with our contractual obligations pursuant to our FHLB advances, junior subordinated debentures, subordinated debt, securities sold under agreements to repurchase and qualified affordable housing investments. Future payments for FHLB advances will include interest in addition to the principal amount of the advances in the table below that will be paid over future periods. Payments related to leases are based on actual payments specified in underlying contracts. Advances from the FHLB totaled approximately $777.7 million and $677.9 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, the advances are collateralized by a blanket floating lien on certain securities and loans, had a weighted average rate of 0.94% and mature on various dates during 2021 and 2025.
In 2017, we began investing in two qualified housing projects. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the balance of the investment for qualified affordable housing projects was $2.9 million and $3.3 million, respectively. This balance is reflected in other assets on our consolidated balance sheets. The total unfunded commitment related to the investment in a qualified housing project totaled $362 thousand and $1.1 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We expect to fulfill these commitments during the year ending December 31, 2034.
Off-Balance Sheet Items
In the normal course of business, we enter into various transactions which, in accordance with GAAP, are not included in our consolidated balance sheets. However, we have has only limited off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material effect on our financial condition, revenues, expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. We enter into these transactions to meet the financing needs of our customers. These transactions include commitments to extend credit and standby and commercial letters of credit, which involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit risk and interest rate risk in excess of the amounts recognized in the consolidated balance sheets.
Our commitments associated with outstanding standby and commercial letters of credit and commitments to extend credit expiring by the period as of the date indicated are summarized below. Since commitments associated with letters of credit and commitments to extend credit may expire unused, the amounts shown do not necessarily reflect the actual future cash funding requirements.
Standby and commercial letters of credit are written conditional commitments that we issue to guarantee the performance of a customer to a third party. In the event the customer does not perform in accordance with the terms of the agreement with the third party, we would be required to fund the commitment. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make is represented by the contractual amount of the commitment. If the commitment is funded, the customer is obligated to reimburse us for the amount paid under this standby letter of credit.
Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend to a customer as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract. Commitments generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Since many of the commitments are expected to expire without being fully drawn, the total commitment
amounts disclosed above do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. Management evaluates each customer’s creditworthiness on a case-by-case basis. The amount of collateral obtained, if considered necessary by us, upon extension of credit, is based on management’s credit evaluation of the borrower.
MW commitments are unconditionally cancellable and represent the unused capacity on MW facilities the Company has approved. The Company reserves the right to refuse to buy any mortgage loans offered for sale by a customer, for any reason, at the Company’s sole and absolute discretion.
Impact of Inflation
Our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. These require the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars, without considering changes in the relative value of money over time due to inflation or recession.
Unlike many industrial companies, substantially all of our assets and liabilities are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates have a more significant impact on our performance than the effects of general levels of inflation. Interest rates may not necessarily move in the same direction or in the same magnitude as the prices of goods and services. However, other operating expenses do reflect general levels of inflation.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Our accounting and reporting policies conform to GAAP and the prevailing practices in the financial services industry. However, we also evaluate our performance by reference to certain additional financial measures discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K that we identify as being “non-GAAP financial measures.” In accordance with SEC rules, we classify a financial measure as being a non-GAAP financial measure if that financial measure excludes or includes amounts, or is subject to adjustments that have the effect of excluding or including amounts, that are included or excluded, as the case may be, in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP as in effect from time to time in the United States in our statements of income, balance sheets or statements of cash flows. Non-GAAP financial measures do not include operating and other statistical measures or ratios or statistical measures calculated using exclusively either financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP, operating measures or other measures that are not non-GAAP financial measures or both.
The non-GAAP financial measures that we discuss in this Annual Report on Form 10-K should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the most directly comparable or other financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. Moreover, the manner in which we calculate the non-GAAP financial measures that we discuss in this Annual Report on Form 10-K may differ from that of other companies reporting measures with similar names. You should understand how such other banking organizations calculate their financial measures similar or with names similar to the non-GAAP financial measures we have discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K when comparing such non-GAAP financial measures.
Tangible Book Value Per Common Share. Tangible book value is a non-GAAP measure generally used by financial analysts and investment bankers to evaluate financial institutions. We calculate: (a) tangible common equity as total stockholders’ equity less goodwill and core deposit intangibles, net of accumulated amortization; and (b) tangible book value per common share as tangible common equity (as described in clause (a)) divided by the number of common shares outstanding at the end of the relevant period. The most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP is our book value per common share.
We believe that this measure is important to many investors who are interested in changes from period to period in book value per common share exclusive of changes in intangible assets. Goodwill and core deposit intangibles have the effect of increasing total book value while not increasing our tangible book value.
The following table reconciles, as of the dates set forth below, total stockholders’ equity to tangible common equity and presents our tangible book value per common share compared with our book value per common share:
Tangible Common Equity to Tangible Assets. Tangible common equity to tangible assets is a non-GAAP measure generally used by financial analysts and investment bankers to evaluate financial institutions. We calculate: (a) tangible common equity as total stockholders’ equity, less goodwill and core deposit intangibles, net of accumulated amortization; (b) tangible assets as total assets less goodwill and core deposit intangibles, net of accumulated amortization; and (c) tangible common equity to tangible assets as tangible common equity (as described in clause (a)) divided by tangible assets (as described in clause (b)). The most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP is total stockholders’ equity to total assets.
We believe that this measure is important to many investors who are interested in the relative changes from period to period in common equity and total assets, in each case, exclusive of changes in intangible assets. Goodwill and core deposit intangibles have the effect of increasing both total stockholders’ equity and assets while not increasing our tangible common equity or tangible assets.
The following table reconciles, as of the dates set forth below, total stockholders’ equity to tangible common equity and total assets to tangible assets and presents our tangible common equity to tangible assets:
.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP and with general practices within the financial services industry. Application of these principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under current circumstances. These assumptions form the basis for our judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from independent, objective sources. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. Use of alternative assumptions may have resulted in significantly different estimates. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
We have identified the following accounting policies and estimates that, due to the difficult, subjective or complex judgments and assumptions inherent in those policies and estimates and the potential sensitivity of our financial statements to those judgments and assumptions, are critical to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations. We believe that the judgments, estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our financial statements are appropriate.
Loans and Allowance for Credit Losses
Management considers the policies related to the allowance for credit losses as the most critical to the financial statement presentation. The total allowance for credit losses includes activity related to allowances calculated in accordance with ASC 310, "Receivables", and ASC 450, "Contingencies". On January 1, 2020, we adopted ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”). The impact of adopting this standard resulted in an increase in our allowance for credit losses of $39.1 million. The allowance for credit losses is established through a provision for loan losses charged to current earnings. The amount maintained in the allowance reflects management’s estimate of expected credit losses in the loan portfolio at the report date. The allowance for credit losses is comprised of specific reserves assigned to certain impaired loans and general reserves. Factors contributing to the determination of specific reserves include the creditworthiness of the borrower, and more specifically, changes in the expected future receipt of principal and interest payments and/or in the value of pledged collateral. A reserve is recorded when the carrying amount of the loan exceeds the discounted estimated cash flows using the loan’s initial effective interest rate or the fair value of the collateral for certain collateral dependent loans. For purposes of establishing the general reserve, we stratify the loan portfolio into homogeneous groups of loans that possess similar loss potential characteristics and apply a loss ratio to these groups of loans to estimate the credit losses in the loan portfolio. We use both historical loss ratios and qualitative loss factors assigned to major loan collateral types to establish general component loss allocations. Refer to “Loans and Allowance for Credit Losses” in Note 1 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 of this report for further discussion of the factors considered by management in establishing the allowance for credit loss.
Business Combinations
We apply the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations. Under the acquisition method, the acquiring entity in a business combination recognizes 100% of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their acquisition date fair values. We use valuation techniques appropriate for the asset or liability being measured in determining these fair values. Any excess of the purchase price over amounts allocated to assets acquired, including identifiable intangible assets and liabilities assumed, is recorded as goodwill. Where amounts allocated to assets acquired and liabilities assumed is greater than the purchase price, a bargain purchase gain is recognized. Acquisition-related costs are expensed as incurred.
Debt Securities
Securities are classified as held to maturity and carried at amortized cost when we have the positive intent and ability to hold them until maturity. Securities to be held for indefinite periods of time are classified as available for sale and carried at fair value, with the unrealized holding gains and losses reported in other comprehensive income, net of tax. We determine the appropriate classification of securities at the time of purchase.
Interest income includes amortization of purchase premiums and discounts. Realized gains and losses are derived from the amortized cost of the security sold. Credit related declines in the fair value of held to maturity and available for sale debt securities below their cost that are deemed to be other than temporary are reflected in earnings as realized losses, with the remaining unrealized loss recognized as a component of other comprehensive income. In estimating allowance for credit losses, we consider, among other things, (1) the length of time and the extent to which the fair value has been less than cost, (2) the financial condition and near-term prospects of the issuer, and (3) the intent and our ability to retain the investment in the issuer for a period of time sufficient to allow for any anticipated recovery in fair value.
Goodwill
Goodwill resulting from a business combination represents the excess of the fair value of the consideration transferred over the fair value of the net assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of the acquisition date. Goodwill is not amortized but is reviewed for potential impairment annually on October 31 of each fiscal year or when a triggering event occurs.
We may first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not (that is, a likelihood of more than 50%) that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill. We have an unconditional option to bypass the qualitative assessment for any reporting unit in any period and proceed directly to performing the quantitative goodwill impairment test, and we may resume performing the qualitative assessment in any subsequent period. If we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then we perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test. The quantitative goodwill impairment test, used to identify both the existence of potential impairment and the amount of impairment loss, involves estimating the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss shall be recognized in an amount equal to that excess, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. Any such adjustments to goodwill are reflected in the results of operations in the periods in which they become known.
Estimating the fair values of a reporting unit involves the use of significant assumptions, estimates and judgments with respect to a variety of factors, including revenues, capital expenditures, cash flows and the selection and use of an appropriate discount rate and market values and multiples of earnings and revenues of similar public companies. Projected sales and capital expenditures are based on our annual business plan or other forecasted results. Discount rates reflect market-based estimates of the risks associated with the projected cash flows of the reporting unit.
The use of different assumptions, estimates or judgments in the goodwill impairment testing process, including with respect to the estimated future cash flows of our reporting unit, the discount rate used to discount such estimated cash flows to their net present value, and the reasonableness of the resultant implied control premium relative to our market capitalization, could materially increase or decrease the fair value of the reporting unit and/or its net assets and, accordingly, could materially increase or decrease any related impairment charge.
During the second quarter of 2020, the Company observed a sustained decline in the market valuation of the Company’s common stock as a result of continued economic disruption occurring after the first quarter of 2020 primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, the Company determined that it was more likely than not that the fair value of the Company’s sole reporting unit was below its carrying value and proceeded to perform an interim quantitative impairment test. The Company determined the fair value of its reporting unit using a combination of a market and an income approach. Upon completion of quantitative evaluation, the Company determined that, as of June 30, 2020, the fair value of the Company's reporting unit exceeded its related carrying value, and therefore goodwill was not impaired.
The Company performed its annual goodwill impairment test as of October 31, 2020 using a qualitative impairment assessment and determined that it was not more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit was less than its carrying amount. The Company also did not identify any potential impairment indicators subsequent to our annual assessment.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to “Recent Accounting Pronouncements” in Note 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 of this report for further discussion.
Special Cautionary Notice Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains certain “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements are based on various facts and derived utilizing assumptions, current expectations, estimates and projections and are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements include, without limitation, statements relating to the expected payment date of our quarterly cash dividend, impact of certain changes in our accounting policies, standards and interpretations, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken in response thereto, our future financial performance, business and growth strategy, projected plans and objectives, as well as other projections based on macroeconomic and industry trends, which are inherently unreliable due to the multiple factors that impact broader economic and industry trends, and any such variations may be material. Statements preceded by, followed by or that otherwise include the words “believes,” “expects,” “anticipates,” “intends,” “projects,” “estimates,” “plans” and similar expressions or future or conditional verbs such as “will,” “should,” “would,” “may” and “could” are generally forward-looking in nature and not historical facts, although not all forward-looking statements include the foregoing words. You should understand that the following important factors could affect our future results and cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed in the forward-looking statements:
•risks related to the concentration of our business in Texas, and specifically within the Dallas-Fort Worth metroplex and the Houston metropolitan area, including risks associated with any downturn in the real estate sector and risks associated with a decline in the values of single family homes in the Dallas-Fort Worth metroplex and the Houston metropolitan area;
•uncertain market conditions and economic trends nationally, regionally and particularly in the Dallas-Fort Worth metroplex and Texas, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•risks related to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and operations;
•possible additional loan losses and impairment of the collectibility of loans, particularly as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the programs implemented by the CARES Act, including its automatic loan forbearance provisions, and our PPP lending activities;
•the effects of regional or national civil unrest;
•changes in market interest rates that affect the pricing of our loans and deposits and our net interest income;
•risks related to our strategic focus on lending to small to medium-sized businesses;
•the sufficiency of the assumptions and estimates we make in establishing reserves for potential loan losses;
•our ability to implement our growth strategy, including identifying and consummating suitable acquisitions;
•our ability to recruit and retain successful bankers that meet our expectations in terms of customer relationships and profitability;
•changes in our accounting policies, standards and interpretations;
•our ability to retain executive officers and key employees and their customer and community relationships;
•risks associated with our commercial real estate and construction loan portfolios, including the risks inherent in the valuation of the collateral securing such loans;
•risks associated with our commercial loan portfolio, including the risk of deterioration in value of the general business assets that generally secure such loans;
•our level of nonperforming assets and the costs associated with resolving problem loans, if any, and complying with government-imposed foreclosure moratoriums;
•potential changes in the prices, values and sales volumes of commercial and residential real estate securing our real estate loans;
•risks related to the significant amount of credit that we have extended to a limited number of borrowers and in a limited geographic area;
•our ability to maintain adequate liquidity (including in compliance with CBLR standards and the effect of the transition to the CECL methodology for allowances and related adjustments) and to raise necessary capital to fund our acquisition strategy and operations or to meet increased minimum regulatory capital levels;
•potential fluctuations in the market value and liquidity of our debt securities;
•the effects of competition from a wide variety of local, regional, national and other providers of financial, investment and insurance services;
•our ability to maintain an effective system of disclosure controls and procedures and internal control over financial reporting;
•risks associated with fraudulent and negligent acts by our customers, employees or vendors;
•our ability to keep pace with technological change or difficulties when implementing new technologies;
•risks associated with difficulties and/or terminations with third-party service providers and the services they provide;
•risks associated with unauthorized access, cyber-crime and other threats to data security;
•potential impairment on the goodwill we have recorded or may record in connection with business acquisitions;
•our ability to comply with various governmental and regulatory requirements applicable to financial institutions;
•the impact of recent and future legislative and regulatory changes, including changes in banking, securities and tax laws and regulations and their application by our regulators, and economic stimulus programs;
•uncertainty regarding the future of LIBOR and any replacement alternatives on our business;
•governmental monetary and fiscal policies, including the policies of the Federal Reserve;
•our ability to comply with supervisory actions by federal and state banking agencies;
•changes in the scope and cost of FDIC, insurance and other coverage; and
•systemic risks associated with the soundness of other financial institutions
Other factors not identified above, including those described under the headings “Risk Factors” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, may also cause actual results to differ materially from those described in our forward-looking statements. Most of these factors are difficult to anticipate and are generally beyond our control. You should consider these factors in connection with considering any forward-looking statements that may be made by us. We undertake no obligation to release publicly any revisions to any forward-looking statements, to report events or to report the occurrence of unanticipated events unless we are required to do so by law.