Item 7.Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand the results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows of the Company. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, the Company’s consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing in Item 8 of this Form 10-K “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”.
Executive Summary
Strategic Priorities
Visteon is a global automotive supplier that designs, engineers and manufactures innovative automotive electronics and connected car solutions for the world’s major vehicle manufacturers. The automotive electronics market is expected to grow faster than underlying vehicle production volumes as the vehicle shifts from analog to digital and towards device and cloud connectivity, electric vehicles, and more advanced safety features.
The Company has laid out the following strategic priorities:
•Technology Innovation - The Company is an established global leader in cockpit electronics and is positioned to provide solutions as the industry transitions to the next generation automotive cockpit experience. The cockpit is becoming fully digital, connected, automated, learning, and voice enabled. Visteon's broad portfolio of cockpit electronics technology, the industry's first wireless battery management system, and the development of the DriveCore™ advanced safety platform positions Visteon to support these macro trends in the automotive industry.
•Long-Term Growth and Margin Expansion - The Company has continued to win business at a rate that exceeds current sales levels by demonstrating product quality, technical and development capability, new product innovation, reliability, timeliness, product design, manufacturing capability, and flexibility, as well as overall customer service.
•Enhance Shareholder Returns - The Company has returned approximately $3.3 billion to shareholders since 2015 through a combination of ongoing share repurchases and a onetime $1.75 billion special distribution in 2016.
Financial Results
The pie charts below highlight the sales breakdown for Visteon for the year ended December 31, 2020.
*Regional sales are based on the geographic region where sale originates and not where customer is located (excludes inter-regional eliminations).
Global Automotive Market Conditions and Production Levels
During 2020 global light vehicle production decreased 16.2% as compared to 2019 primarily due to closed or significantly reduced production at manufacturing facilities due to COVID-19.
Light vehicle production levels for 2020 and 2019 by geographic region are provided below:
The automotive industry was negatively impacted in 2020 by the COVID-19 pandemic, with industry production coming to a stop at most locations at varying times throughout the first half of the year, followed by a faster than anticipated recovery in the second half of the year.
This recovery has led to a worldwide semiconductor supply shortage in early 2021, as semiconductor suppliers have been unable to rapidly reallocate production lines to serve the automotive industry. The magnitude of the impact on the Company's 2021 financial statements and results of operations and cash flows will depend on the semiconductor supply shortage, related plant production schedules and supply chain impacts.
Company Highlights
Visteon proactively implemented actions early in 2020 focused on actively generating cash and aggressively adjusting its cost base. To mitigate the impact caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, Visteon implemented a series of restructuring programs, introduced strict cost controls, reduced discretionary spending, and enacted a temporary salary reduction for all salaried employees. In addition, Visteon implemented a comprehensive set of safety protocols to protect the health and safety of employees and manufactured and donated approximately 50,000 protective face shields to front line workers around the world.
As a result, Adjusted EBITDA (a non-U.S. GAAP financial measure, as defined in Note 20, "Segment Information and Revenue Recognition" to the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K) was $192 million or 7.5% of net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, cash, equivalents, and restricted cash was $500 million and debt was $349 million, equating to a net cash position of $151 million.
Visteon also made significant progress towards its long-term strategic priorities of technology innovation, long-term growth, and margin expansion. In 2020, Visteon continued to set the groundwork for sustainable market out-performance driven by new business wins and new product launches. For the full-year, Visteon was awarded $4.6 billion in new business and 55 new product launches, despite the challenges caused by COVID-19.
Visteon also continued to enhance its technology capabilities through its software platform strategy, which creates scalable, cost-efficient, and quick to market products while also introducing innovative new products. In 2020, Visteon introduced the industry’s first wireless battery management system, which replaces wired connections between the subsystems with highly secure and reliable wireless communication technology. This solution supports multiple charging protocols with a safe, modular, and scalable design to meet OEM cost, weight, battery pack configuration, and packaging requirements.
The Company's consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
Results of Operations - 2020 Compared with 2019
Net Sales and Cost of Sales
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $2,548 million, which represents a decrease of $397 million compared with 2019. Unfavorable volumes, primarily due to the impacts of COVID-19, and mix, partially offset by net new business, decreased net sales by $318 million. Customer pricing decreased net sales by $58 million. Unfavorable currency decreased net sales by $13 million, primarily attributable to the euro, Chinese renminbi, Brazilian real and Indian rupee. Other cost performance, primarily related to design changes, reduced sales by $8 million.
Cost of sales decreased $318 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared with 2019. Lower volumes, primarily due to the impacts of COVID-19, partially offset by unfavorable product mix, decreased cost of sales by $128 million. Engineering costs, excluding currency, decreased cost of sales by $93 million. Foreign currency decreased cost of sales by $5 million primarily attributable to the euro, Chinese renminbi, Indian rupee, Brazilian real, and Bulgarian lev. Favorable cost performance including material design, usage, and economics decreased cost of sales by $92 million.
A summary of net engineering costs is shown below:
Gross engineering includes program development costs and advanced engineering activities, excluding contractually reimbursable engineering costs. Net engineering costs of $201 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, including the impacts of currency, were $99 million lower than 2019, primarily related to short-term and long-term cost reduction initiatives including the benefits of previously announced restructuring actions implemented to optimize the structure while supporting future growth.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses were $193 million, or 7.6% of net sales, and $221 million, or 7.5% of net sales, during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease of $28 million is primarily related to temporary salary reductions in 2020, other cost reduction initiatives, and the impacts of previously announced restructuring actions.
Restructuring Expense, Net
Restructuring actions initiated during 2020 include the following:
•In January, the Company approved a plan primarily related to European engineering and administrative functions to improve the Company’s efficiency and rationalize its footprint. The Company incurred $26 million of net restructuring expense for cash severance, retention, and termination costs related to this plan.
•In March, the Company approved a global restructuring plan impacting engineering, administrative and manufacturing functions to improve the Company’s efficiency and rationalize its footprint. The Company incurred $16 million of net restructuring expense for cash severance, retention, and termination costs related to this plan.
•In September, the Company approved a plan to respond to COVID-19 impacts while at the same time improving efficiency and rationalizing the Company’s footprint. The Company has incurred $32 million of net restructuring expense related to this plan.
•In December, the Company approved a plan related to engineering, administrative, and manufacturing functions in Asia to improve the Company's efficiency and rationalize its footprints. The Company has incurred $2 million in restructuring costs relation to this plan.
During 2019, the Company recorded approximately $4 million of net restructuring expenses related to end of life of certain products and the optimization of certain operations.
Interest Expense, Net
Net interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $11 million, representing an increase of $2 million as compared to 2019. The increase is primarily due to the first quarter 2020 borrowing of $400 million under the Company's revolving credit facility. The Company fully repaid the amount borrowed during the third quarter of 2020 following stronger than expected industry recovery and improved Company performance.
Equity in Net Income of Non-Consolidated Affiliates
Equity in net income of non-consolidated affiliates was $6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net consists of the following:
During 2020, the Company transferred a portion of the benefit obligation related to its defined benefit U.S. pension plan to a third-party issuer. The transaction met the criteria for settlement accounting, and accordingly the Company recognized a $5 million pension settlement charge in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Income Taxes
The Company's provision for income taxes was $28 million for year ended December 31, 2020 and reflects income tax expense related to those countries where the Company is profitable; accrued withholding taxes; ongoing assessments related to the recognition and measurement of uncertain tax benefits; the inability to record a tax benefit for pretax losses (including the U.S.) and/or recognize tax expense for pretax income in certain jurisdictions due to valuation allowances; and other non-recurring tax items.
The Company's provision for income taxes increased $4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared with 2019. The increase in tax expense reflects the reassessment of the 2020 valuation allowances in connection with the realization of deferred tax assets in Germany and Brazil, as well as the non-recurrence of a 2019 discrete income tax valuation allowance release in Germany, resulting in an increase in income tax expense of $19 million. Other changes in the Company’s deferred tax asset valuation allowances did not materially impact net tax expense during the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019. The increases described above were partially offset by approximately $15 million decrease in income tax expense primarily due to changes in the mix of earnings and differing tax rates between jurisdictions which reflects the overall decrease in earnings in jurisdictions where the Company is profitable and withholding taxes.
Discontinued Operations
During 2019, the Company recorded a $1 million charge for legal expenses related to former employees at a closed plant in Brazil.
Net Income (Loss) Attributable to Visteon
Net loss attributable to Visteon was $56 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net income of $70 million for 2019. The decrease of $126 million is related to a decrease in gross margin of $79 million, higher restructuring expense of $72 million, and higher provision for income taxes of $4 million. These decreases were partially offset by lower selling, general and administrative expense of $28 million, and lower other income, net of $1 million.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA was $192 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a decrease of $42 million when compared with Adjusted EBITDA of $234 million for 2019. Unfavorable volumes, primarily due to the impacts of COVID-19, and mix reduced Adjusted EBITDA by $190 million. Foreign currency decreased Adjusted EBITDA by $7 million, primarily attributable to the euro, Chinese renminbi, Brazilian real and Japanese yen, partially offset by the Mexican peso and Bulgarian lev. Lower net engineering costs, excluding currency, increased Adjusted EBITDA by $93 million. Favorable cost performance of $128 million, including material, design, and usage economics, lower manufacturing costs, lower selling and general and administrative expenses more than offset annual customer pricing of $58 million.
The reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income attributable to Visteon for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is as follows:
The Company's consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 were as follows:
Results of Operations - 2019 Compared with 2018
Net Sales and Cost of Sales
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled $2,945 million, which represents a decrease of $39 million compared with 2018. Unfavorable currency decreased net sales by $59 million, primarily attributable to the euro, Chinese renminbi, Brazilian real and Indian rupee. Net new business, partially offset by unfavorable volumes and mix, increased net sales by $22 million. Mix reflects the Company-specific content across programs. The consolidation of a previously non-consolidated affiliate, Changchun Visteon FAWAY Auto Electronics Co., Ltd, ("VFAE"), during the third quarter 2018 increased net sales $38 million. Other reductions, primarily associated with customer pricing, decreased net sales by $71 million. Design changes and other revenue claims increased net sales by $31 million.
Cost of sales increased $48 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, when compared with 2018. Net new business and mix, partially offset by unfavorable volumes, increased cost of sales by $91 million. Foreign currency decreased cost of sales by $47 million primarily attributable to the euro, Chinese renminbi, Indian rupee, Brazilian real, and Bulgarian lev. Engineering costs, excluding currency and the consolidation of VFAE, increased cost of sales by $21 million. Favorable cost performance including material, design and usage economics, decreased cost of sales by $49 million in 2019. The consolidation of VFAE during 2018 increased cost of sales $32 million.
A summary of net engineering costs is shown below:
Gross engineering includes program development costs and advanced engineering activities, excluding contractually reimbursable engineering costs. Net engineering costs, of $300 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, including the impacts of currency and the consolidation of VFAE, were $14 million higher than 2018, primarily related to costs to support the Company's new business wins.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses were $221 million, or 7.5% of net sales, and $193 million, or 6.5% of net sales, during the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase of $28 million is related to higher stock compensation expense due to the 2018 resolution of a legal matter as further described in Note 19, "Commitments and Contingencies," to the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, along with higher incentive compensation costs, bad debt expense, personnel costs, and the consolidation of VFAE, partially offset by favorable currency.
Restructuring Expense, Net
During the first quarter of 2019, the Company approved a restructuring program impacting two European manufacturing facilities due to the end of life of certain product lines. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded net restructuring expense of $2 million related to this program.
During the third quarter of 2018, the Company approved a restructuring program impacting engineering and administrative functions to optimize operations. During the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, the Company recorded net restructuring expense of $1 million and $19 million related to this program.
During the second quarter of 2018, the Company approved a restructuring program impacting legacy employees at a South America facility and employees at North America manufacturing facilities due to the wind-down of certain products. During, the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, the Company recorded net restructuring expense of $1 million and $5 million related to this plan.
During 2016, the Company approved a restructuring program impacting engineering and administrative functions to further align the Company's footprint with its core product technologies and customers. During the year ended December 31, 2018, the Company recorded net restructuring expense of $5 million related to this program.
During the year ended December 31, 2018, the Company recorded approximately $1 million associated with a former European Interiors facility related to settlement of employee severance litigation.
Interest Expense, Net
Net interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2019, was $9 million, representing an increase of $2 million when compared to 2018. The increase is primarily due to lower interest income on short-term investments.
Equity in Net Income of Non-Consolidated Affiliates
Equity in net income of non-consolidated affiliates was $6 million and $13 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The decrease in income is primarily attributable to the Company's equity interest in Yanfeng Visteon Investment Company due to decreases in engineering services, and to the elimination of equity income due to the consolidation of VFAE in the third quarter of 2018.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net consists of the following:
Transformation initiatives during the year ended December 31, 2018 include a $4 million benefit related to the resolution of a legal matter as further described in Note 19, "Commitments and Contingencies" to the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
On September 1, 2018, Visteon acquired an additional 1% ownership interest in VFAE, a former non-consolidated affiliate, resulting in a total 51% controlling interest and a non-cash gain of $4 million as further described in Note 2, "Discontinued Operations" to the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Income Taxes
The Company's provision for income taxes was $24 million for year ended December 31, 2019 and reflects income tax expense related to those countries where the Company is profitable; accrued withholding taxes; ongoing assessments related to the recognition and measurement of uncertain tax benefits; the inability to record a tax benefit for pretax losses and/or recognize tax expense for pretax income in certain jurisdictions (including the U.S.) due to valuation allowances; and other non-recurring tax items.
The Company's provision for income taxes decreased $19 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared with 2018. The decrease in tax expense includes approximately $15 million primarily attributable to the overall decrease in year-over-year earnings, including changes in the mix of earnings and differing tax rates between jurisdictions, and withholding taxes. During the first quarter of 2019, the closure of tax audits in Germany allowed the Company to initiate a tax planning strategy previously determined not to be prudent. This strategy provided the necessary positive evidence to support the future utilization of a portion of the Company's deferred tax assets in Germany resulting in a $12 million income tax benefit recognized in 2019.
Other changes in the Company’s deferred tax asset valuation allowances did not materially impact net tax expense during the years ended December 31, 2019 or 2018. These decreases in the tax provision were partially offset by the $8 million increase in tax expense related to uncertain tax positions, primarily attributable by the non-recurrence of a $6 million income tax benefit in connection with uncertain tax positions related to goodwill tax amortization at an affiliate in Asia, and $2 million income tax expense primarily related to certain transfer pricing positions taken between affiliates in Europe and the U.S.
Discontinued Operations
During 2019, the Company recorded a $1 million charge for legal expenses related to former employees at a closed plant in Brazil.
During the first quarter of 2018, the Company recognized a $3 million benefit related to the resolution of a legal matter as further described in Note 19, "Commitments and Contingencies" in the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. During 2018 the Company recorded a $4 million charge for legal expenses related to former employees at a closed plant in Brazil.
The Company recorded a $4 million income tax benefit during 2018 related to uncertain tax positions in connection with the Climate transaction, resulting from statute expiration.
Net Income
Net income attributable to Visteon was $70 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to net income of $164 million for 2018. The decrease of $94 million includes a decrease in gross margin of $87 million, higher selling, general and administrative expense of $28 million, lower other income, net of $11 million, and lower equity in net income of non-consolidated affiliates of $7 million. These decreases were partially offset by lower restructuring expense of $25 million, and lower provision for income taxes of $19 million.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA was $234 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing a decrease of $96 million when compared with Adjusted EBITDA of $330 million for 2018. Unfavorable volumes and mix reduced Adjusted EBITDA by $69 million. Foreign currency decreased Adjusted EBITDA by $7 million, attributable to the euro, Chinese renminbi, Brazilian real and Japanese yen, partially offset by the Mexican peso and Bulgarian lev. Higher net engineering costs, excluding currency and the consolidation of VFAE, decreased Adjusted EBITDA by $21 million. Adjusted EBITDA was negatively impacted by annual customer pricing of $71 million, which was partially offset by favorable cost performance of $68 million. The consolidation of VFAE, during the third quarter of 2018, increased Adjusted EBITDA by $4 million.
The reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income attributable to Visteon for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 is as follows:
Liquidity
Overview
The Company's primary sources of liquidity are cash flows from operations, existing cash balances, and borrowings under available credit facilities. As we continue to confront the many challenges caused by the impact of COVID-19, including governmental actions to mitigate the pandemic and supply chain disruptions, the Company believes that funds from these sources will be sufficient to sustain ongoing operations and support investment in differentiating technologies. The Company will continue to closely monitor and preserve its available liquidity and maintain access to additional liquidity to as needed. The Company's intra-year needs are normally impacted by seasonal effects in the industry, such as mid-year shutdowns, the ramp-up of new model production, and year-end shutdowns at key customers.
A substantial portion of the Company's cash flows from operations are generated by operations located outside of the United States. Accordingly, the Company utilizes a combination of cash repatriation strategies, including dividends and distributions, royalties, and other intercompany arrangements to provide the funds necessary to meet obligations globally. The Company’s ability to access funds from its subsidiaries is subject to, among other things, customary regulatory and statutory requirements and contractual arrangements including joint venture agreements and local credit facilities. Moreover, repatriation efforts may be modified by the Company according to prevailing circumstances.
On March 19, 2020, the Company borrowed the entire $400 million amount available under the revolving credit facility. On September 24, 2020, the Company fully repaid the amount borrowed under the Revolving Credit Facility following stronger than expected industry recovery and improved Company performance in the third quarter of 2020.
Access to additional capital through the debt or equity markets is influenced by the Company's credit ratings. As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s corporate credit rating is Ba3 and BB- by Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s, respectively. See Note 11, "Debt" in the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a comprehensive discussion of the Company's debt facilities. Incremental funding requirements of the Company's consolidated foreign entities are primarily accommodated by intercompany cash pooling structures. Affiliate working capital lines, which are
utilized by the Company's consolidated joint ventures, had availability of $182 million and the Company had $400 of available credit under the revolving credit facility, as of December 31, 2020.
Cash Balances
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had total cash of $500 million, including $4 million of restricted cash. Cash balances totaling $406 million were located in jurisdictions outside of the United States, of which approximately $190 million is considered permanently reinvested for funding ongoing operations outside of the U.S. If such permanently reinvested funds were repatriated to the U.S., no U.S. federal taxes would be imposed on the distribution of such foreign earnings due to U.S. tax reform enacted in December 2017, but the Company would be required to accrue additional tax expense, primarily related to foreign withholding taxes.
Other Items Affecting Liquidity
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash contributions to the Company's U.S. defined benefit pension plans were $18 million and cash contributions of $6 million related to its non-U.S. employee retirement plans. Contributions related to certain non-U.S. plans of approximately $2 million have been deferred until 2024 due to COVID-19 relief measures. Additionally, the Company expects to make contributions to its U.S. defined benefit pension plans of $17 million and non-US defined benefit pension plans of $7 million during 2021. The Company’s expected 2021 contributions may be revised.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company paid $32 million related to restructuring activities. Additional discussion regarding the Company's restructuring activities is provided in Note 4, "Restructuring Activities" in the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
The Company has committed to make a $15 million investment in two entities principally focused on the automotive sector pursuant to limited partnership agreements. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has contributed $5 million toward the aggregate investment commitments. As a limited partner in each entity, the Company will periodically make capital contributions toward this total commitment amount.
Purchase Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, the Company has contractual purchase obligations of approximately $75 million through 2023.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Notwithstanding the significant actions implemented by the Company to substantially mitigate the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company generated $168 million of cash from operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $183 million during 2019 representing a $15 million decrease.
Lower cash flow from operating activities was primarily due to lower net income of $129 million. Favorable changes in accounts receivable, partially attributable to $40 million of higher than anticipated customer receipts during the final month of 2020, were more than offset by unfavorable changes in inventory and accounts payable balances resulting in lower trade working capital of $17 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. These unfavorable impacts were partially offset by lower cash tax payments, higher net recoveries of reimbursable taxes and higher net proceeds received from customers to fund the Company's pre-production design, engineering and tooling costs necessary to support current and future programs.
The Company generated $183 million of cash from operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019, as compared to $204 million during 2018, representing a $21 million decrease in cash provided from operations. The decrease in operating cash flows is due to lower net income of $93 million, partially offset by higher depreciation, increased stock based compensation expense, lower equity income of non-consolidated affiliates, net of dividends and other non-cash adjustments totaling $38 million. In addition, improved trade working capital performance of $27 million and favorable changes of other assets and other liabilities of $7 million further reduced the impact of lower net income on net cash from operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Investing Activities
Net cash used by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $98 million, as compared to $128 million in 2019, representing a decrease of $30 million. Net cash used by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily attributable to capital expenditures of $104 million to support new business, offset by proceeds from net investment hedging transactions and loan repayments received from a non-consolidated affiliate.
Net cash used by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 totaled $128 million, as compared to $98 million in 2018, representing an increase in cash used by investing activities of $30 million. Net cash used by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 is primarily attributable to capital expenditures of $142 million, partially offset by net loan repayment proceeds received from non-consolidated affiliates of $11 million. Net cash used by investing activities during year ended December 31, 2018, included capital expenditures of $127, partially offset by cash acquired from the consolidation of VFAE of $16 million and $13 million of other net proceeds primarily attributable to the settlement of certain agreements related to the Interiors Divestiture.
Financing Activities
Net cash used by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, totaled $58 million as compared to $49 million for 2019, representing an increase of $9 million, primarily attributable to an increase in short-term debt repayment partially offset by a decrease of common stock repurchases.
Net cash used by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019, totaled $49 million, compared to $335 million for 2018, representing a decrease in net cash used by financing activities of $286 million. Lower net cash used by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to 2018 is primarily attributable to lower share repurchase transactions of $280 million. Activity during 2018 also includes dividends paid to non-controlling interests of $28 million, distribution payments of $14 million and proceeds from an increase in short-term debt of $12 million.
Debt and Capital Structure
See "Liquidity" above and also see Note 11, "Debt" and Note 15, "Stockholders' Equity and Non-controlling Interests" to the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information.
Fair Value Measurements
See Note 17, "Fair Value Measurements" to the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The Company’s significant accounting policies have been disclosed in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes under Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information. Certain policies relate to estimates that involve matters that are highly uncertain at the time the accounting estimate is made and different estimates or changes to an estimate could have a material impact on the reported financial position, changes in financial condition or results of operations. Such critical estimates are discussed below. For these, materially different amounts could be reported under varied conditions and assumption. Other items in the Company's consolidated financial statements require estimation, however, in our judgment, they are not as critical as those discussed below.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is measured based on the transaction price and the quantity of parts specified in a contract with a customer. Discrete price adjustments may occur during the vehicle production period in order for the Company to remain competitive with market prices or based on changes in product specifications. Some of these price adjustments are non-routine in nature and require estimation. In the event the Company concludes that a portion of the revenue for a given part may vary from the purchase order, the Company records consideration at the most likely amount to which the Company expects to be entitled based on historical experience and input from customer negotiations. See Note 1, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Product Warranty and Recall
The Company accrues for warranty obligations for products sold based on management estimates, with support from the Company’s sales, engineering, quality, and legal functions, of the amount that eventually will be required to settle such obligations. This accrual is based on several factors including contractual arrangements, past experience, current claims, production changes, industry developments, and various other considerations. The Company accrues for product recall claims related to potential financial participation in customer actions to provide remedies as a result of actual or threatened regulatory or court actions or the Company’s determination of the potential for such actions. The Company's accrual for recall claims is based on specific facts and circumstances underlying individual claims with support from the Company’s engineering, quality, and legal functions. Amounts accrued are based upon management’s best estimate of the amount that will ultimately be required to settle such claims. See Note 19, "Commitments and Contingencies" in the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Restructuring
The Company accrues costs in connection with its restructuring of the engineering, administration organization and manufacturing. These accruals include estimates primarily related to employee headcount, local statutory benefits, and other employee termination costs. Actual costs may vary from these estimates. These accruals are reviewed on a quarterly basis and changes to restructuring actions are appropriately recognized when identified. See Note 4, “Restructuring Activities” in the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Pension Plans
Certain Company employees participate in defined benefit pension plans or retirement/termination indemnity plans. The Company has approximately $304 million in unfunded net pension liabilities as of December 31, 2020, of which approximately $232 million and $72 million are attributable to U.S. and non-U.S. pension plans, respectively. The determination of the Company’s obligations and expense for its pension plans is dependent on assumptions set by the Company used by actuaries in calculating such amounts. Assumptions are described in Note 12, “Employee Benefit Plans” to the Company’s consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, which are incorporated herein by reference, including the discount rate, expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, and rate of increase in compensation.
Actual results that differ from assumptions used are accumulated and amortized over future periods and, accordingly, generally affect recognized expense in future periods. Therefore, assumptions used to calculate benefit obligations as of the annual measurement date directly impact the expense to be recognized in future periods. The primary assumptions affecting the Company’s accounting for employee benefits, as of December 31, 2020, are as follows:
•Expected long-term rate of return on plan assets: The expected long-term rate of return is used to calculate net periodic pension cost. The required use of the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets may result in recognized returns that are greater or less than the actual returns on those plan assets in any given year. Over time the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is designed to approximate actual returns. The expected long-term rate of return for pension assets has been estimated based on various inputs, including historical returns for the different asset classes held by the Company’s trusts and its asset allocation, as well as inputs from internal and external sources regarding expected capital market returns, inflation, and other variables.
In determining its pension expense for 2020, the Company used long-term rates of return on plan assets. For U.S. plans, the Company used an expected rate of return of 6.6%. For non-U.S. plans, the Company used expected rates of return ranging from 2.0% to 7.25%. The Company has set the long-term rates of return assumptions for its 2021 pension expense which range from 2.0% to 7.0% outside the U.S. and 6.15% in the U.S. Actual returns on U.S. pension assets for 2020, 2019 and 2018 were 15.0%, 19.9% and (4.5%), respectively.
•Discount rate: The Company uses the spot rate method to estimate the service and interest components of net periodic benefit cost for pension benefits for its U.S. and certain non-U.S. plans. The Company has elected to utilize an approach that discounts individual expected cash flows underlying interest and service costs using the applicable spot rates derived from the yield curve used to determine the benefit obligation to the relevant projected cash flows. The discount rate assumption is based on market rates for a hypothetical portfolio of high-quality corporate bonds rated Aa or better with maturities closely matched to the timing of projected benefit payments for each plan at its annual measurement date. The Company used discount rates ranging from 0.8% to 8.75% to determine its pension and other benefit obligations as of December 31, 2020, including weighted average discount rates of 2.60% for U.S. pension plans and 1.78% for non-U.S. pension plan.
While the Company believes that these assumptions are appropriate, significant differences in actual experience or significant changes in these assumptions may materially affect the Company’s pension benefit obligations and its future expense. The following table illustrates the sensitivity to a change in certain assumptions for Company sponsored U.S. and non-U.S. pension plans on its 2020 funded status and 2021 pretax pension expense.
Income Taxes
The Company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous non-U.S. jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in determining the Company’s worldwide provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and valuation allowances recorded against the Company’s net deferred tax assets. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carry forwards.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets when, based on all available evidence, both positive and negative, it is more likely than not that such assets will not be realized. This assessment, which is completed on a jurisdiction-by-jurisdiction basis, requires significant judgment, and in making this evaluation, the evidence considered by the Company includes historical, and projected financial performance, as well as the nature, frequency, and severity of recent losses along with any other pertinent information.
In the ordinary course of the Company’s business, there are many transactions and calculations where the final tax determination is uncertain. The Company is regularly audited by tax authorities. Where appropriate, the Company accrues for contingencies related to income tax risks and non-income tax risks. See Note 14, "Income Taxes" in the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Fair Value Measurements
The Company uses fair value measurements in the preparation of its financial statements, utilizing various inputs including those that can be readily observable, indirectly observable or are unobservable. The Company utilizes market-based data and valuation techniques that maximize the use of observable inputs. Additionally, the Company applies assumptions that market participants would use in pricing an asset or liability, including assumptions about risk. See Note 17, "Fair Value Measurements" in the Company's consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the Company's consolidated financial statements under Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
Forward-Looking Statements
Certain statements contained or incorporated in this Annual Report on Form 10-K which are not statements of historical fact constitute “Forward-Looking Statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (the “Reform Act”). Forward-looking statements give current expectations or forecasts of future events. Words such as “anticipate”, “expect”, “intend”, “plan”, “believe”, “seek”, “estimate” and other words and terms of similar meaning in connection with discussions of future operating or financial performance signify forward-looking statements. These statements reflect the Company’s current views with respect to future events and are based on assumptions and estimates, which are subject to risks and uncertainties including those discussed in Item 1A under the heading “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Accordingly, undue reliance should not be placed on these forward-looking statements. Also, these forward-looking statements represent the Company’s estimates and assumptions only as of the date of this Form 10-K. The Company does not intend to update any of these forward-looking statements to reflect circumstances or events that occur after the statement is made and qualifies all of its forward-looking statements by these cautionary statements.
You should understand that various factors, in addition to those discussed elsewhere in this document, could affect the Company’s future results and could cause results to differ materially from those expressed in such forward-looking statements, including:
•Continued and future impacts of the coronavirus ("COVID-19") pandemic on the Visteon’s financial condition and business operations including global supply chain disruptions, market downturns, reduced consumer demand, and new government actions or restrictions.
•Significant or prolonged shortage of critical components from Visteon’s suppliers including, but not limited to semiconductors, and particularly those components from suppliers who are sole or primary sources.
•Significant changes in the competitive environment in the major markets where Visteon procures materials, components, or supplies or where its products are manufactured, distributed, or sold.
•Visteon’s ability to satisfy its future capital and liquidity requirements; Visteon’s ability to access the credit and capital markets at the times and in the amounts needed and on terms acceptable to Visteon; Visteon’s ability to comply with covenants applicable to it; and the continuation of acceptable supplier payment terms.
•Visteon’s ability to access funds generated by its foreign subsidiaries and joint ventures on a timely and cost-effective basis.
•Changes in the operations (including products, product planning and part sourcing), financial condition, results of operations, or market share of Visteon’s customers.
•Changes in vehicle production volume of Visteon’s customers in the markets where it operates.
•Increases in commodity costs or disruptions in the supply of commodities, including resins, copper, fuel, and natural gas.
•Visteon’s ability to generate cost savings to offset or exceed agreed-upon price reductions or price reductions to win additional business and, in general, improve its operating performance; to achieve the benefits of its restructuring actions; and to recover engineering and tooling costs and capital investments.
•Visteon’s ability to compete favorably with automotive parts suppliers with lower cost structures and greater ability to rationalize operations; and to exit non-performing businesses on satisfactory terms, particularly due to limited flexibility under existing labor agreements.
•Restrictions in labor contracts with unions that restrict Visteon’s ability to close plants, divest unprofitable, noncompetitive businesses, change local work rules and practices at a number of facilities and implement cost-saving measures.
•The costs and timing of facility closures or dispositions, business or product realignments, or similar restructuring actions, including potential asset impairment or other charges related to the implementation of these actions or other adverse industry conditions and contingent liabilities.
•Legal and administrative proceedings, investigations and claims, including shareholder class actions, inquiries by regulatory agencies, product liability, warranty, employee-related, environmental and safety claims and any recalls of products manufactured or sold by Visteon.
•Changes in economic conditions, currency exchange rates, changes in foreign laws, regulations or trade policies or political stability in foreign countries where Visteon procures materials, components or supplies or where its products are manufactured, distributed, or sold.
•Shortages of materials or interruptions in transportation systems, labor strikes, work stoppages or other interruptions to or difficulties in the employment of labor in the major markets where Visteon purchases materials, components or supplies to manufacture its products or where its products are manufactured, distributed or sold.
•Visteon’s ability to satisfy its pension and other postretirement employee benefit obligations, and to retire outstanding debt and satisfy other contractual commitments, all at the levels and times planned by management.
•Changes in laws, regulations, policies or other activities of governments, agencies and similar organizations, domestic and foreign, that may tax or otherwise increase the cost of, or otherwise affect, the manufacture, licensing, distribution, sale, ownership, or use of Visteon’s products or assets.
•Possible terrorist attacks or acts of war, which could exacerbate other risks such as slowed vehicle production, interruptions in the transportation system, changes in fuel prices, and disruptions of supply.
•The cyclical and seasonal nature of the automotive industry.
•Visteon’s ability to comply with environmental, safety, and other regulations applicable to it and any increase in the requirements, responsibilities and associated expenses and expenditures of these regulations.
•Visteon’s ability to protect its intellectual property rights and to respond to changes in technology and technological risks and to claims by others that Visteon infringes their intellectual property rights.
•Visteon’s ability to quickly and adequately remediate control deficiencies in its internal control over financial reporting.
•Other factors, risks and uncertainties detailed from time to time in Visteon’s Securities and Exchange Commission filings.