Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Safe Harbor Statement under The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995
Our reports, filings and other public announcements contain certain statements that describe our management’s beliefs concerning future business conditions, plans and prospects, growth opportunities and the outlook for our business and the biopharmaceutical industry based upon information currently available. Such statements are “forward-looking” statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Wherever possible, we have identified these forward-looking statements by words such as “will,” “may,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “intends,” “estimates,” “expects,” “plans,” “projects,” “trends,” “opportunity,” “current,” “intention,” “position,” “assume,” “potential,” “outlook,” “remain,” “continue,” “maintain,” “sustain,” “seek,” “target,” “achieve,” “continuing,” “ongoing,” and similar words or phrases, or future or conditional verbs such as “would,” “should,” “could,” “may,” or similar expressions. These forward-looking statements are based upon assumptions our management believes are reasonable. Such forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties which could cause our actual results, performance and achievements to differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by, these statements, including, among others, the risks and uncertainties listed in this report under “Item 1A Risk Factors” and in our other reports filed with the SEC from time-to-time.
Because our forward-looking statements are based on estimates and assumptions that are subject to significant business, economic and competitive uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control or are subject to change, actual results could be materially different and any or all of our forward-looking statements may turn out to be wrong. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date made and can be affected by assumptions we might make or by known or unknown risks and uncertainties. Many factors mentioned in our discussion in this report will be important in determining future results. New factors emerge from time-to-time, and it is not possible for us to predict which factors will arise. Consequently, we cannot assure you that our expectations or forecasts expressed in such forward-looking statements will be achieved. Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to publicly update any of our forward-looking or other statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise.
Overview
Vericel Corporation is a leader in advanced cell therapies and specialty biologics for the sports medicine and severe burn care markets. We currently market two FDA-approved autologous cell therapy products in the United States. MACI® (autologous cultured chondrocytes on porcine collagen membrane) is an autologous cellularized scaffold product indicated for the repair of symptomatic, single or multiple full-thickness cartilage defects of the knee with or without bone involvement in adults. Epicel® (cultured epidermal autografts) is a permanent skin replacement HUD for the treatment of adult and pediatric patients with deep-dermal or full-thickness burns comprising greater than or equal to 30 percent of TBSA. We also hold an exclusive license from MediWound Ltd. for North American rights to NexoBrid®, (concentrate of proteolytic enzymes enriched in bromelain), a registration-stage biological orphan product. On June 30, 2020, MediWound submitted to the FDA a BLA seeking the approval of NexoBrid for eschar removal (debridement) in adults with deep partial-thickness and/or full-thickness thermal burns. The FDA subsequently accepted the BLA for filing and has assigned a Prescription Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA) target date of June 29, 2021.
COVID-19
Throughout 2020, the pandemic caused by the spread of a novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) has created significant disruptions to the U.S. and global economy and has contributed to significant volatility in financial markets. The global impact of the outbreak is continually evolving and, as the virus spreads and infection rates surge in various locations, many state, local and national governments - including those in Massachusetts and Michigan, where our operations are located - have responded by issuing, extending and supplementing orders requiring quarantines, restrictions on travel, and the mandatory closure of certain non-essential businesses, among other actions. In the U.S., the status and application of these orders have varied on a state-by-state basis since the early days of the pandemic. Many of the restrictions have been periodically updated as infections rates in the U.S. have risen and fallen and as world health leaders learn more about the virus, its transmission pathway and who is most at risk. Because Vericel is deemed an essential business, we continue to be exempt from government orders, in their current form, requiring the closure of workplaces and the cessation of business operations.
Notwithstanding being an essential business, Vericel’s business and operations have been adversely impacted by the effects of COVID-19. After the COVID-19 pandemic began directly affecting the U.S., in March 2020, the American College of Surgeons and United States Surgeon General recommended that each hospital, health system, and surgeon minimize, postpone, or cancel electively scheduled surgeries. These recommendations were followed by numerous state level executive orders either
restricting or partially restricting elective surgeries. Because MACI is an elective surgical procedure, as a result of these restrictions, beginning in mid-March 2020, we began to experience a significant increase in cancellations of scheduled MACI procedures as well as a slowdown in new MACI orders. The widespread suspension of elective procedures impacted our business and operations during the first and second quarters of 2020. These restrictions began to ease in May and by the end of September 2020 there were no state orders in place that directly impacted a surgeon’s or patient’s ability to move forward with a MACI surgery. Consequently, MACI procedure and order volumes recovered throughout the third and fourth quarter of 2020, and the majority of MACI cases that had previously been canceled as a result of COVID-19 factors were rescheduled. The COVID-19 pandemic remains unpredictable, however, and in late September and October 2020, the number of COVID-19 infections began to increase markedly in various geographies and by late December 2020 the rolling seven-day average of new daily coronavirus cases in the United States reached the highest level at any point during the pandemic. As a result, the scheduling of MACI pipeline cases during the last two weeks of December slowed compared to historical trends and there was an increase in case cancellations during that period. Although hospitals are now better prepared for subsequent surges in COVID-19 patients, the risk remains that regional or local restrictions could again be placed on the performance of elective surgical procedures, or that patients may choose to postpone or be unable to appear for a MACI procedure if the number of COVID-19 infections in the United States continues to rise.
Though Epicel is used almost exclusively in an emergent setting by burn centers and surgeons throughout the country, Epicel revenue and procedure volumes have been less affected by the pandemic. Nevertheless, large burns and burn admissions can be affected by restrictions on human activity resulting from more severe government lockdown orders. Epicel procedure volumes did experience a slow-down during the second quarter of 2020, however, the reduction was less pronounced than that observed with MACI. Further reductions could be observed in the future, based on the degree of restrictions imposed.
At the outset of the pandemic, Vericel put in place a comprehensive workplace protection plan, which institutes protective measures in response to COVID-19. These measures include mandatory employee training on social distancing and hygiene protocols, conducting daily health screenings of all employees, vendors and visitors entering our facilities, canceling all international business travel, limiting domestic business travel to essential purpose travel only, requesting that employees limit non-essential personal travel, enhancing our facilities’ janitorial and sanitary procedures, making certain physical modifications and enhancements to our facilities to enable effective social distancing among employees, providing certain personal protective equipment to employees working in our offices, encouraging employees to work from home to the extent their job function enables them to do so, limiting third-party access to our facilities, encouraging the use of virtual employee meetings, modifying the manner and schedule of on-site production activities, and providing guidance to our field-based commercial teams concerning their communications and contact with customers and healthcare professionals. In addition, we put certain expense reduction measures in place including a reduction of discretionary spending. We are reviewing these measures regularly as the pandemic evolves and may take additional actions to the extent required.
We continue to manufacture MACI and Epicel and are maintaining a significant safety stock of all key raw materials. We do not expect current supply chain interruptions will impact our ongoing manufacturing operations. With respect to customer delivery, MACI final product has an established shelf life of six (6) days and established shipping shelf life of three (3) days. Currently, MACI is picked up by courier and shipped by commercial air or ground transportation to customer surgical sites. Epicel final product has an established shelf life of 24 hours and is hand carried to customer hospitals by courier. Transportation is primarily by commercial or charter airline. Although we have not experienced material shipping delays or materially increased costs to date, significant disruption of air travel could result in the inability to deliver MACI or Epicel final products to customer sites within appropriate timeframes, which could further adversely impact our business. There is no expected impact of COVID-19 on our distributors, operations or third-party service providers’ ability to manage patient cases.
We believe it is likely that we will continue to experience variable impacts on our business, based on the resurgence of COVID-19 in various areas of the United States. Measures taken to limit the impact of COVID-19 at the international, national and local levels, including shelter-in-place orders, social distancing measures, travel bans and restrictions, and business and government shutdowns, may continue to create significant negative economic impacts on a global basis. Given that uncertainty, we cannot reliably estimate the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may continue to impact utilization and revenues of our products in 2021 and beyond.
For a discussion of additional risks associated with COVID-19, please see Item 1A. Risk Factors.
Manufacturing
We have a cell-manufacturing facility in Cambridge, Massachusetts which is used for U.S. manufacturing and distribution of MACI and Epicel.
Product Portfolio
Our marketed products include two FDA-approved autologous cell therapies. MACI, a third-generation autologous implant for the repair of symptomatic, full-thickness cartilage defects of the knee in adult patients and Epicel, a permanent skin replacement for adult and pediatric patients with deep dermal or full-thickness burns greater than or equal to 30% of TBSA. Both products are currently marketed in the U.S. In addition, we have entered into exclusive license and supply agreements with MediWound to commercialize NexoBrid in North America. As previously mentioned, MediWound has submitted a BLA to the FDA seeking commercial approval of NexoBrid. On September 16, 2020, we announced that the FDA accepted the BLA for review and has assigned a PDUFA target date of June 29, 2021.
MACI and Carticel
Carticel®, an earlier generation ACI product for the treatment and repair of cartilage defects in the knee, was the first FDA-approved autologous cartilage repair product. Carticel was replaced at the end of the second quarter of 2017 by MACI, which the FDA approved on December 13, 2016 by the FDA. MACI is a third-generation product for ACI, a class of methods for the repair of symptomatic, single or multiple full-thickness cartilage defects of the knee with or without bone involvement in adults.
The target audience of U.S. physicians is approximately 5,000 orthopedic surgeons and is divided into two segments - a group of orthopedic surgeons who self-identify and/or have a formal specialty as sports medicine physicians, and a sub-population of general orthopedic surgeons who perform a high volume of cartilage repair procedures. As of December 31, 2020, we have increased the number of MACI sales representatives to 76 Clinical Account Specialists and expanded their reach to over nine geographical regions to enable the sales force to call on 2,000 of the general orthopedic surgeons. Most private payers have a medical policy that covers treatment with MACI with the top 30 largest commercial payers having a formal medical policy for MACI or ACI in general. Even for private payers that have not yet approved a medical policy for MACI, for medically appropriate cases, we often obtain approval on a case-by-case basis. For the year ended December 31, 2020, MACI net revenues totaled $94.4 million.
Epicel
Epicel is a permanent skin replacement for deep dermal or full-thickness burns greater than or equal to 30% of TBSA. Epicel is regulated by the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, or CBER of the FDA under medical device authorities, and is the only FDA-approved cultured epidermal autograft product available for large total surface area burns. Epicel was designated as a HUD in 1998 and a HDE application for the product was submitted in 1999. HUDs are devices that are intended for diseases or conditions that affect fewer than 8,000 individuals annually in the U.S. Under an HDE approval, a HUD cannot be sold for an amount that exceeds the cost of research and development, fabrication and distribution unless certain conditions are met.
A HUD is eligible to be sold for profit after receiving HDE approval if the device meets certain eligibility criteria, including where the device is intended for the treatment of a disease or condition that occurs in pediatric patients and such device is labeled for use in pediatric patients. If the FDA determines that a HUD meets the eligibility criteria, the HUD is permitted to be sold for profit so long as the number of devices distributed in any calendar year does not exceed the Annual Distribution Number (ADN). The ADN is defined as the number of devices reasonably needed to treat a population of 8,000 individuals per year in the U.S.
On February 18, 2016, the FDA-approved our HDE supplement to revise the labeled indications of use for Epicel to specifically include pediatric patients. The revised product label also now specifies that the probable benefit of Epicel, mainly related to survival, was demonstrated in two Epicel clinical experience databases and a physician-sponsored study comparing outcomes in patients with massive burns treated with Epicel relative to standard care. Because of the change in the label to specifically include use in pediatric patients, Epicel is no longer subject to the HDE profit restrictions. In conjunction with adding the pediatric labeling and meeting pediatric eligibility criteria, the FDA has determined the ADN number for Epicel to be 360,400 which is approximately 45 times larger than the volume of grafts sold in 2019. We currently have an eleven-person sales force comprised of seven (7) account managers and four (4) burn clinical specialists, overseen by a senior sales director. In the year ended December 31, 2020, Epicel net revenues totaled $27.5 million.
NexoBrid
Our portfolio also includes NexoBrid, a topically-administered biological product that enzymatically removes nonviable burn tissue, or eschar, in patients with deep partial and full-thickness thermal burns. On June 30, 2020, we announced the submission of a BLA to the FDA seeking the approval of NexoBrid. Subsequently, on September 16, 2020, we announced that the FDA accepted the BLA for review and assigned a PDUFA target date of June 29, 2021. NexoBrid is approved in the European Union and other international markets and has been designated as an orphan biologic in the United States, European Union and other international markets. Pursuant to the terms of our existing license agreement, if the BLA is approved, MediWound will transfer the BLA to Vericel and Vericel will market NexoBrid in the U.S. Both MediWound and Vericel, under the supervision of a Central Steering Committee comprised of members of both companies will continue to guide development of NexoBrid in North America. Under our license agreement with MediWound, NexoBrid is being manufactured for BARDA prior to approval by the FDA under an emergency use authorization. Vericel recorded revenue of $2.2 million associated with the delivery of NexoBrid to BARDA during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Results of Operations
Net Income
Our net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $2.9 million. Our net loss for the year ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 totaled $9.7 million and $8.1 million, respectively, which included a $17.5 million upfront payment to MediWound for the NexoBrid license in 2019 and a loss on extinguishment of debt of $0.8 million in 2018.
Net Revenues
Net revenues increased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to December 31, 2019, with both MACI and Epicel growing, in addition to revenue being recognized related to the first deliveries of NexoBrid to BARDA. An increase in demand during the third and fourth quarters of 2020, partially offset the effects of COVID-19 related shutdowns in the first half of 2020.
Net revenues increased for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to December 31, 2018, primarily due to an increase in MACI volume growth as well as continued growth in demand for Epicel grafts over the prior year.
Net revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 are shown below.
Seasonality. During 2020, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic disrupted the normal seasonality of our MACI business. These effects included, among others, the temporary limitation of elective surgical procedures throughout the country, the
inability of our Clinical Account Specialists to call on surgeon customers and, we believe, a reduction in the number of patients seeking treatment for cartilage damage. In the four years preceding 2020, ACI sales volumes from the first through the fourth quarter on average represented 19% (16%-24% range), 23% (21%-25% range), 22% (20%-23% range) and 36% (32%-38% range) respectively, of total annual volumes. MACI orders are consistently stronger in the fourth quarter due to several factors including insurance deductible limits and the time of year patients prefer to start rehabilitation. Due to COVID-19 the seasonality in 2020 did not follow a historical patterns, and seasonality in 2021 could be impacted by COVID-19 related factors, as well. Due to the low incidence and variable occurrence of severe burns, Epicel revenue has inherent variability from quarter-to-quarter and does not exhibit significant seasonality. Over the past four years, Epicel revenue in a single quarter has ranged from as high as 38% to as low as 18% of annual revenue.
Gross Profit and Gross Profit Ratio
Gross profit increased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019, as well as for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to 2018, primarily due to an increase in MACI and Epicel sales combined with our highly fixed manufacturing cost structure which consists mainly of labor and facility costs that do not materially fluctuate with volume increases. The gross profit increase for the year ended December 31, 2020 also includes the impact of the NexoBrid revenue.
Gross profit percentage decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019, as a result of a reduction in sales in the second quarter of 2020 due to COVID-19 related restrictions on elective surgeries. Due to our highly fixed manufacturing cost structure, we incurred labor and facility costs during a period of little production which decreased the year to date percentage. The increase in gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to 2018, was the result of a large increase in revenue as noted above.
Research and Development Costs
The following table summarizes research and development expenses which includes license fees, materials, professional fees and the approximate allocation of employee-related salary and fringe benefit costs for our research and development projects:
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $13.0 million, compared to $30.4 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in research and development costs during the year ended December 31, 2020 is due primarily to the $17.5 million upfront payment to MediWound for the North American rights to NexoBrid made in 2019.
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $30.4 million, compared to $13.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase is due primarily to the $17.5 million upfront payment to MediWound for the North American rights to NexoBrid, which was partially offset by costs related to the ongoing MACI pediatric trial which decreased compared to the same period a year ago.
Selling, General and Administrative Costs
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 increased to $68.8 million from $61.1 million, respectively. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses in 2020 is primarily due to a $4.4 million increase in MACI sales force expenses, $1.2 million of incremental third-party patient reimbursement support services, a $1.2 million increase in stock-based compensation expenses and $0.9 million increase in Epicel sales force expense.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 increased to $61.1 million from $49.0 million, respectively. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses in 2019 is due primarily to a $4.2 million increase in stock-based compensation expenses, an incremental $2.6 million in MACI sales force expenses driven by the expansion in the second quarter of 2019, a $2.4 million increase in marketing expenses and a $1.8 million increase in patient reimbursement support services.
Other Income (Expense)
The change in other income and expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, is due primarily to a drop in interest income due to an overall decrease in market yield related to our short and long-term investments.
The change in other income and expense for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to 2018, is due primarily to interest income as a result of our investments in various marketable debt securities. The other income and expense in 2018 relate to the increase in our stock price in 2018 resulting in an increase in the fair value of warrants and interest expense related to the then outstanding term loan. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we did not incur interest expense as the term loan was repaid in December 2018 and we did not experience a change in warrant value due to the expiration of the liability classified warrants in 2018.
Tax Provision
For the year-ended December 31, 2020, we recorded income tax expense of $0.2 million as a result of taxable income in certain states where the net operating loss carryforwards and related deferred tax assets have been fully utilized. We did not have material income tax expense in prior periods.
Stock Compensation
Non-cash stock-based compensation expense included in cost of goods sold, research and development expenses and selling, general and administrative expenses is summarized in the following table:
The increase in stock-based compensation expense is due primarily to fluctuations in stock prices which impacts the fair value of the options and restricted stock units awarded and the expense recognized in the period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our acquisition in 2014 of MACI, Epicel and Carticel, our primary focus has been to invest in our existing commercial business with the goal of growing revenue. We have raised significant funds in order to complete our product development programs and to market and commercialize our products including NexoBrid. To date, we have financed our operations primarily through cash received through Epicel and MACI sales, debt and public and private sales of our equity securities. Despite the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, we generated $17.6 million in operating cash flows during 2020 and we may continue to finance our commercial business operations through the sales of equity securities.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented:
Our cash and cash equivalents totaled $33.6 million, short-term investments totaled $42.2 million and long-term investments totaled $24.1 million as of December 31, 2020. The $17.6 million of cash generated by operations was the result of a $2.9 million net income, additional noncash charges including $13.8 million in stock compensation expense, $4.4 million in operating lease amortization and $2.4 million in depreciation and amortization expense. Working capital requirements increased due to a $2.3 million increase in accounts receivable and a $2.5 million increase in inventory, as a result of an increase in sales volume, slightly offset by $3.3 million in accrued expenses.
Our cash and cash equivalents totaled $26.9 million, short-term investments totaled $42.8 million and long-term investments totaled $9.2 million at December 31, 2019. The $7.2 million of cash used for operations was the result of an $9.7 million net loss which included a cash outflow of $17.5 million to MediWound for the upfront payment for the NexoBrid license, offset by noncash charges including $13.2 million in stock compensation expense, $2.8 million in operating lease amortization and $1.7 million in depreciation and amortization expense. Working capital requirements increased due to a $8.7 million increase in accounts receivable and a $3.3 million increase in inventory, as a result of the increase in sales volume, slightly offset by $1.0 million in accrued expenses related to timing of payments.
The change in cash used for investing activities in 2020 is the result of $63.1 million in investments purchases, respectively, offset by $48.5 million of investment sales and maturities and property plant and equipment purchases of $2.6 million primarily for manufacturing upgrades and leasehold improvements through December 31, 2020. The change in cash used for investing activities in 2019 is the result of $72.3 million in investments purchases offset by $85.6 million of sales and maturities and property plant and equipment purchases of $2.6 million, primarily for manufacturing upgrades and leasehold improvements through December 31, 2019.
The change in cash provided from financing activities is the result of net proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $6.6 million through December 31, 2020. The change in cash provided from financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the prior period is primarily the result of net proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $5.3 million through December 31, 2019.
We believe that our current cash on hand, cash equivalents and investments will be sufficient to support our current operations through at least 12 months from the issuance of the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. However, the continuing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic continue to evolve and may result in irrecoverable losses from customers.
If revenues decline for a sustained period, we may need to access additional capital; however, we may not be able to obtain financing on acceptable terms or at all. Market volatility resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic or other factors could also adversely impact our ability to access financing as and when needed. The terms of any financing may adversely affect the holdings or the rights of our shareholders. Actual cash requirements may differ from projections and will depend on many factors, including the ultimate duration of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, the level of future research and development, the scope and results of ongoing and potential clinical trials, the costs involved in filing, prosecuting and enforcing patents, the need for additional manufacturing capacity, competing technological and market developments, costs of possible acquisition or development of complementary business activities, and the cost to market our products.
Contractual Obligations
We lease facilities in Ann Arbor, Michigan and Cambridge, Massachusetts. The Cambridge facility includes clean rooms, laboratories for MACI and Epicel manufacturing and office space. We also pay for use of an offsite warehouse space and lease various vehicles and computer equipment.
In October 2020, we amended our current lease in Cambridge to, among other provisions, extend the term until February 2032. Under the amendment, the landlord will contribute $4.3 million toward the cost of tenant improvements. The previous contributions toward the cost of tenant improvements was recorded as part of the operating lease assets under the leasing guidance, on our consolidated balance sheet.
Our purchase commitments consist of minimum purchase amounts of materials used in our cell manufacturing process to manufacture our marketed cell therapy products. Future minimum payments related to our contractual obligations are as follows:
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that could materially impact the Consolidated Financial Statements and disclosures based on varying assumptions. We believe our estimates and assumptions are reasonable; however, actual results and the timing of the recognition of such amounts could differ from these estimates.
The following is a list of accounting policies that are most significant to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and/or that require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments.
Revenue Recognition and Net Product Sales - Revenue from sales to a customer (distributor, hospital or other party) is recognized in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue Recognition, which was adopted January 1, 2018. We recognize product revenue from sales to a customer (distributor or hospital) following the five step model in ASC 606: (i) identify contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenues when (or as) we satisfy the
performance obligation. Under this revenue standard, we recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of the promised goods, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods.
MACI Implants
We have engaged a third-party services provider to provide the patient support program to manage patient cases and to ensure complete and accurate billing information is provided to the insurers and hospitals, to facilitate reimbursement.
Prior authorization and confirmation of coverage level by the patient’s private insurance plan, hospital or government payer is a prerequisite to the shipment of product to a patient. We recognize product revenues from sales of all MACI implants upon delivery at which time the customer obtains control of the implant and the claim is billable. The total consideration which we expect to collect in exchange for MACI implants (the transaction price) may be fixed or variable. Direct sales to hospitals or distributors are recorded at a contracted price, there are typically no forms of variable consideration.
When we sell MACI the patient is responsible for payment; however, we are typically reimbursed by a third-party insurer or government payer, subject to a patient co-pay amount. Reimbursements from third-party insurers and government payers vary by patient and payer and are based on either contracted rates, publicly available rates or a fee schedule. Net product revenue is recognized net of estimated contractual allowances, which considers historical collection experience from both the payer and patient, denial rates and the terms of our contractual arrangements. We estimate expected collections for these transactions using the portfolio approach. We record a reduction to revenue at the time of sale for the estimate of the amount of consideration that will not be collected. In addition, potential credit risk exposure has been evaluated for our accounts receivable in accordance with ASC 326, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses. We assess risk and determine a loss percentage by pooling account receivables based on similar risk characteristics. The loss percentage is calculated through the use of forecasts that are based on current and historical economic and financial information.
Changes in estimates of the transaction price are recorded through revenue in the period in which such change occurs.
Leases - We primarily enter into lease agreements for manufacturing and office space, warehouses space, vehicle and computer equipment. The leases have varying terms, some of which may include options to extend. We determine if an arrangement is a lease at contract inception. Certain of our lease agreements include lease payments that are adjusted periodically for an index or rate. The leases are initially measured using the present value of the projected payments adjusted for the index or rate in effect at the commencement date such as an estimated incremental borrowing rate. Our lease agreements do not contain any material residual value guarantees or material restrictive covenants. All operating lease commitments with a lease term greater than 12 months are recognized as right to use (ROU) assets and liabilities, on a discounted basis on the balance sheet.
ROU assets represent our right to control the use of an explicitly or implicitly identified fixed asset for a period of time and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Control of an underlying asset is conveyed to us if we obtain the rights to direct the use of and to obtain substantially all of the economic benefits from using the underlying asset.
Lease payments included in the measurement of the lease liability are comprised of fixed payments. Our leases contain non-lease components and activities that do not transfer a good or service to us which were not considered to be components of the contract and therefore were not included in the net ROU assets or lease liabilities.
The lease term for all of our leases include the non-cancellable period of the lease plus any additional periods covered by either an option to extend (or not to terminate) the lease that is reasonably certain to exercise, or an option to extend (or not to terminate) the lease controlled by the lessor.
Stock-Based Compensation - The accounting for stock-based compensation requires us to determine the fair value of common stock issued in the form of stock option awards and restricted stock units. The fair value of restricted stock units held by the employees is determined based on the fair value of our common stock on the date of the grant. We use the value of our common stock at the date of the grant in the calculation of the fair value of our share-based awards. The fair value of stock options held by our employees is determined using a Black-Scholes option valuation method, which is a valuation technique that is acceptable for share-based payment accounting. Key assumptions in determining fair value include volatility, risk-free interest rate, dividend yield and expected term. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock options represent our best estimates; however, these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors change and different assumptions are used, the stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. In addition, we are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and only recognize expense for those stock
options expected to vest over the service period. We estimate the forfeiture rate considering the historical experience of our stock-based awards. If the actual forfeiture rate is different from the estimate, we adjust the expense accordingly.
Tax Valuation Allowance - A valuation allowance is recorded if it is more likely than not that a deferred tax asset will not be realized. We provided a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets that primarily consist of cumulative federal net operating losses. Due to our three year cumulative loss position and history of operating losses prior to the year-ended December 31, 2020, a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets was considered necessary. We will continue to monitor our cumulative loss position and forecasts and reevaluate the need for a valuation allowance as it could be reversed in future periods.
The summary of significant accounting policies should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes and this discussion of our results of operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a material effect on our financial condition.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.