Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As discussed in the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements,” the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, as well as assumptions that, if they never materialize or prove incorrect, could cause our results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” under Part I, Item 1A in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Company Overview
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company engaged in the discovery and development of targeted biotherapeutics to treat serious diseases and conditions with unmet medical needs, including cancer, neurodegenerative diseases, and autoimmune disorders. We believe we are the leader in the field of semaphorin 4D, or SEMA4D, biology and that we are the only company targeting SEMA4D as a potential treatment for cancer, neurodegenerative diseases, or autoimmune disorders. SEMA4D is an extracellular signaling molecule that regulates the migration of immune and inflammatory cells to sites of injury, cancer, or infection. We are leveraging our SEMA4D antibody platform and our extensive knowledge of SEMA4D biology to develop our lead product candidate, pepinemab, an antibody that we believe utilizes novel mechanisms of action. We are focused on developing pepinemab for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer, or NSCLC, Huntington’s disease, and Alzheimer’s disease. Additionally, third party investigators are studying pepinemab in clinical trials in osteosarcoma and melanoma as well as in “window of opportunity” studies in other indications. We have developed multiple proprietary platform technologies and are developing product candidates to address serious diseases or conditions that have a substantial impact on day-to-day functioning and for which treatment is not addressed adequately by available therapies. We employ our proprietary platform technologies, including through our work with our academic collaborators, to identify potential product candidates for sustained expansion of our internal product pipeline and to facilitate strategic development and commercial partnerships.
Our lead platform technologies include our SEMA4D antibody platform and our ActivMAb antibody discovery platform. In addition, we and our academic collaborators are using our Natural Killer T, or NKT, vaccine platform to discover product candidates that target and extend the activity of NKT cells. Our lead product candidate, pepinemab, is currently in clinical development for the treatment of NSCLC, osteosarcoma, and Huntington’s disease, through our efforts or through investigator-sponsored trials, or ISTs. Our additional product candidates VX5 and VX25 are in earlier stages of development and were selected using our ActivMAb and NKT vaccine platforms, respectively. We believe our multiple platform technologies position us well for continued pipeline expansion and partnership opportunities going forward.
We have generated a limited amount of service revenue from collaboration agreements but have not generated any revenue from product sales to date. We continue to incur significant development and other expenses related to our ongoing operations. As a result, we are not and have never been profitable and have incurred losses in each period since our inception, resulting in substantial doubt in our ability to continue as a going concern. We reported a net loss of $28.9 and $31.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, we had cash and cash equivalents of $10.6 million and $2.8 million, respectively. We expect to continue to incur significant losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect these losses to increase as we continue our research and development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, our product candidates. We may also encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays and other unknown factors, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, that may adversely affect our business. The size of our future net losses will depend, in part, on the rate of future growth of our expenses and our ability to generate revenues, if any.
Our recurring net losses and negative cash flows from operations raised substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the issuance of our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020. Until we can generate sufficient revenue from the commercialization of our product candidates, we expect to finance our operations through the public or private sale of equity, debt financings or other capital sources, such as government funding, collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties. To date, the Company has relied on equity and debt financing to fund its operations, in addition to capital contributions from noncontrolling interests and a limited amount of service revenue from collaboration agreements. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we raised total proceeds of approximately $37.6 million, net of commissions and discounts before expenses, from the following activities:
Equity Financings
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company completed private placements of our common stock to various investors in January 2020 and July 2020, for gross proceeds of $7.5 million and $4.0 million, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we received gross proceeds of $13.8 million. Additionally, in September 2020 we received gross proceeds of
$2.0 million through an award from the Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation (“ADDF”), in the form of an investment in our common stock.
On March 27, 2020, we announced that we had (i) entered into an open market sale agreement (the “Open Market Sale Agreement” or “ATM”) with Jefferies, LLC (“Jefferies”) and filed a prospectus supplement pursuant to which we were able to issue and sell up to $11.5 million of shares of our common stock from time and (ii) entered into a purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with Keystone Capital Partners, LLC (“Keystone”) pursuant to which Keystone agreed to purchase up to an aggregate of $5.0 million of shares of our common stock from time to time. During the second quarter of 2020, 317,688 shares were sold through the Open Market Sale Agreement for proceeds of $1.2 million, net of commission, and 324,424 shares were sold through the Purchase Agreement with Keystone for proceeds of $1.2 million, net of discount. In August 2020, we ceased use of the Purchase Agreement with Keystone, and in September 2020, we filed a replacement prospectus supplement related to the Open Market Sale Agreement pursuant to which we may sell up to $113 million of shares of our common stock through Jefferies. During the third quarter of 2020, 3,815,600 shares were sold through the Open Market Sale Agreement for proceeds of $12.3 million, net of commission, and 47,319 shares were sold through the Purchase Agreement for proceeds of $300,000, net of discount.
Debt Financings
In August 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “SPA”), with 3i, LP, (“3i”) as collateral agent and purchaser (the “Convertible Debt Financing”). Pursuant to the SPA, on August 3, 2020, we issued a 7% Original Issue Discount Senior Secured Convertible Debenture (“Senior Secured Convertible Debenture” or “the Debenture”), in the principal amount of $8.64 million for a purchase price of $8.0 million, which reflects an original issue discount of approximately 8%. The Debenture will mature on August 3, 2021. The Debenture accrues interest at 7% per year and is convertible into shares of our common stock at a conversion price of $9.4125 per share, subject to certain customary adjustments.
In addition, on May 8, 2020, the Company received a loan of $1.1 million from Five Star Bank (the “PPP Loan”) under the Paycheck Protection Program established as a part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”).
Grant Revenues
The Company also received $575,000 in proceeds from our $750,000 grant from the Alzheimer’s Association under its 2020 Part the Cloud Program. The remainder of this award is anticipated to be funded in 2021.
Our cash and cash equivalents were $10.6 million and total current assets were $11.3 million at December 31, 2020. In January and February 2021, the Company sold 522,272 and 5,415,628 additional shares of the Company’s common stock, respectively, at a weighted average price of $2.58 and $5.82, respectively through the Open Market Sale Agreement, for total net proceeds of $31.9 million, which the Company will use to fund our planned clinical trials and general operations.
In January and February 2021, the Company made payments under the Mandatory Redemption provision of the Debenture totaling $6,372,575, consisting of $5,955,678 for principal repayments and $416,897 for accrued and make-whole interest.
Our strategic plans and certain of our clinical trial operations have been adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and the measures imposed to mitigate the spread of COVID-19, including unprecedented restrictions on business operations, travel, and gatherings, resulting in a global economic downturn and other adverse economic and societal impacts, and our ability to raise additional capital necessary to continue as a going concern. We had previously anticipated initiating a trial of pepinemab in Alzheimer’s disease in mid-2020, but the initial enrollment date is now delayed until the first half of 2021. In addition, as discussed above, to mitigate the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including impacts on the Company’s ability to raise capital and to maintain its personnel, the Company applied for and received the PPP Loan. We may experience further disruptions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic that could adversely impact our business, including disruption of research and clinical development activities, plans for release of data, manufacturing, supply, and interactions with regulators and other third parties, and further difficulties in raising additional capital. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may impact our business will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence.
Financial Overview
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we generated a limited amount of service revenue from our collaboration agreements, including with Surface Oncology and Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp.
Our ability to generate revenue and become profitable depends on our ability to successfully obtain marketing approval of and commercialize our product candidates. We do not expect to generate product revenue in the foreseeable future as we continue our development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, our product candidates, and potentially commercialize approved products, if any.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs for our clinical trials and activities related to regulatory filings, employee compensation-related costs, supply expenses, equipment depreciation and amortization, consulting and other miscellaneous costs. The following table sets forth the components of our research and development expenses and the amount as a percentage of total research and development expenses for the periods indicated.
Our current research and development activities primarily relate to the clinical development in the following indications:
•
Huntington’s Disease. We are evaluating pepinemab for the treatment of HD in our Phase 2 SIGNAL trial. Topline data for this trial, consisting of 265 subjects, was reported in late September 2020. Although the study did not meet its prespecified primary endpoints, it provided important new information that is likely to influence the design of further studies. Trial data continues to be analyzed to determine a path forward in Huntington’s and other neurodegenerative disease indications. The Company is evaluating its development strategy in terms of business opportunity and near-term focus on Huntington’s or Alzheimer’s disease in the event that resources are limited.
•
Cancer Studies. Pepinemab is also being evaluated by third parties in investigator-sponsored trials, or ISTs, for osteosarcoma and melanoma, and in multiple “window of opportunity” studies in additional cancer indications.
•
Alzheimer’s Disease. Given the current escalation in the COVID-19 pandemic, we are delaying plans to initiate a clinical trial of pepinemab in Alzheimer’s disease until mid 2021with a study design that is based, in part, on knowledge gained from the SIGNAL trial in Huntington’s disease.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. We record costs for certain development activities, such as clinical trials, based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment. We do not allocate employee related costs, depreciation, rental and other indirect costs to specific research and development programs because these costs are deployed across multiple of our product programs under research and development.
Results of Operations
The following table set forth our results of operations for the periods presented (in thousands):
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Operating Expenses
Research and Development. Research and development expenses in the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $4.1 million, or 16%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily attributable to decreases in expenses in the CLASSICAL-Lung and SIGNAL studies, as patients have come off study.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses in the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by $0.7 million or 11%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to increased directors and officers insurance costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales. Since our inception in 2001, we have relied on public and private sales of equity and debt financing to fund our operations, in addition to capital contributions from noncontrolling interests and limited service revenue from collaboration agreements, and to some degree, grant money. We are not a party to any material off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
In July 2019, January 2020, and July 2020, we completed private placements of our common stock and received gross proceeds of $13.8 million, $7.5 million, and $4.0 million, respectively and in September 2020 we received gross proceeds of $2.0 million through an award from ADDF, in the form of an investment in our common stock. Additionally, on March 27, 2020, we announced that we had (i) entered into an Open Market Sale Agreement with Jefferies and filed a prospectus supplement pursuant to which we were able to issue and sell up to $11.5 million of shares of our common stock from time to time and (ii) entered into a Purchase Agreement with Keystone pursuant to which Keystone agreed to purchase up to an aggregate of $5.0 million of shares of our common stock from time to time. In August 2020, we ceased use of the Purchase Agreement with Keystone, and in September 2020, we filed a replacement prospectus supplement related to the Open Market Sale Agreement pursuant to which we may sell up to $113.0 million of shares of our common stock through Jefferies. During the third quarter of 2020, 3,815,600 shares were sold through the Open Market
Sale Agreement for proceeds of $12.3 million, net of commission, and 47,319 shares were sold through the Purchase Agreement with Keystone for proceeds of $300,000, net of discount. On August 3, 2020, we closed the Convertible Debt Financing discussed below for gross proceeds of $8.0 million. In addition, on May 8, 2020, we received the PPP Loan in the amount of $1.1 million. In the third quarter, we raised total proceeds of approximately $26.6 million, net of commissions and discounts and before expenses, through our Open Market Sale Agreement with Jefferies, the Convertible Debt Financing, the July 2020 private placement transaction, the ADDF award, and our Purchase Agreement with Keystone. We also received $575,000 in proceeds from our $750,000 grant from the Alzheimer’s Association under its 2020 Part the Cloud Program.
In August 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement, or the SPA, with 3i, as collateral agent and purchaser. Pursuant to the SPA, on August 3, 2020, we issued our 7% Original Issue Discount Senior Secured Convertible Debenture, or the Debenture, in the principal amount of $8.64 million for a purchase price of $8.0 million, which reflects an original issue discount of approximately 8%. The Debenture will mature on August 3, 2021. The Debenture accrues interest at 7% per year and is convertible into shares of our common stock at a conversion price of $9.4125 per share, subject to certain customary adjustments. Subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions, at any time, we may elect to redeem all or any portion of the Debenture for an amount equal to 115% of the outstanding principal balance being redeemed plus all accrued and unpaid interest on the amount being redeemed that would have accrued if the Debenture were held through the maturity date. Our obligations under the Debenture can be accelerated upon the occurrence of certain customary events of default and are secured under a Security Agreement by a lien on substantially all of our assets, subject to certain exceptions.
The Debenture contains customary representations and warranties and affirmative and restrictive covenants, including limitations on indebtedness, liens, dispositions of assets, organizational document amendments, change of control transactions, stock repurchases, indebtedness repayments, dividends, affiliate transactions and certain other matters. The Debenture also provides that in connection with future capital raising transactions, subject to certain exceptions, at the election of the holder we must use 20% of the funds raised to redeem amounts outstanding under the Debenture.
In January 2021, the Company sold 522,272 shares of the Company’s common stock at a weighted average price of $2.58 through the Open Market Sale Agreement, for net proceeds of $1.3 million.
In February 2021, the Company sold 5,415,628 shares of the Company’s common stock at a weighted average price of $5.82 through the Open Market Sale Agreement, for net proceeds of $30.6 million.
In January and February 2021, the Company made payments under the Mandatory Redemption provision of the Debenture totaling $6,372,575, consisting of $5,955,678 for principal repayments and $416,897 for accrued and make-whole interest.
Operating Capital Requirements
Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, compensation and related expenses, third-party research services and amounts due to vendors for research supplies. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, our principal source of liquidity was cash and cash equivalents in the amount of $10.6 million and $2.8 million, respectively. Given our projected operating requirements, our existing cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities, we will seek to complete an additional financing transaction or transactions in order to continue operations. For a discussion of the additional financing completed during the first quarter of the year ended December 31, 2021, see Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements.
Since our inception in 2001, we have incurred significant net losses and negative cash flows from operations. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we reported a net loss of $28.9 million and $31.9 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, we had an accumulated deficit of $277.5 million and $248.6 million, respectively. We anticipate that we will continue to generate losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect the losses to increase as we continue the development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, our product candidates. We are subject to risks associated with the development of new biopharmaceutical products, and we may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays and other unknown factors, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, that may adversely affect our business.
Our recurring net losses and negative cash flows from operations raised substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the issuance of our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020. Until we can generate sufficient revenue from the commercialization of our product candidates, we expect to finance our operations through the public or private sale of equity, debt financings or other capital sources, such as government funding, collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties. Our cash and cash equivalents were $10.6 million and total current assets were $11.3 million at December 31, 2020, which the Company anticipates will be insufficient to fund our planned operations through one year of the date that these consolidated financial statements are available for issuance. Please see Footnote 1of this annual report on Form 10-K for a description of our capital raising activities in 2020.
Additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, if at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital in sufficient amounts or on terms acceptable to us, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development of one or more of our product candidates or cease operations. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of additional debt or equity securities it could result in dilution to our existing stockholders, increased fixed payment obligations and these securities may have rights senior to those of our common stock and could contain covenants that would restrict our operations and potentially impair our competitiveness, such as limitations on our ability to incur additional debt, limitations on our ability to acquire, sell or license our intellectual property rights and other operating restrictions that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business. Any of these events could significantly harm our business, financial condition and prospects.
Financing strategies we may pursue include, but are not limited to, the public or private sale of equity, debt financings or funds from other capital sources, such as government or grant funding, collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties. There can be no assurances additional capital will be available to secure additional financing, or if available, that it will be sufficient to meet our needs on favorable terms. If we are unable to raise additional capital in sufficient amounts or on terms acceptable to us, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development of one or more of our product candidates. In addition, the Debenture also provides that in connection with future capital raising transactions (subject to certain exceptions), at the election of the holder we must use 20% of the funds raised to redeem amounts outstanding under the Debenture. If we raise additional funds through the public or private sale of equity or debt financings, it could result in dilution to our existing stockholders or increased fixed payment obligations and these securities may have rights senior to those of our common stock and could contain covenants that would restrict our operations and potentially impair our competitiveness, such as limitations on our ability to incur additional debt, limitations on our ability to acquire, sell or license our intellectual property rights and other operating restrictions that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business. Any of these events could significantly harm our business, financial condition and prospects.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities. We have historically experienced negative cash flows as we have developed our product candidates and continued to expand our business. Our net cash used in operating activities primarily results from our net loss adjusted for non-cash expenses and changes in working capital components as we have continued our research and development and is influenced by the timing of cash payments for research related expenses. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are compensation and related-expenses, employee-related expenditures, third-party research services and amounts due to vendors for research supplies. Our cash flows from operating activities will continue to be affected principally by the extent to which we increase spending on personnel, research and development and other operating activities as our business grows.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $28.6 million in cash, primarily as a result of our continued efforts of discovery and development of targeted biotherapeutics to treat serious diseases and conditions with unmet medical needs without any product revenue, resulting in a net loss of $28.9 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, operating activities used $30.7 million in cash, primarily as a result of our continued efforts of discovery and development of targeted biotherapeutics to treat serious diseases and conditions with unmet medical needs without any product revenue, resulting in a net loss of $31.9 million.
Investing Activities. Cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted from purchases of property and equipment. Cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 of $14.1 million resulted from sales of marketable securities and capital expenditures to purchase property and equipment.
Financing Activities. During the year ended December 31, 2020, financing activities provided $36.8 million, of which $11.5 million was attributable to the private placement of common stock, $17.0 million, net of underwriting commissions and discounts was due to the issuance of the Company’s common stock pursuant to the Open Market Sale Agreement and Purchase Agreement with Keystone, $7.8 million due to the issuance of Convertible Debt, and $1.1 million was from long-term debt. During the year ended December 31, 2019, financing activities provided $13.8 million from the proceeds of a private offering of our common stock.
Capital Contributions from Noncontrolling Interests
In November 2017, we entered into a license agreement, or the VX3 License Agreement, with VX3, which was formed in October 2017 by a group of Canadian investors including our majority stockholder, FCMI Parent. Pursuant to the VX3 License Agreement to date, we have earned $0 of an aggregate of $32 million in milestone payments under the agreement. In connection with the VX3 License Agreement, we also entered into a services agreement with VX3 pursuant to which VX3 has paid us initial capital contributions of $23.9 million. The VX3 License Agreement provides that upon termination, we will issue to VX3 or its designees the number of shares of our common stock equal to the lesser of (1) the aggregate of all capital contributions made to VX3 by its partners divided by $18.20 and (2) the then fair market value of VX3 divided by the then fair market value of one share of our common stock. We have determined VX3 to be a variable interest entity in which we are the primary beneficiary. For a full description of these agreements, see “Financing Arrangements with Canadian Investors-VX3” in Part 1, Item 1.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an “emerging growth company” within the meaning of the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act, or the JOBS Act. Section 107(b) of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can leverage the extended transition period, provided in Section 102(b) of the JOBS Act, for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until those standards apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period and, as a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates of such accounting standards.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, expenses and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgment and estimates.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses represent costs associated with developing our proprietary drug candidates, our collaboration agreements for such drugs, and our ongoing clinical studies.
Clinical trial costs are a significant component of our research and development expenses. We have a history of contracting with third parties that perform various clinical trial activities on our behalf in the ongoing development of our drug candidates. Expenses related to clinical trials are accrued based on our estimates of the actual services performed by the third parties for the respective period. If the contracted amounts are revised or the scope of a contract is revised, we will modify the accruals accordingly on a prospective basis and will do so in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become reasonably certain.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements that we have not yet adopted, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of accounting pronouncements that we have recently adopted, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements.