ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Form 10-K, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on May 14, 2018 in the Cayman Islands with limited liability (meaning our shareholders have no liability, as members of the Company, for the liabilities of the Company over and above the amount already paid for their shares) formed for the purpose of acquiring, engaging in a share exchange, share reconstruction and amalgamation with, purchasing all or substantially all of the assets of, or engaging in any other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses or entities. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of our Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Units that occurred simultaneously with the completion of our Initial Public Offering, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
The issuance of additional shares in a Business Combination:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors who would not have pre-emption rights in
respect of any such issue;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of ordinary shares if the rights, preferences, designations and limitations attaching to the preferred shares are created by amendment of our memorandum and articles of association by resolution of the board of directors and preferred shares are issued with rights senior to those afforded our ordinary shares；
● could cause a change in control if a substantial number of ordinary shares are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the share ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our ordinary shares.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant indebtedness, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after our initial Business Combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if any document governing such debt contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our ordinary shares;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our ordinary shares if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2020 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and identifying a target business for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial Public Offering.
We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing a Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $117,787, which consists of formation and operating costs of $117,787.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we had a net loss of $4,975, which consists of formation and operating costs of $4,975.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On February 11, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 4,600,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $46,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 225,000 Private Units to the sponsor and the underwriter at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $2,250,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Units, a total of $45,120,075 was placed in the Trust Account and we had $1,339,925 of cash held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering, and available for working capital purposes. On February 18, 2021, we transferred $1,339,925 of such amount to the trust account. We incurred $2,462,765 in transaction costs, including $805,000 of underwriting fees, $1,150,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $507,765 of offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $77,815, consisting primarily of a net loss of $117,787. Changes in our operating assets and liabilities provided cash of $39,972.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities was $4,975, consisting primarily of net loss of $4,975.
At December 31, 2020, we had cash of $239 held outside the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate prospective acquisition candidates, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, select the target business to acquire and structure, negotiate and consummate a Business Combination.
We issued an unsecured promissory note to our sponsor in the aggregate amount of $450,000. The notes do not bear interest and matured on February 11, 2021. As of December 31, 2020, the outstanding balance under the notes amounted to an aggregate of $228,483.
Other than as described above, in order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into Private Units, at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination is less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to consummate our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only consummate such financing simultaneously with the consummation of our Business Combination. Following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-balance sheet financing arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of a member of our sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and administrative support provided to the Company. We began incurring these fees on February 8, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and the Company’s liquidation.
In addition, we have an agreement to pay the underwriters a deferred fee of two and one-half percent (2.5%) of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, or $1,000,000. Pursuant to the agreement we have with the underwriter, we will have the right to pay up to $400,000 of such amount to other advisors retained by us to assist us in connection with a Business Combination; provided, however, that we may, in its sole discretion, apply such 1.0% fee to other deal expenses instead.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Ordinary shares subject to redemption
We account for our ordinary shares subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Net loss per ordinary share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Ordinary shares subject to possible redemption which are not currently redeemable and are not redeemable at fair value, have been excluded from the calculation of basic net loss per ordinary share since such shares, if redeemed, only participate in their pro rata share of the Trust Account earnings. Our net loss is adjusted for the portion of income that is attributable to ordinary shares subject to redemption, as these shares only participate in the earnings of the Trust Account and not our income or losses.
Recent accounting pronouncements
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.