ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our results of operations and financial condition for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and the other financial information that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion includes forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations, and intentions. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties such as our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements below. Factors that could cause or contribute to those differences in our actual results include, but are not limited to, those discussed below and those discussed elsewhere within this Annual Report, particularly in the section entitled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and the Item entitled “Risk Factors.”
Overview
We are a Software-as-a-Service (“SaaS”) applications platform developer. Our platform is comprised of a suite of interactive video-based sales enablement business software products marketed on a subscription basis. Our applications, available in both mobile and desktop versions, are offered as a fully integrated suite, as well as on a standalone basis, and include verbCRM, our white-labelled Customer Relationship Management (“CRM”) application for large sales-based enterprises; verbTEAMS, our CRM application for small-and medium-sized businesses and solopreneurs; verbLEARN, our Learning Management System application, and verbLIVE, our Live Stream eCommerce application.
Our Technology
Our suite of applications can be distinguished from other sales enablement applications because our applications utilize our proprietary interactive video technology as the primary means of communication between sales and marketing professionals and their customers and prospects. Moreover, the proprietary data collection and analytics capabilities of our applications inform our users on their devices in real time , when and for how long their prospects have watched a video, how many times such prospects watched it, and what they clicked on, which allows our users to focus their time and efforts on ‘hot leads’ or interested prospects rather than on those that have not seen such video or otherwise expressed interest in such content. Users can create their hot lead lists by using familiar, intuitive ‘swipe left/swipe right’ on-screen navigation. Our clients report that these capabilities provide for a much more efficient and effective sales process, resulting in increased sales conversion rates. We developed the proprietary patent-pending interactive video technology, as well as several other patent-issued and patent-pending technologies that serve as the unique foundation for all our platform applications.
Our Products
verbCRM combines the capabilities of CRM lead-generation, content management, and in-video ecommerce capabilities in an intuitive, yet powerful tool for both inexperienced as well as highly skilled sales professionals. verbCRM allows users to quickly and easily create, distribute, and post videos to which they can add a choice of on-screen clickable icons which, when clicked, allow viewers to respond to the user’s call-to-action in real-time, in the video, while the video is playing, without leaving or stopping the video. For example, our technology allows a prospect or customer to click on a product they see featured in a video and impulse buy it, or to click on a calendar icon in the video to make an appointment with a salesperson, among many other novel features and functionalities designed to eliminate or reduce friction from the sales process for our users. The verbCRM app is designed to be easy to use and navigate, and takes little time and training for a user to begin using the app effectively. It usually takes less than four minutes for a novice user to create an interactive video from our app. Users can add interactive icons to pre-existing videos, as well as to newly created videos shot with practically any mobile device. verbCRM interactive videos can be distributed via email, text messaging, chat app, or posted to popular social media directly and easily from our app. No software download is required to view Verb interactive videos on virtually any mobile or desktop device, including smart TVs.
verbLEARN is an interactive, video-based learning management system that incorporates all of the clickable in-video technology featured in our verbCRM application and adapts them for use by educators for video-based education. verbLEARN is used by enterprises seeking to educate a large sales team or a customer base about new products, or elicit feedback about existing products. It also incorporates Verb’s proprietary data collection and analytics capabilities that inform users in real time when and for how long the viewers watched the video, how many times they watched it, and what they clicked on, in addition to adding gamification features that enhance the learning aspects of the application.
verbLIVE builds on popular video-based platforms such as Facebook Live, Zoom, WebEx, and Go2Meeting, among others, by adding Verb’s proprietary interactive in-video ecommerce capabilities - including an in-video Shopify shopping cart integrated for Shopify account holders - to our own live stream video broadcasting application. verbLIVE is a next-generation live stream platform that allows hosts to utilize a variety of novel sales-driving features, including placing interactive icons on-screen that appear on the screens of all viewers, providing in-video click-to-purchase capabilities for products or services featured in the live video broadcast, in real-time, driving friction-free selling. verbLIVE also provides the host with real-time viewer engagement data and interaction analytics. verbLIVE is entirely browser-based, allowing it to function easily and effectively on all devices without requiring the host or the viewers to download software, and is secured through end-to-end encryption. A mobile app-based version of verbLIVE, with enhanced features, is currently in development and is expected to be released in early second quarter of 2021.
verbTEAMS is our interactive, video-based CRM for small-and medium-sized businesses and solopreneurs. verbTEAMS also incorporates verbLIVE as a bundled application. verbTEAMS incorporates self-sign-up, self-onboarding, self-configuring, content management system capabilities, user level administrative capabilities, and high-quality analytics capabilities in both mobile and desktop platforms that sync with one another. It also has a built-in one-click sync capability with Salesforce.
Verb Partnerships and Integrations
We have completed and deployed the integration of verbLIVE into Salesforce and passed their security review process. In recent weeks we launched a joint marketing campaign with Salesforce to introduce the verbLIVE plug-in functionality to current Salesforce users. A verbCRM sync application for Salesforce users is currently being utilized by at least one of our large enterprise clients and the verbLIVE plug-in is now being offered to all Salesforce users on a monthly subscription fee basis.
We have completed the integration of verbCRM into systems offered by 17 of the most popular direct sales back-office system providers, such as Direct Scale, Exigo, By Design, Thatcher, Multisoft, Xennsoft, and Party Plan. Direct sales back-office systems provide many of the support functions required for direct sales operations, including payroll, customer genealogy management, statistics, rankings, and earnings, among other direct sales financial tracking capabilities. The integration into these back-office providers, facilitated through our own API development, allows single sign-on convenience for users, as well as enhanced data analytics and reporting capabilities for all users. We believe that our integration into these back-end platforms accelerates the adoption of verbCRM by large direct sales enterprises that rely on these systems and as such, we believe this represents a competitive advantage.
We are currently working to introduce an integration of our interactive video technology into Microsoft Outlook followed by a broad-scale launch in early 2021, pursuant to and in accordance with our existing Microsoft partnership agreement. We expect to follow the Microsoft Outlook integration with the integration into other Microsoft Office 365 products.
Non-Digital Products and Services
Historically, we have also provided certain non-digital services to some of our enterprise clients such as printing and fulfillment services. We designed and printed welcome kits and starter kits for their marketing needs and provided fulfillment services, which consisted of managing the preparation, handling and shipping of our client’s custom-branded merchandise they use for marketing purposes at conferences and other events. We also managed the fulfillment of our clients’ product sample packs that verbCRM users order through the app for automated delivery and tracking to their customers and prospects.
However, in May 2020, we executed a contract with Range Printing (“Range”), a company in the business of providing enterprise class printing, sample assembly, warehousing, packaging, shipping, and fulfillment services. Pursuant to the contract, through an automated process we have established for this purpose, Range will receive orders for samples and merchandise from us as and when we receive them from our clients and users, and print, assemble, store, package and ship such samples and merchandise on our behalf. The Range contract provides for a revenue share arrangement based upon the specific services to be provided by Range that is designed to maintain our relationship with our clients by continuing to service their non-digital needs, while eliminating the labor and overhead costs associated with the provision of such services by us. The transition to Range Printing is now virtually complete.
Our Market
Our client base consists primarily of multi-national direct sales enterprises to whom we provide white-labeled, client-branded versions of our products. Our clients also include large professional associations, educational institutions, including school districts, auto sales, auto leasing, insurance, real estate, home security, not-for-profits, as well as clients in the health care industry, and the burgeoning CBD industry, among other business sectors. As of March 26, 2021, we provide subscription-based application services to approximately 140 enterprise clients for use in over 60 countries, in over 48 languages, which collectively account for a user base generated through more than 1.9 million downloads of our verbCRM application. Among the new business sectors targeted for this year are pharmaceutical sales, government institutions, small businesses and individual entrepreneurs.
Revenue Generation
We generate revenue from the following sources:
● recurring subscription fees paid by enterprise users and affiliates;
● recurring subscription fees paid by non-enterprise, small business, and individual users;
● recurring subscription fees paid by users who access in-app purchases of various premium services, features, functionality, and upgrades;
● recurring subscription fees paid by users who access in-app purchases of third-party software provider apps in our forthcoming app store;
● recurring subscription fees paid by users of Salesforce and Microsoft among others with whom we have executed partnership agreements, for access to our applications that we either have integrated or intend to integrate into these platforms, including recurring subscription fees paid by users who subscribe to bundled service offerings from these partners and/or their respective value-added resellers;
● recurring subscription fees paid by users for all of the foregoing products and services generated through our recently launched Japan operations;
● recurring subscription fees paid by users generated through our forthcoming reseller and affiliate distribution programs; and
● Fees paid by enterprise clients for non-digital products and services through our Range Printing venture.
Recent Developments
verbLIVE Marketing and Monetization Strategies
Salesforce
verbLIVE is available to Salesforce users in the Salesforce App Exchange Marketplace under the Salesforce partner program. For a monthly subscription fee of $24.99 per user per month, every Salesforce user that subscribes will have the ability to click on their contacts icon in their Salesforce dashboard and from the drop-down menu they will see a verbLIVE icon. By clicking that, Salesforce users will be able to launch their own verbLIVE live stream ecommerce session and invite people to participate directly from their Salesforce contacts list. We worked with Salesforce to develop a marketing campaign to promote verbLIVE within the Salesforce ecosystem that launched in October 2020.
verbLIVE Pre-Sales
As previously disclosed, 17 of our existing clients have signed up for verbLIVE during the pre-launch marketing last quarter. We believe that these corporate clients have a combined potential individual user base of 465,350 users which represent the total addressable market among the existing clients that have already signed on. Historically, our penetration rates among our existing corporate clients vary but on the low end it is approximately 10%. Adopting that 10% rate, we believe that we have the potential to attract 46,000 users to subscribe and pay for verbLIVE. Currently, we charge $9.99 to $14.99 per user per month for verbLIVE depending on the features and package for existing verbCRM users, though at launch, we may charge a lower price, including a free trial period. Applying the lower price of $9.99 per user and a penetration rate of 10% for this analysis, we believe that we could potentially capture approximately $0.5 million of SaaS recurring revenue per month - or approximately $5.5 million of annual recurring revenue. We are encouraged by the fact that many of these prospective users already have our verbCRM app on their mobile device which allows us to send very targeted marketing messages promoting verbLIVE, including video demonstrations explaining what verbLIVE could do for their business. In addition, our platform is already integrated into many of our clients’ back-office providers making adoption for these clients and users much faster and easier. This is a small part of our internal modeling and should not be interpreted by anyone as a guarantee of performance or results. Notwithstanding the foregoing, which is an example only, our current projected usage models forecast far greater numbers than the 10% penetration rates for our existing signed customers, which we projected earlier this year, and much greater numbers still when we add anticipated adoption rates from the as yet untapped market outside our existing business.
For the quarter ended September 30, 2020, we reported that we were working diligently to ramp up capacity before a larger launch to ensure that we do not face service outages from overloaded servers. Notwithstanding these efforts, we may nevertheless experience server overloads as it is difficult to predict the rate of adoption and usage. We have begun final testing on the platform enhancements that have been designed and built to accommodate tens of thousands of simultaneous live streams, logins, viewers, and interactions on a global basis. Upon satisfactory completion of the testing, we will begin satisfying our existing back-log of current verbCRM users as discussed above.
We also intend to release a new small business-focused version of our interactive video CRM application, that incorporates verbLIVE which we expect to release before year-end. This new application, called verbTEAMS, is designed to appeal to a larger target market than our verbCRM application as it incorporates self-sign-up, self-onboarding, self-configuring, content management system capabilities, user level administrative capabilities, and high quality analytics capabilities in both mobile and desktop platforms that sync with one another. It also has a built-in one-click synch capability with Salesforce. verbTEAMS is designed for small businesses and entrepreneurs with a feature set we believe is highly scalable and unique in the marketplace, that will be very competitive with the most popular CRM systems available today.
SoloFire Acquisition
In September 2020 we completed the acquisition of Ascend Certification, LLC, dba SoloFire (“SoloFire”). SoloFire develops and markets leading SaaS-based sales enablement applications for sales representatives of medical device, diagnostics and life sciences companies. SoloFire’s platform empowers sales and marketing teams by allowing them to efficiently find, show, share and track regulatory and industry compliant, accurate and up-to-date content. With SoloFire, content can be locally stored, making it accessible without Wi-fi or mobile data, which is often a challenge in hospital environments. The sales tools can be tailored to a company’s unique medical products, while creating personalized sales conversations with physicians and other stakeholders. In addition, insights from in-depth analytics capabilities enable sales and marketing teams to identify and replicate the content that most resonates with clients, driving higher conversion rates. We have begun combining VERB’s sales enablement solutions, including our interactive video and interactive livestream ecommerce features, with the SoloFire mobile and desktop applications to provide even more powerful tools for this exciting new target market.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business and Industry
In the three months ended June 30, 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in significant uncertainty and volatility in a wide variety of industries and markets, including in our industry, and prompted many federal, state, local, and foreign governments to implement various lock-down measures in an attempt to contain the spread and mitigate the impact of the disease. The initial implementation of such lock-down measures, and their re-introduction in response to a nation-wide resurgence of COVID-19 cases in late-2020, resulted in business closures, work stoppages, slowdowns and delays, work-from-home policies, travel restrictions and the cancellation or postponement of events.
Despite recent approval and initial distribution of vaccines, both the pandemic and the containment and mitigation measures have had, and are likely to continue to have, an adverse impact on the global and U.S. economies, the severity and duration of which are uncertain. It is likely that government stabilization efforts will only partially mitigate the consequences to the economy. As such, both the pandemic and containment and mitigation measures may adversely affect our business, operations and financial condition by, among other things, reducing demand for our applications, impairing the productivity of our workforce, and reducing our access to capital. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will impact our business, financial conditions, and results of operations in the future remains uncertain and will be affected by a number of factors. These include the duration and extent of the pandemic, the duration and extent of imposed or recommended containment and mitigation measures, the extent, duration, and effective execution of government stabilization and recovery efforts, including those from the successful distribution of effective vaccines.
The COVID-19 pandemic may have long-term effects on the nature of the office environment and remote working. This may present operational and workplace culture challenges that may adversely affect our business. However, we are committed to our employees returning to the workplace in the long-term. Throughout the year ended December 31, 2020 and through the filing of this Annual Report, we have encouraged safe practices designed to stem the infection and spread of COVID-19 within our workforce and beyond and to maintain the mental health and well-being of our employees. Beginning in March 2020, in an effort to protect our employees and comply with applicable government orders, we restricted non-essential employee travel and transitioned our employees to a remote work environment. We currently expect the majority of our employees will continue working remotely at least through the second quarter of 2021. Our workforce has continued to effectively develop and support our product and service offerings notwithstanding the current environment.
We began the year ended December 31, 2020 with healthy demand for our products and services, many of which are designed to enable our customers to manage their businesses virtually. In the three months ended June 30, 2020, we experienced some uncertainty regarding whether there would be variability in demand for the services we provide on our platform after lock-down measures were implemented. We expect demand variability for our products and services may continue as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic; however, our sales team reported a higher level of interest in our products and services during the year ended December 31, 2020. Although the impact has not been material to date, a prolonged downturn in economic conditions could have a material adverse effect on our customers and demand for our services.
We continue to actively communicate with and listen to our customers to ensure we are responding to their needs in the current environment with innovative solutions that will not only be beneficial now but also over the long-term. We monitor developments related to COVID-19 and remain flexible in our response to the challenges presented by the pandemic. To mitigate the adverse impact COVID-19 may have on our business and operations, we implemented a number of measures in the year ended December 31, 2020 to protect the health and safety of our employees, as well as to strengthen our financial position. These efforts include eliminating, reducing, or deferring non-essential expenditures, as well as complying with local and state government recommendations to protect our workforce.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following is a comparison of the results of our operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Revenue
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $10.0 million, compared to $9.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in revenue is attributed to the addition of new clients and the expansion of existing clients for access to one or more of our suite of software products on our sales enablement platform. Those products now include verbCRM, verbLEARN, verb TEAMS, and verbLIVE. The revenue we derive from these products is divided into two main categories: digital revenue and non-digital revenue. Within the digital revenue category, we have two forms of revenue. The first is SaaS recurring digital revenue based on contract-based subscriptions to our products and platform services. The second is non-SaaS, non-recurring digital revenue which is revenue generated by use of our apps and in-app purchases, such as sampling and other services obtained through the app. Non-digital revenue is revenue we generate from non-app, non-digital sources through ancillary services we provide as an accommodation to our clients and customers. These include printing and shipping services which we now outsource to a strategic partner as part of a cost reduction plan we instituted in 2020.
Total digital revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $6.5 million, compared to $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This consisted of SaaS recurring subscription-based revenue associated with our verbCRM, verbLEARN, and verbTEAMS applications of $5.1 million compared to $2.8 million in 2019. There was no revenue for verbLIVE in 2020 as it was launched commercially in 2021. Non-subscription digital revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was virtually flat compared to December 31, 2019.
Total non-digital revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $3.5 million, compared to $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Total non-digital revenue for 2020 consisted of revenue generated from the design and printing of welcome kits/starter kits that our clients use for new sales reps, fulfillment of various custom products our clients use for marketing purposes and at conferences of $2.7 million; and shipping fees associated with client welcome kits and fulfillment of $723,000.
The table below sets forth our quarterly revenues from the quarter ended March 31, 2019 through the quarter ended December 31, 2020, which reflects the trend of revenue since our acquisition of Verb Direct in April 2019:
* The decrease in digital revenue is primarily attributed to the impact of COVID-19 on many of our customers, which magnified what is traditionally a business slowdown during holiday season. We also experienced an unusual loss of several customers which had a direct impact on our 4th quarter recurring revenue. Notably, however, as the year drew to a close, as of December 31, 2020, we had begun to see a meaningful uptick and return to more normalized business and sales activity with 14 new clients under contract that will launch in 2021, at which time we will recognize that revenue. Overall, we signed 62 new clients in 2020, representing approximately $3.0 million of minimum contract value.
Cost of Revenue
Total cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $4.8 million, compared to $4.9 million for 2019. The decrease in cost of revenue is primarily attributed by lower non-digital revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 versus December 31, 2019 offset by an increase in digital cost of revenue attributed to additional enterprise customers on the platform and increased users within our existing customer base.
Gross Margin
The shift in resources to our SaaS recurring subscription revenue reflects an increase in gross margin to 52% for the year ended December 31, 2020 versus 46% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The shift had a material impact on as gross margin increased $934,000, while gross revenue increased $865,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 versus December 31, 2019.
Operating Expenses
Research and development expenses were $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Research and development expenses primarily consisted of fees paid to employees and vendors contracted to perform research projects and develop technology. The increase in research and development is attributed the development of verbLIVE, plus enhancements to verbCRM and our core platform to facilitate native integrations with Salesforce, Microsoft, and other channel partners.
Depreciation and amortization expenses were $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is associated with an additional three months of amortization in 2020 related to the intangible asset recorded as part of the acquisition of Verb Direct in April 2019, amortization of SoloFire intangible assets, and amortization of leasehold improvements related to our California office.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $20.5 million, as compared to $14.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in general and administrative expenses is primarily related to general and administration expenses attributed to an increase in stock compensation expense of $1.9 million, an additional quarter of operations in 2020 for Verb Direct of $1.1 million, expenses from SoloFire of $809,000 primarily driven by retention bonuses, plus increases to support growth driven by labor related costs of $697,000, professional services of $631,000, marketing and promotion of $493,000, and increased facility costs associated with our California office of $175,000.
Other income (expense), net, for the year ended December 31, 2020 was ($218,000), which was attributed to interest expense for amortization of debt discount of ($493,000), financing costs of ($248,000), and interest expense of ($153,000), offset by a change in the fair value of derivative liability of $574,000 and other income (expense), net of $102,000. Other income (expense), net, for the year ended December 31, 2019 was ($82,000), which was attributed to interest expense for amortization of debt discount of ($1.7) million, financing costs of ($1.6) million, interest expense of ($186,000), other income (expense), net of ($11,000), offset by a change in the fair value of derivative liability of $1.9 million, and debt extinguishment of $1.5 million.
Use of Non-GAAP Measures - Modified EBITDA
In addition to our results under generally accepted accounted principles (“GAAP”), we present Modified EBITDA as a supplemental measure of our performance. However, Modified EBITDA is not a recognized measurement under GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to net income, income from operations or any other performance measure derived in accordance with GAAP or as an alternative to cash flow from operating activities as a measure of liquidity. We define Modified EBITDA as net income (loss), plus interest expense, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, financing costs and changes in fair value of derivative liability.
Management considers our core operating performance to be that which our managers can affect in any particular period through their management of the resources that affect our underlying revenue and profit generating operations that period. Non-GAAP adjustments to our results prepared in accordance with GAAP are itemized below. You are encouraged to evaluate these adjustments and the reasons we consider them appropriate for supplemental analysis. In evaluating Modified EBITDA, you should be aware that in the future we may incur expenses that are the same as or similar to some of the adjustments in this presentation. Our presentation of Modified EBITDA should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items.
The $6.5 million decrease in modified EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019, resulted from increased research and development, expenses related to SoloFire primarily driven by retention bonuses, an increase in professional services primarily attributed to the acquisition of SoloFire, labor related costs to support growth, marketing and promotion, increased facility costs associated with our California office, and twelve months of Verb Direct general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 versus the nine months of Verb Direct results in 2019, offset by an increase in gross margin.
We present Modified EBITDA because we believe it assists investors and analysts in comparing our performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding items that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating performance. In addition, we use Modified EBITDA in developing our internal budgets, forecasts and strategic plan; in analyzing the effectiveness of our business strategies in evaluating potential acquisitions; and in making compensation decisions and in communications with our board of directors concerning our financial performance. Modified EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, which includes, among others, the following:
● Modified EBITDA does not reflect our cash expenditures, or future requirements, for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
● Modified EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
● Modified EBITDA does not reflect future interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, on our debts; and
● Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and Modified EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Going Concern
We have incurred operating losses and negative cash flows from operations since inception. We incurred a net loss of $24,956,000 during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. We also utilized cash in operations of $16,294,000 during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. As a result, our continuation as a going concern is dependent on our ability to obtain additional financing until we can generate sufficient cash flows from operations to meet our obligations. We intend to continue to seek additional debt or equity financing to continue our operations.
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which implies we may not continue to meet our obligations and continue our operations for the next twelve months. Our continuation as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to obtain necessary debt or equity financing to continue operations until we begin generating positive cash flow. In addition, our independent registered public accounting firm, in its report on our December 31, 2020 consolidated financial statements, has raised substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
There is no assurance that we will ever be profitable or that debt or equity financing will be available to us in the amounts, on terms, and at times deemed acceptable to us, if at all. The issuance of additional equity securities by us would result in a significant dilution in the equity interests of our current stockholders. Obtaining commercial loans, assuming those loans would be available, would increase our liabilities and future cash commitments. If we are unable to obtain financing in the amounts and on terms deemed acceptable to us, we may be unable to continue our business, as planned, and as a result may be required to scale back or cease operations for our business, the results of which would be that our stockholders would lose some or all of their investment. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classifications of liabilities that may result should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Overview
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $1,815,000. We estimate our operating expenses for the next twelve months may continue to exceed any revenue we generate, and we may need to raise capital through either debt or equity offerings to continue operations. Due to market conditions and the early stage of our operations, there is considerable risk that we will not be able to raise such financings at all, or on terms that are not dilutive to our existing stockholders. We can offer no assurance that we will be able to raise such funds. If we are unable to raise the funds we require for all of our planned operations, we may be forced to reallocate funds from other planned uses and may suffer a significant negative effect on our business plan and operations, including our ability to develop new products and continue our current operations. As a result, our business may suffer, and we may be forced to reduce or discontinue operations.
In April 2019, we closed our public offering that provided us with gross proceeds of approximately $20,500,000 before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other estimated offering expenses payable by us. The proceeds were used to pay the $15,000,000 cash portion of the acquisition price for Sound Concepts (now, Verb Direct), pay principal and interest amounts outstanding under convertible debt in the amount of $2,025,000, pay commissions and other offering expenses related to the public offering in the amount of $2,100,000, and pay other operating expenses.
On August 14, 2019, we entered into a purchase agreement with investors, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell up to an aggregate of 6,000 shares of our Series A Preferred Stock and the warrants to purchase an aggregate of up to 3.87 million shares of common stock (an amount equivalent to the number of shares of common stock into which the Series A Preferred Stock is initially convertible). Each share of Series A Preferred Stock is convertible, at any time and from time to time from and after the issuance date, at the holder’s option into that number of shares of common stock equal to the stated value per share (or $1,000) divided by the conversion price (initially, $1.55); thus, initially, each share of Series A Preferred Stock is convertible into approximately 645 shares of common stock. The warrants have an initial exercise price of $1.88 per share, subject to customary adjustments, are exercisable from and after six months after the date of issuance, and will expire five years from the date of issuance. We closed the offering on August 14, 2019, and issued 5,030 shares of Series A Preferred Stock and issued warrants to purchase up to 3,245,162 shares of common stock in connection therewith. We received gross proceeds equal to $5,030,000
On February 5, 2020, we initiated our private placement, which is for the sale and issuance of up to five million shares of our common stock at a per-share price of $1.20, which amount represents a 20% discount to the $1.50 closing price of our common stock on that day, and is memorialized by a subscription agreement.
On March 31, 2020 we closed our private placement. In total we issued 4,237,833 shares of common stock and netted $4.4 million after fees and expenses.
On April 17, 2020, we received loan proceeds in the amount of approximately $1,218,000 under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). The PPP, established as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act, provides for loans to qualifying businesses for amounts up to 2.5 times of the average monthly payroll expenses of the qualifying business. The loans and accrued interest are forgivable after eight weeks as long as the borrower uses the loan proceeds for eligible purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities, and maintains its payroll levels. The amount of loan forgiveness will be reduced if the borrower terminates employees or reduces salaries during the eight-week period. Subsequent to December 31, 2020 the entire note and accrued interest was forgiven.
On July 24, 2020, the Company concluded its public offering pursuant to a registration statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-239055) and issued and sold 12,545,453 shares of common stock (which included 1,636,363 shares of common stock sold pursuant to the exercise by the underwriters of an overallotment option). The net proceeds to the Company, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and direct offering expenses was $12,337,000
On March 15, 2021 the Company completed a registered direct offering with institutional investors for the purchase and sale of 9,375,000 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $1.60 per share. Net proceeds were approximately $14,000,000
The following is a summary of our cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Cash Flows - Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our cash flows used in operating activities amounted to $16.3 million, compared to cash used for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $8.1 million. The change is attributed to the growth of the business, product development, inclusion of Verb Direct and SoloFire operating expenses, professional services, and a change in accounts payable, accrued expenses, and accrued interest of ($1.3) million, prepaid expenses of ($474,000) compared to December 31, 2019, offset by an increase in gross margin, a change in accounts receivable of $820,000, deferred revenue and customer deposits of $302,000, compared to December 31, 2019.
Cash Flows - Investing
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our cash flows used from investing activities amounted to $88,000, which was primarily attributed to fixed asset purchases of $317,000, offset by $229,000 of cash acquired from the acquisition of Solofire. For the year ended December 31, 2019, our cash flows used from investing activities amounted to $14.6 million, which was primarily attributed to the net cash paid as part of the acquisition of Verb Direct in April 2019 of $14.4 million, plus fixed asset purchases of $146,000.
Cash Flows - Financing
Our cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $17.2 million, which represented $16.8 million of net proceeds from the issuance of shares of our common stock, proceeds from warrant exercises of $2.2 million, a paycheck protection program loan of $1.2 million, advances on future receipts of $728,000, and an economic injury disaster loan of $150,000, all offset by ($1.9) million of an acquisition note payable for Solofire, ($1.8) million of payments against advance on future receipts, a ($100,000) principal payment on related party debt. Our cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 amounted to $23.0 million, which represented $18.5 million of net proceeds from the issuance of shares of our Common Stock, $4.7 million of net proceeds from the issuance of shares of our Series A Preferred Stock, $1.3 million of proceeds from notes payable, advances on future receipts of $728,000, $432,000 of proceeds from the issuance of convertible debt, $58,000 of unsecured related party debt, and $45,000 of proceeds from warrant exercises, partially offset by ($2.0) million paid in connection with convertible notes outstanding, ($630,000) paid in connection with notes outstanding, and ($58,000) paid in connection with related party notes outstanding, and ($7,000) of payments against advance on future receipts.
Notes Payable - Related Parties
We had the following related parties notes payable as of December 31, 2020:
(A) On December 1, 2015, we issued a convertible note payable to Rory J. Cutaia, our Chief Executive Officer and then-majority stockholder, to consolidate all loans and advances made by Mr. Cutaia to our company as of that date. The note bears interest at a rate of 12% per annum, is secured by our assets, and will mature on February 8, 2021, as amended. A total of 30% of the original note balance or $375,000 was convertible to common stock and was converted in 2018 while the remaining note balance of $825,000 is not convertible. Subsequent to December 31, 2020 the Company extended the note to February 8, 2023.
(B) On December 1, 2015, we issued a note payable to a former member of our board of directors, in the amount of $112,000 representing unpaid consulting fees as of November 30, 2015. The note is unsecured, bears interest rate of 12% per annum, and matured in April 2017. As of December 31, 2020, the outstanding principal balance of the note was equal to $112,000.
(C) On April 4, 2016, we issued a convertible note to Mr. Cutaia, in the amount of $343,000, to consolidate all advances made by Mr. Cutaia to our company during the period December 2015 through March 2016. A total of 30% of the original note balance or $103,000 was convertible to common stock and was converted in 2018 while the remaining note balance of $240,000 is not convertible. The note, as amended, bears interest at a rate of 12% per annum, is secured by our assets, and will mature on June 4, 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded total interest expense of $141,000 pursuant to the terms of the notes and paid $100,000 of principal on note (A) and paid $120,000 of interest.
Deferred Incentive Compensation
(A) On December 23, 2019, we awarded Rory Cutaia, our Chief Executive Officer and Jeff Clayborne, our Chief Financial Officer annual incentive compensation of $430,000 and $125,000, respectively, for services rendered. We have determined that it is in our best interest and in the best interest of our stockholders to defer payments to Messrs. Cutaia and Clayborne. We will pay 50% of the annual incentive compensation on January 10, 2021 and the remaining 50% on January 10, 2022. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, the Company paid $215,000 of the amount due and will pay the remaining $63,000 during 2021.
(B) On December 23, 2019, we awarded Rory Cutaia, our Chief Executive Officer and Jeff Clayborne, our Chief Financial Officer a bonus for the successful up-listing to The NASDAQ Capital Market and the acquisition of Verb Direct totaling $324,000 and $162,000, respectively. We have determined that it is in our best interest and in the best interest of our stockholders to defer payments to Messrs. Cutaia and Clayborne. We will pay 50% of these awards on January 10, 2021 and the remaining 50% on January 10, 2022. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, the Company paid $162,000 of the amount due and will pay the remaining $82,000 during 2021.
Advance on Future Receipts
We had the following related parties notes payable as of December 31, 2020:
(A) On June 30, 2019, we received two secured advances from an unaffiliated third party totaling $727,000 for the purchase of future receipts/revenues of $1,012,000 Pursuant to the terms of the agreement the unaffiliated third-party will auto withdraw an aggregate of $6,000 from our operating account each banking day. The term of the agreement extends until the advances are paid in full. We may pay off either note for $446,000 if paid within 30 days of funding; for $465,000 if paid between 31 and 60 days of funding; or for $484,000 if paid within 61 to 90 days of funding.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP, which require that we make certain assumptions and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of net revenue and expenses during each reporting period.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reported periods. Significant estimates include valuation of derivative liability, valuation of debt and equity instruments, share-based compensation arrangements and long-lived assets. Amounts could materially change in the future.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company evaluates its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the consolidated statements of operations. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is evaluated at the end of each reporting period. Derivative instrument liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement of the derivative instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
We use Level 2 inputs for our valuation methodology for the derivative liabilities as their fair values were determined by using a Binomial pricing model. Our derivative liabilities are adjusted to reflect fair value at each period end, with any increase or decrease in the fair value being recorded in results of operations as adjustments to fair value of derivatives.
Share Based Payment
We issue stock options, common stock, and equity interests as share-based compensation to employees and non-employees. We account for our share-based compensation to employees in accordance with FASB ASC 718 “Compensation - Stock Compensation.” Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date, based on the estimated fair value of the award, and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period. We value stock compensation based on the market price on the measurement date.
We value stock options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Assumptions used in the Black-Scholes model to value options issued during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 are as follows:
The risk-free interest rate was based on rates established by the Federal Reserve Bank. We use the historical volatility of our common stock to estimate the future volatility for our common stock. The expected dividend yield was based on the fact that we have not customarily paid dividends in the past and do not expect to pay dividends in the future.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For a summary of our recent accounting policies, please refer to Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Financial Statements commencing on page of this Annual Report for management’s discussion as to the impact of recent accounting pronouncements.