Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion includes forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” on page ii and Item 1A (Risk Factors) of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a provider of artificial intelligence (“AI”) solutions, including our proprietary AI platform, aiWARE™, digital content management solutions and content licensing services. We also operate a full-service media advertising agency and our VeriAds™ Network. Our business, products and services are discussed in detail in Item 1 (Business) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we reported total revenue of $57.7 million and $49.6 million, respectively. Total revenue from our aiWARE SaaS solutions increased to 24% of our total revenue in 2020 compared with 21% of our total revenue in 2019.
Significant Transactions
In December 2020, we completed an offering of our common stock, pursuant to which we sold an aggregate of 3,450,000 shares of our common stock (which included the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares) at a price of $18.50 per share, for aggregate net proceeds of approximately $59.8 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs of approximately $4.0 million.
During 2020, we also sold an aggregate of 1,491,317 shares of our common stock and received net proceeds of approximately $6.0 million, after deducting commissions of $0.3 million, pursuant to the Equity Distribution Agreement that we entered into with JMP Securities LLC (“JMP Securities”) in June 2018 (the “ATM Facility”). During 2019, we sold an aggregate of 5,205,430 shares of our common stock under the ATM Facility and received net proceeds of approximately $24.4 million, after deducting commissions of $0.8 million paid to JMP Securities. We voluntarily terminated the ATM Facility in January 2021.
Opportunities, Challenges and Risks
In 2020 and 2019, we derived our revenue through our aiWARE SaaS solutions, aiWARE content licensing and media services, and advertising services. Beginning in the second half of 2020, we began to experience significant growth in revenue across our aiWARE SaaS solutions, which increased 43% and 53% during the quarters ended September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020, respectively, compared with the same periods in 2019. The year-over-year growth in aiWARE SaaS solutions revenue in these periods was driven primarily by increases in revenue in our government, legal and compliance and energy markets. As we are at the early stages of new product introductions in these markets, we expect that our aiWARE SaaS revenue will continue to increase significantly in the near and long term, both in absolute dollars and as a percentage of our total revenue.
We are a leader in AI SaaS, advertising and content licensing solutions across the media and entertainment market. Our media and entertainment customers and trading partners include some of the most recognizable media and entertainment companies in the world, and we estimate that the network of our advertising reach includes approximately 25% of all podcast advertising. Moreover, we have demonstrated our ability to grow our advertising services, including our VeriAds Network launched in late 2019, with our revenue from these services increasing 39% and 50% during the quarters ended September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020, respectively, compared with the same periods in 2019. This growth in our advertising services in the second half of 2020 is particularly noteworthy given the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on total advertising spending. One of the driving factors of our advertising success is our unique AI technology, which powers our rich media analytics capabilities, giving us a competitive advantage. We continue to see significant opportunities for growth in the media and entertainment market, as we continue to extend our customer base beyond radio broadcasters to major media companies and rights holders, where our AI solutions could add tremendous value in content creation and distribution, including in news, television, and film.
We believe there will be significant near and long term opportunities for AI SaaS revenue growth from the U.S. Government adopting our AI and aiWARE SaaS technologies and solutions, as discussed under “Business - Overview” above. However, many sales opportunities with government customers can involve long sales cycles, during which we must invest significant time and resources without a guarantee of success. We may seek to acquire businesses with deep relationships and greater scale with the U.S. Government to further accelerate our pursuit of the growth opportunities we see in this market.
During the second half of 2020, we launched our Veritone Energy solutions to help utilities increase profitability and improve grid reliability as they make the transition to renewables. We believe that our patented technology is uniquely suited to solving some of the most difficult challenges facing utilities today, and we see tremendous near and long term opportunity to grow our revenue within this market, as discussed under “Business - Overview” above. Our aiWARE technology is in the early stages of deployment in the energy market, and we expect to continue making significant investments in product, sales and engineering over the next 12 to 24 months to further develop our current and future technologies to address the opportunities in this market.
At the end of the fourth quarter of 2020, we reported 1,896 SaaS accounts, which represented growth of 77% compared with the fourth quarter of 2019. To continue to grow our SaaS account base at similar levels in 2021, and drive increased sales within our existing customer base, we will need to increase our sales and marketing spending in 2021 compared with 2020.
We believe our aiWARE SaaS technology will extend the capabilities of many third-party software platforms and products that are widely used today. For example, over the last six months, we integrated aiWARE with the Alteryx platform, enabling Alteryx users to access aiWARE’s AI models and AI analytics capabilities, and we enhanced aiWARE to run on the NVIDIA® CUDA® GPU-based platform, enabling dramatic increases in aiWARE’s processing speed and opening up a wide range of new use cases for our technology. We are in the process of developing and marketing specific use cases for these integrations, which we believe will open up new markets for our products and accelerate our near and long term revenue growth. We plan to hire additional engineers and business development resources in the near term to further accelerate our pursuit of these potential opportunities, as well as other third-party technology integrations.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our gross margin (calculated as described in “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below) improved to 73%, compared with 69% for the year ended December 31, 2019, driven by a higher proportion of SaaS revenue, which generally has higher gross margins, coupled with recent enhancements made to the aiWARE platform that significantly reduced our computing and storage costs. Our gross margin is impacted significantly by the mix of our aiWARE SaaS revenue, aiWARE content licensing and media services revenue and advertising revenue in a given period. Our gross profit (calculated as described in “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below) is also dependent upon our ability to grow our revenue by expanding our customer base and increasing business with existing customers, and to manage our costs by negotiating favorable economic terms with cloud computing providers such as AWS and Microsoft Azure. While we are focused on continuing to improve our gross profit, our ability to attract new and retain existing customers to grow our revenue will be highly dependent on our ability to implement and continually improve upon our technology and services and improve our technology infrastructure and operations as we experience increased network capacity constraints due to our growth.
We believe our operating results and performance are, and will continue to be, driven by various factors that affect our industry. Our ability to attract, grow and retain customers for our AI platform is highly sensitive to rapidly changing technology and is dependent on our ability to maintain the attractiveness of our platform, content and services to our customers. Moreover, we expect to continue to report operating losses in the near term. The future revenue and operating growth across our platform will rely heavily on our ability to grow our SaaS customer base, continue to develop and deploy quality and innovative AI-driven applications, provide unique and attractive content and advertising services to our customers, continue to grow in newer markets such as government and energy, and manage our corporate overhead costs. While we believe we will be successful in these endeavors, we cannot guarantee that we will succeed in generating substantial long term operating growth and profitability.
Since 2017, we have made acquisitions that extended our business and technology reach in several areas, as discussed in more detail in “Business - Overview” above. We believe there are strategic acquisition targets that can accelerate our entry into key strategic markets, as well as our ability to grow our business. As a result, we are prioritizing corporate development efforts beginning in the first half of 2021. Our acquisition strategy is threefold: (i) to increase the scale of our business in markets we are in today, (ii) to accelerate growth in new markets and product categories, including expanding our existing engineering and sales resources, and (iii) to accelerate the adoption of aiWARE as the universal AI operating system through venture or market-driven opportunities. If we are successful in identifying and entering into
agreements to acquire target companies, we may need to raise additional capital to finance such acquisitions and to continue executing on our growth strategy.
In the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, substantially all of our revenue was derived from customers located in the United States. We believe that there is a substantial opportunity over time for us to significantly expand our service offerings and customer base in countries outside of the United States. In the long term, we plan to expand our business further internationally in places such as Europe, Asia Pacific and Latin America, and as a result we expect to continue to incur significant incremental upfront expenses associated with these growth opportunities.
Impact of the Coronavirus (“COVID-19”) Pandemic
The COVID-19 outbreak emerged in late 2019 and was declared a global pandemic by the World Health Organization in March 2020. The COVID-19 pandemic, and the actions being taken by governments worldwide to mitigate the public health consequences of the pandemic, significantly impacted the global economy. Beginning in March 2020, we began to experience fluctuations in demand for certain services, particularly our aiWARE content licensing and media services, a significant amount of revenue from which is typically driven by major live sporting events that were cancelled or postponed in the United States due to COVID-19. While many major sporting events have resumed, future cancellations of live sporting events could have a material adverse impact on our revenue generated from our aiWARE content licensing and media services in future quarters.
The pandemic has affected and may continue to affect some of our customers, which may further reduce the demand and/or delay purchase decisions for our products and services, and may additionally impact the creditworthiness of customers. We have assessed the potential credit deterioration of our customers due to changes in the macroeconomic environment and have determined that no additional allowance for doubtful accounts was necessary due to credit deterioration as of December 31, 2020.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic and the related macroeconomic conditions may continue to affect our financial condition or results of operations is uncertain. While we did not experience decreases in revenue from our advertising services and aiWARE SaaS solutions in 2020 compared with 2019, the severity and duration of the pandemic and the resulting macroeconomic conditions are difficult to predict, and our revenue and operating results may be adversely impacted in future periods. The extent of the impact on our operational and financial performance will depend on various factors, including the duration and spread of the outbreak; advances in testing, treatment and prevention; the impact of government measures to contain the virus; and related government stimulus actions. Due to the nature of our business, the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic may not be fully reflected in its results of operations until future periods. The most significant risks to our business and results of operations arising from the COVID-19 pandemic are discussed in Part I, Item 1A (Risk Factors).
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have taken actions to control expenses, including temporarily discontinuing non-essential services and instituting controls on travel, entertainment and other expenses. In addition, in compliance with government mandates, we have temporarily closed our offices and initiated a work from home policy.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In evaluating our cash flows and financial performance, we use a measure of Non-GAAP net loss, the results for which measure are presented below for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The items excluded from Non-GAAP net loss, as well as a breakdown of GAAP net loss, non-GAAP net loss and these excluded items between our core operations and corporate, are detailed in the reconciliation below.
Non-GAAP net loss is not a financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and should not be considered as an alternative to net income (loss), operating income (loss) or any other financial measures so calculated and presented, nor as an alternative to cash flow from operating activities as a measure of liquidity. Other companies (including our competitors) may define Non-GAAP net loss differently.
In addition, we have provided additional supplemental non-GAAP measures of operating expenses, loss from operations, other income (expense), net, and loss before income taxes, excluding the items excluded from non-GAAP net loss as noted above, and reconciling such non-GAAP measures to the applicable GAAP measures.
We present this supplemental non-GAAP financial information because management believes such information to be important supplemental measures of performance that are commonly used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties in the evaluation of companies in its industry, and believes that such measures, and the breakdown between
our core operations and corporate, provide a useful comparison of our current period financial results to our historical and future financial results. Management also uses this information internally for forecasting and budgeting. These non-GAAP measures may not be indicative of our historical operating results or predictive of potential future results. Investors should not consider this supplemental non-GAAP financial information in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported in accordance with GAAP.
The following tables set forth the calculation of our gross profit and gross margin, followed by a reconciliation of non-GAAP to GAAP financial information presented in our consolidated financial statements for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
1) Adjustments are comprised of the adjustments to GAAP sales and marketing expenses, research and development expenses and general and administrative expenses and other (expense) income, net (where applicable) listed above.
Key Performance Indicators
We track key performance indicators (“KPIs”) for our advertising services and our aiWARE SaaS solutions. We evaluate the KPIs that are most relevant to our business periodically, and beginning in the first quarter of 2020, we made changes to the KPIs that we track.
The KPIs for our advertising services include: (i) average gross billings per active agency client, and (ii) revenue. The key performance indicators for our aiWARE SaaS solutions include: (i) total accounts on the platform, (ii) new bookings, (iii) total contract value of new bookings, and (iv) revenue.
In the tables below, the ‘revenue during quarter’ amounts for the periods in 2019 reflect amounts reported using the revenue recognition guidance of Topic 605, Revenue Recognition, and the ‘revenue during the quarter’ amounts for the periods in 2020 reflect amounts reported using the revenue guidance in Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, following our adoption of Topic 606. For additional information about our revenue recognition accounting policies, see the discussion under the headings “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates - Revenue Recognition” and “Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements” below.
Advertising KPI Results
The following table sets forth the results for each of the KPIs for our advertising services.
(1)
For each quarter, reflects the average gross quarterly billings per agency client over the twelve month period through the end of such quarter for agency clients that are active during such quarter.
We have experienced and may continue to experience volatility in revenue from our agency services due to a number of factors, including: (i) the timing of new large client wins; (ii) loss of clients who choose to replace our services by bringing their advertising placement in-house; (iii) clients who experience reductions in their advertising budgets due to issues with their own businesses; (iv) losses of clients who change providers from time to time based largely on pricing; and (v) the seasonality of the campaigns for certain large clients. We have historically generated a significant portion of our revenue from a few major clients. As we continue to grow and diversify our client base, we expect that our dependency on a limited number of large clients will be minimized.
aiWARE SaaS Solutions KPI Results
The following table sets forth the results for each of the KPIs for our aiWARE SaaS solutions.
(1)
Represents the contractually committed fees payable during the first 12 months of the contract term, or the non-cancellable portion of the contract term (if shorter), for new contracts received in the quarter, excluding any variable fees under the contract (i.e., fees for cognitive processing, storage, professional services and other variable services).
(2)
Represents the total fees payable during the full contract term for new contracts received in the quarter (including fees payable during any cancellable portion and an estimate of license fees that may fluctuate over the term), excluding any variable fees under the contract (i.e., fees for cognitive processing, storage, professional services and other variable services).
As we grow our business for our aiWARE SaaS solutions, we expect that our KPI results will be impacted in different ways based on our customer profiles and the nature of their use of our aiWARE SaaS solutions in certain target markets. For example, in the government, legal and compliance markets, use of our aiWARE SaaS solutions is often project-based and, accordingly, in a given period, we may experience significant fluctuations in revenue without any significant change in total accounts or new bookings. The timing of large contract renewals and the variable versus fixed fee nature of certain contracts will impact the amount of new bookings and the total contract value of new bookings from quarter to quarter. As such, our results for different KPIs may fluctuate significantly within the same period, and the result for a particular KPI in one period may not be indicative of the results that we will achieve for that KPI in future periods.
Common Stock Warrants
In April 2020, we issued warrants to purchase up to 450,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $3.01 per share, of which 50,000 shares were fully vested and exercisable upon issuance, and an additional 133,333 shares vested and became exercisable upon the achievement of a market condition in 2020. The vesting of the remaining 266,667 shares underlying such warrants is conditioned upon the achievement of performance goals and had not vested as of December 31, 2020.
During 2020, we issued 154,311 shares of common stock upon the exercise of warrants for an aggregate exercise price of $2.1 million and issued an aggregate of 442,126 shares of common stock upon exercises of warrants to purchase an aggregate of 813,400 shares of common stock, which were effected on a net exercise basis without cash payment of the exercise price.
As of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we had outstanding warrants to purchase an aggregate of 779,440 and 1,297,151 shares of our common stock, respectively.
Net Loss Carryforwards
As of December 31, 2020, we had federal and state income tax net operating loss carryforwards (“NOLs”) totaling approximately $186.3 million and $87.3 million, respectively. The U.S. federal and state NOLs will begin to expire in 2034 and 2021, respectively, unless previously utilized. NOLs generated after January 1, 2018 may be carried forward indefinitely, subject to the 80% taxable income limitation on the utilization of the carryforwards.
In general, under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”), a corporation that undergoes an “ownership change” (generally defined as a cumulative change (by value) of more than 50% in the equity ownership of certain stockholders over a rolling three-year period) is subject to limitations on its ability to utilize its pre-change NOLs to offset post-change taxable income. Our existing NOLs may be subject to limitations arising from previous ownership changes, and our ability to utilize NOLs could be further limited by Section 382 of the Code. In addition, future changes in our stock ownership, some of which may be outside of our control, could result in an ownership change under Section 382 of the Code. The amount of such limitations, if any, has not been determined.
There is also a risk that due to other future regulatory changes, such as suspensions on the use of NOLs, or other unforeseen reasons, our existing NOLs could expire or otherwise be unavailable to offset future income tax liabilities. For these reasons, we may not be able to realize a tax benefit from the use of our NOLs, even if we attain profitability.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and related notes, as well as the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. Management evaluates its accounting policies, estimates and judgments on an on-going basis. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
Management evaluated the development and selection of its critical accounting policies and estimates and believes that the following involve a higher degree of judgment or complexity and are most significant to reporting our results of operations and financial position and are therefore discussed as critical. The following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. With respect to critical accounting policies, even a relatively minor variance between expected and actual experience can potentially have a materially favorable or unfavorable impact on subsequent results of operations. More information on these critical accounting policies and our significant accounting policies can be found in Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 (Financial Statements and Supplementary Data) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Accounting for Business Combinations
As part of the purchase accounting for acquisitions, we estimate the fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. A fair value measurement is determined as the price we would receive to sell an asset or pay to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. In the absence of active markets for the identical assets or liabilities, such measurements involve developing assumptions based on market observable data and, in the absence of such data, internal information that is consistent with what market participants would use in a hypothetical transaction that occurs at the measurement date. In the context of purchase accounting, the determination of fair value often involves significant judgments and estimates by management, including the selection of valuation methodologies, estimates of future revenues, costs and cash flows, discount rates, and selection of comparable companies. The fair values reflected in the purchase accounting rely on management’s judgment and the expertise of a third-party valuation firm engaged to assist in concluding on the fair value measurements.
Impairment of Goodwill and Long-Lived Assets
Goodwill is not amortized but instead is tested at least annually for impairment, or more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired. Our annual impairment test is performed during the second quarter. In assessing goodwill impairment, we have the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. Our qualitative assessment of the recoverability of goodwill considers various macro-economic, industry-specific and company-specific factors. These factors include: (i) severe adverse industry or economic trends; (ii) significant company-specific actions, including exiting an activity in conjunction with restructuring of operations; (iii) current, historical or projected deterioration of our financial performance; or (iv) a sustained decrease in our market capitalization below its net book value. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, we determine it is unlikely that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then a quantitative analysis is unnecessary. However, if we conclude otherwise, or if we elect to bypass the qualitative analysis, then we are required to perform a quantitative analysis that compares the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, goodwill is not considered impaired; otherwise, a goodwill impairment loss is recognized for the lesser of: (a) the amount that the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value; or (b) the amount of the goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
We review long-lived assets to be held and used, other than goodwill, for impairment at least annually, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If an evaluation of recoverability is required, the estimated undiscounted future cash flows directly associated with the asset are compared with the asset’s carrying amount. If the estimated future cash flows from the use of the asset are less than the carrying value, an impairment charge would be recorded to write down the asset to its estimated fair value.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue under our contracts with customers in accordance with ASU 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“Topic 606”). We derive our revenues primarily from three sources: (1) subscription revenues, which are comprised primarily of subscription and related fees from customers for access to and use of our platforms and associated services delivered as software-as-a-service (“SaaS”), (2) content licensing revenues, which are comprised primarily of fees from customers for licenses to third-party content owners’ digital assets, and (3) advertising revenues.
We recognize revenue to depict the transfer of control of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. We follow a five-step process to determine revenue recognition, as follows:
•
Identify the contracts(s) with a customer;
•
Identify the performance obligations in the contract;
•
Determine the transaction price;
•
Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
•
Recognize revenue when (or as) performance obligations are satisfied.
We enter into contracts with customers that may include promises to transfer multiple services. We evaluate these services to determine whether they represent distinct, separately identifiable performance obligations that should be accounted for separately or as a single performance obligation. For contracts containing multiple performance obligations, to meet the allocation objective of Topic 606, we allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price (“SSP”) basis. The SSP is the price at which we would sell a promised service separately to a customer. For certain arrangements, the determinations regarding whether a contract contains multiple performance obligations and, if so, the SSP of each performance obligation, may require judgment by management.
aiWARE SaaS Revenues
We have agreements with customers under which we provide customers with access to and use of our aiWARE and digital content management platforms. Under most agreements, we provide access to the platform, specified applications and associated data ingestion, hosting and/or processing services, and provide standard user support. Fees for these services typically take the form of a fixed monthly subscription fee, with certain contracts specifying usage-based fees for data processing services in excess of the data processing services included as part of such subscription services. Fees for excess usage-based data processing services are accounted for as variable consideration. In certain cases, the fixed monthly subscription fee may adjust during each monthly period of the contract based on changes in the monthly volume of services, at the rates established in the contract. These contracts typically have terms ranging from one to three years, with renewal options, and do not contain refund-type provisions. All significant services provided as part of these subscription arrangements are highly interdependent and constitute a single performance obligation comprised of a series of distinct services transferred to the customer in a similar manner throughout the contract term (collectively, the “subscription services”), with the exception of the additional usage-based services, which represent a separate performance obligation as discussed below. The fixed subscription fees are recognized as revenue ratably over the contract term, at the applicable monthly rate, as the performance obligation is satisfied, as this best depicts the pattern of control transfer. If a portion of the term of a contract is cancellable, we determine the transaction price for, and recognize revenue ratably over, the non-cancellable portion of the term of the contract. In certain SaaS arrangements with broadcasters, the fees for subscription services are paid by broadcasters with advertising inventory that is provided to and monetized by us. We recognize revenue for these arrangements based on the fair value of the advertising inventory.
We also make data processing, storage and transfer services available to customers through our aiWARE and digital content management platforms under usage-based arrangements with no minimum fees, either separately or in addition to subscription services as described above. Fees are charged for actual usage of such services at the rates specified in the contract for each particular service. Each of these distinct services represents an individual performance obligation. When sold in connection with subscription services, we consider the allocation guidance of Topic 606.
Variable consideration for usage-based data processing, storage and transfer services is recognized in the month in which it is earned, as the payment terms relate to a specific outcome (amount of data processed, stored or transferred) of delivering the distinct time increment (the month) of services, and represents the fees to which we expect to be entitled for providing the services, and allocating the variable fees in this way is consistent with the allocation objective of Topic 606.
We also enter into software license agreements with customers under which we provide software representing an on-premises deployment of our aiWARE platform or components thereof. Under these license agreements, the customer is responsible for the installation and configuration of the software in the customer-controlled environment. We recognize the license fees as revenue under these agreements at the time that we make the software available for download by the customer.
We typically invoice our aiWARE SaaS customers for subscription services monthly, for on-premise software at the time the software is made available for download by the customer, and for professional services either monthly or in accordance with an agreed upon invoicing schedule. Invoices are typically due and payable within 30 days following the date of invoice. Amounts that have been invoiced are recorded in accounts receivable or in deferred revenue, depending on whether transfer of control to customers of the promised services has occurred.
aiWARE Content Licensing Revenues
We have agreements with third-party owners of digital assets pursuant to which we license those assets to customers and remit royalties to the content owners. In licensing such third-party digital assets, we host public and private content libraries on our platform to enable customers to view and search for digital assets to be licensed, establish and negotiate with customers the scope and term of, and the prices for, licenses to those digital assets, and make the licensed digital assets
available to the customers. We are considered the principal under most agreements that have this range of services due to obtaining control prior to transfer of the assets, and we record the revenue from the customer gross of royalties due to the content owner. In limited cases, we do not obtain control prior to transfer of the assets, and accordingly, we record revenues net of royalties due to the content owner.
We license digital assets under (i) individual license agreements, pursuant to which the customer licenses a particular digital asset (or set of digital assets) for a specified license fee, and (ii) bulk license agreements, pursuant to which the customer pays a fixed fee to have access to view and search third-party owners’ content and to license a specified number of minutes of that content in each year over the term of the contracts, which typically range from one to three years, with certain contracts specifying usage-based license fees for additional digital assets that may be licensed by the customer.
Under individual license agreements, we have a single performance obligation, which is to make the licensed digital assets available to the customer, generally by download. We recognize the license fees charged for the digital assets as revenue when the licensed digital assets are made available to the customer.
Under bulk license agreements, our obligations include hosting the content libraries for access and searching by the customer, updating the libraries with new content provided by the content owner, and making assets selected by the customer available for download, throughout the term of the contract. All of these services are highly interdependent and constitute a single performance obligation comprised of a series of distinct services transferred to the customer in a similar manner throughout the contract term. The predominant item in the single performance obligation is a license providing a right to access the content library throughout the license period. For these arrangements, we recognize the total fixed fees under the contract as revenue ratably over the term of the contract as the performance obligation is satisfied, as this best depicts the pattern of control transfer. If the customer selects digital assets in excess of the amount included in the fixed fees under the contract, we constrain the variable consideration until the usage occurs and recognize such usage-based license fees as the digital assets are made available to the customer, consistent with the usage-based royalty accounting of Topic 606.
Advertising Revenues
Our advertising services consist primarily of placing advertisements for clients with media vendors, including broadcasters, podcasters and digital media providers. We receive fees, at varying rates of gross advertising media placed, as consideration for services performed by us. Under the most common billing arrangements, we bill and collect the gross cost of the advertisement we place, less any discounts negotiated with the client off of the media vendor’s standard agency fee. We then remit to the media vendor the gross amount less the standard agency fee. The amount billed to the client, less the amount payable to the media vendor, represents our fees and is recognized as revenue.
All significant services performed by us under our contracts with advertising clients in conjunction with media placements, including planning and placing media and verifying that advertisements have aired, represent a single performance obligation as such services are highly interrelated. Our fee, which represents the transaction price, is recognized as revenue at a point in time when the advertisement is aired, which is the point at which we have an enforceable right to payment of our fees.
Our clients may be required to make a deposit or prepay the gross costs of advertisements, including our fees. Such amounts are reflected as client advances on our consolidated balance sheets until all revenue recognition criteria have been met.
Gross Versus Net Revenue Recognition
We report revenue on a gross or net basis based on management’s assessment of whether we act as a principal or agent in the transaction. To the extent that we act as the principal, revenue is reported on a gross basis net of any sales tax from customers, when applicable. The determination of whether we act as a principal or an agent in a transaction is based on an evaluation of whether we control the good or service prior to transfer to the customer. We have determined that we act as the principal in providing all of our services with the exception of certain advertising services, where we recognize our fees on a net basis.
Remaining Performance Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, the aggregate amount of the transaction prices under our contracts allocated to our remaining performance obligations was $5.0 million, approximately 69% of which we expect to recognize as revenue over the next twelve months, and the remainder thereafter. This aggregate amount excludes amounts allocated to remaining performance obligations under contracts that have an original duration of one year or less and variable consideration that is allocated to remaining performance obligations.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
We record stock-based compensation expense associated with restricted stock, restricted stock units and stock options granted under our stock incentive plans, and purchase rights granted under our Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”). We have granted stock options with time-based vesting conditions, as well as performance-based stock options, the vesting of which is conditioned upon the achievement of specified target stock prices for our common stock (“Performance Options”). All Performance Options become exercisable in three equal tranches based on the achievement of specific market price targets for our common stock. For each tranche to become exercisable, the closing price per share of our common stock must meet or exceed the applicable stock price target for a period of 30 consecutive trading days. All stock options have terms of ten years following the grant date, subject to earlier termination in the case of cessation of the awardee’s continued service.
Stock-based compensation expense is estimated at the grant date based on the fair value of the award. Prior to our initial public offering (“IPO”) in May 2017, the fair values of restricted stock awards were estimated at the date of grant by using both the option-pricing method and the probability-weighted expected return method. All restricted stock awards granted prior to our IPO have vested in full as of the fourth quarter of 2020. Following our IPO, the fair values of restricted stock and restricted stock unit awards are based on the closing market price of our common stock on the date of grant.
We estimate the fair values of stock options having time-based vesting conditions, as well as purchase rights under our ESPP, using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model. We estimate the fair values of Performance Options utilizing a Monte Carlo simulation model to estimate when the stock price targets will be achieved and the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model. A fair value is estimated for each tranche of such Performance Options that is tied to a particular stock price target.
Determining the appropriate fair values of stock options and ESPP purchase rights at the grant date requires significant judgment, including estimating the volatility of our common stock, the expected term of awards, and the derived service periods for each tranche of Performance Options. In determining fair values, we estimate volatility based on the historical volatility of our common stock along with the volatility of the peer group. In calculating estimated volatility, as the number of years of trading history for our common stock has increased, the volatility of our common stock has been given a weighting ranging from 25% to 50%, and the volatility of the peer group companies has been given a weighting ranging from 75% to 50%, with each peer company weighted equally. We will continue utilizing this combination and will periodically adjust the weightings as additional historical volatility data for our own shares of common stock becomes available.
The expected term for stock options other than Performance Options represents the period of time that stock options are expected to be outstanding and is determined using the simplified method. Under the simplified method, the expected term is calculated as the midpoint between the weighted average vesting date and the contractual term of the options. The expected term for Performance Options considers the remaining term of the option after the attainment date and the ratio of the stock price at the attainment date to the option exercise price.
The risk-free rate is based on the implied yield of U.S. Treasury notes as of the grant date with a remaining term approximately equal to the expected term of the award.
The fair value of stock-based awards (other than Performance Options) is amortized using the straight-line attribution method over the requisite service period of the award, which is generally the vesting period. For Performance Options, expense is recognized over a graded-vesting attribution basis over the period from the grant date to the estimated attainment date, which is the derived service period of each tranche of the award.
We engaged a third-party valuation specialist to assist us in determining the fair values and derived service periods of Performance Options awarded, and to assist us in determining the fair values and new derived service periods of Performance Options in connection with a modification that occurred in August 2020 as a result of certain amendments to the Performance Options outstanding at that time. The valuation specialist used a Monte Carlo simulation model which incorporated three key assumptions: dividend yield, risk-free interest rate; and estimated volatility. The estimated volatility required the most judgment of those three assumptions, and it was based on the historical volatility of our common stock along with the historical volatility of the peer group. The estimated volatility used in valuing Performance Options granted in 2020 and 2019 was 85% and 65%, respectively, and the estimated volatility used in valuing the modified Performance Options in 2020 was 80%.
We recognize actual forfeitures as they occur and do not estimate forfeitures in determining our stock-based compensation expense.
If Performance Options are modified, the fair values and the new derived service periods of the modified awards as of the date of modification and the fair values of the original awards immediately before the modification are determined. The amount of incremental compensation expense resulting from the modification of each award is equal to the excess of the fair
value of the modified award on the date of modification over the fair value of the original award immediately before the modification. The incremental compensation expense is recognized over the new derived service period of the modified award.
Accounting for Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are established for temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax bases of our assets and liabilities using statutory tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to reverse.
We assess the likelihood that the deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income and, if recovery is not more likely than not, we establish a valuation allowance to reduce the deferred tax assets to the amounts expected to be realized. Realization of the deferred tax assets is dependent on us generating sufficient taxable income in future years to obtain a benefit from the reversal of temporary differences and from net operating losses. Due to uncertainties related to our ability to utilize our deferred tax assets in future periods, we have recorded a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets, in the amount of $65.1 million, as of December 31, 2020. These assets consist primarily of NOLs.
Significant management judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, our deferred tax assets and liabilities and our valuation allowance. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, management has considered both the positive and negative evidence available, including but not limited to, our prior history of net losses, projected future outcomes, industry and market trends and the nature of existing deferred tax assets. In management’s judgment, any positive indicators are outweighed by the uncertainties surrounding our estimates and judgments of potential future taxable income, due primarily to uncertainties surrounding the timing of realization of future taxable income. In the event that actual results differ from these estimates or we adjust these estimates should we believe we would be able to realize these deferred tax assets in the future, an adjustment to the valuation allowance would increase income in the period such determination was made.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as modified by the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”). The JOBS Act permits emerging growth companies to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards under Section 107 of the JOBS Act. This election allows us to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until those standards apply to private companies.
Effective for our fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, we adopted the provisions and expanded disclosure requirements described in Topic 606 for our annual financial statements. We adopted the standard using the modified retrospective method. Accordingly, the results for the prior comparable periods were not adjusted to conform to the current year measurement and recognition of results. As of the beginning of 2019, the impact of the adoption of Topic 606 was not material. However, in adopting Topic 606, we have modified our revenue recognition policy in the following ways:
•
Some multi-year contracts include fixed annual price increases. Historically, we recognized revenue based on the price allocated to each year. Now, we recognize the aggregate fixed price as revenue ratably over the full term of the contract.
•
Historically, certain variable consideration was recognized one month in arrears when the amount became known. These revenues are now recognized in the month in which the service is provided based on an estimate of the amount that we expect to be entitled to receive for the services.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, our quarterly financial statements were prepared using the prior revenue recognition standard, Topic 605, Revenue Recognition. Beginning in the first quarter of 2020, our quarterly financial statements is presented using Topic 606.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework-Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement, as part of its disclosure framework project intended to improve the effectiveness of disclosures in the notes to the financial statements by updating certain disclosure requirements related to fair value measurements. The standard became effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2020. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842). The amendments under this pronouncement will change the way all leases with duration of one year or more are treated. Under this guidance, lessees will be required to capitalize virtually all leases on the balance sheet as a right-of-use asset and an associated financing lease liability or capital lease liability. The right-of-use asset represents the lessee’s right to use, or control the use of, a specified asset for the specified lease term. The lease liability represents the lessee’s obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease, measured on a discounted basis. Based on certain characteristics, leases are classified as financing leases or operating leases. Financing lease liabilities, those that contain provisions similar to capitalized leases, are amortized in the same manner as capital leases are amortized under current accounting rules, as amortization expense and interest expense in the statement of operations. Operating lease liabilities are amortized on a straight-line basis over the life of the lease as lease expense in the statement of operations. This standard will be effective for us beginning with the first quarter of fiscal year 2022. We are currently evaluating the impact this standard will have on our policies and procedures pertaining to our existing and future lease arrangements, our disclosure requirements and our consolidated financial statements.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326). which requires measurement and recognition of expected credit losses for financial assets held. This standard will be effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2023 and early adoption is permitted. We are currently evaluating the impact that this standard will have on our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures as well as the timing of adoption.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12 to simplify the accounting in ASC 740, Income Taxes. This standard removes certain exceptions related to the approach for intraperiod tax allocation, the methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period, and the recognition of deferred tax liabilities for outside basis differences. This guidance also clarifies and simplifies other areas of ASC 740. This standard will be effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2022 and early adoption is permitted. We are currently evaluating the impact that this standard will have on our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures as well as the timing of adoption.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, in dollars and as a percentage of our revenue for those periods. Throughout this discussion regarding our results of operations, certain amounts for 2019 have been reclassified to conform to the presentation for 2020. In particular, amortization expense, which was presented in prior year periods within cost of revenue, sales and marketing, research and development, and general and administrative operating expenses, has been reclassified and is presented as a single separate line item in operating expenses. In addition, gross profit, which was previously reflected in the statement of operations and comprehensive loss, is no longer presented, and cost of revenue, which was presented in prior periods within gross profit, is presented as an operating expense. We believe that this presentation more accurately reflects our cost of revenue and operating expenses. These reclassifications had no effect on our reported net loss. The period-to-period comparisons of our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected in the future.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared With Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
The year-over-year increase in advertising revenue was due primarily to revenue generated from our VeriAds Network, which we launched in late 2019. Revenue from our VeriAds Network totaled $4.0 million in 2020, compared with $0.1 million for 2019. The remaining increase was due to a combination of the addition of new clients and increased business with existing clients.
The year-over-year increase in aiWARE SaaS Solutions revenue was due primarily to initial revenue received from a customer in the energy market, and revenue received under a subcontract for a U.S. Air Force project, as well as expanded services to some existing customers in the media and entertainment market.
Revenue from our aiWARE content licensing and media services, a significant portion of which is typically driven by major sporting events and production of entertainment content, was negatively impacted in 2020 compared with the prior year period due to the cancellation or postponement of substantially all major sporting events from March 2020 through July 2020 and the curtailment of entertainment content production as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Revenue from our advertising services is impacted by the timing of particular advertising campaigns of our major clients, in many cases due to the seasonal nature of their advertising activities. Our aiWARE SaaS solutions revenue from customers in certain markets, particularly in the government, legal and compliance markets, is often project-based and is impacted by the timing of projects. Revenue from our aiWARE content licensing and media services is impacted by the timing of major sporting events throughout the year. As such, in general, we expect that our revenue from these services and markets may fluctuate significantly from period to period. In addition, we anticipate that our revenues in future periods could be impacted by the macroeconomic conditions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, as discussed in more detail above.
Gross Profit
As noted above, our gross profit is calculated as our revenue less our cost of revenue, as follows:
The increase in gross margin in 2020 compared with 2019 was due primarily to a decrease in platform costs from computing cost reductions and completed enhancements to our aiWARE operating system that have improved our computing efficiency. In addition, the increase resulted from the lower proportion of revenue from our content licensing and media services and the higher proportion of revenue from our aiWARE SaaS solutions, which have higher gross margins.
Operating Expenses
Cost of Revenue. The increase in cost of revenue in 2020 compared with 2019 was due primarily to our higher revenue level, offset in part by the decrease in platform costs, as discussed above.
Sales and Marketing. The decrease in sales and marketing expenses in 2020 compared with 2019 was due primarily to a decrease of $1.8 million in personnel-related costs resulting from our focused spending reductions and decreases in spending on travel, entertainment and trade shows. As a percentage of revenue, sales and marketing expenses declined to 34% in 2020 from 47% in 2019, due to the increased operating leverage provided by our higher revenue level.
Research and Development. The decrease in research and development expense in 2020 compared with 2019 was attributable primarily to a decrease of $5.2 million in personnel-related costs resulting from our focused spending reductions. The decrease was also due to the expense for contingent payments totaling $1.6 million that were made to the former stockholders of Machine Box in 2019, which did not recur in 2020, and to a decrease in platform and cognitive processing related costs. As a percentage of revenue, research and development expense declined to 25% in 2020 from 46% in 2019, due to the increased operating leverage provided by our higher revenue level.
General and Administrative. The increase in general and administrative expenses in 2020 compared with 2019 was due primarily to an increase in personnel-related costs of $3.0 million, including $1.3 million in incentive bonuses tied to the achievement of quarterly and annual performance goals, offset in part by a decrease of $1.0 million in travel and entertainment expenses. As a percentage of revenue, general and administrative expenses declined to 87% in 2020 from 95% in 2019, due to the increased operating leverage provided by our higher revenue level.
Amortization. Amortization expense increased in 2020 compared with 2019 due to a full year of amortization in 2020 of customer relationships associated with 2018 acquisitions, compared with only eleven months of amortization recorded in 2019 after finalizing the determination of useful lives.
As discussed above, we intend to continue to make significant investments in the development of our AI capabilities and enhancement of our aiWARE SaaS solutions and services, and in our sales and marketing efforts in order to drive greater awareness of our offerings, gain new customers and grow our business. In particular, we expect to hire additional product, engineering and sales resources over the next 12 to 24 months to further develop our products and technologies to address significant opportunities in the energy market and to pursue opportunities across the wide range of new use cases for our technology arising from our recent technology integrations. As a result, we anticipate that our sales and marketing and research and development expenses will increase in the near term in absolute dollars, but will continue to decline as a percentage of revenue in the long term as we grow our business.
Over the past year, we have gained operational efficiencies, implemented computing cost reductions, and completed enhancements to our aiWARE operating system that have improved our computing efficiency. We believe that these initiatives and our ongoing cost management efforts in the area will continue to support the further development of our AI capabilities while reducing our computing expenses and improving our financial performance.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other expense, net for 2020 was comprised primarily of warrant expense of $0.2 million, offset in part by interest income. In 2019, other income, net was comprised primarily of interest income on investments in money market funds, which totaled $0.5 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are our cash and cash equivalents, which totaled $114.8 million as of December 31, 2020, compared with total cash and cash equivalents of $44.1 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase in our cash and cash equivalents in 2020 was due primarily to $66.3 million in proceeds from common stock offerings and $2.1 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock warrants.
Cash Flows
A summary of our operating, investing and financing activities is shown in the following table:
Cash Provided By (Used In) Operating Activities
Our operating activities provided cash of $1.4 million in 2020, due primarily to a net increase of $25.0 million in cash received from advertising clients for future payments to vendors, offset in part by the effect of our net loss of $47.9 million, adjusted by $26.3 million in non-cash expenses, including $19.5 million in stock-based compensation expense. Our business strategy includes decreasing operational costs while investing in the development of our AI capabilities and enhancement of our aiWARE SaaS solutions and services to grow our business and future revenue. We gauge the amount of cash utilized in these efforts using the Non-GAAP net loss measure, as presented under the heading “Non-GAAP Financial Measure” above. Our use of cash as measured by Non-GAAP net loss decreased to $20.6 million in 2020 from $36.2 million in 2019, due primarily to the initiatives that we commenced in the fourth quarter of 2019 to decrease our operating costs, including headcount reductions and enhancements to our software architecture, which have resulted in lower cloud computing costs, and to increases in our revenues.
Our operating activities used cash of $30.4 million in 2019, due primarily to our net loss of $62.1 million, adjusted by $25.2 million in non-cash expenses, including $20.7 million in stock-based compensation expense, offset by an increase in prepayments by our advertising clients.
Cash (Used In) Provided by Investing Activities
In 2020, we used $0.2 million in cash for capital expenditures, which was offset in part by minimal amounts received from the sale of equipment.
Our investing activities provided cash of $12.0 million in 2019. Net cash provided by investing activities consisted primarily of proceeds from maturing marketable securities, which were used to fund a portion of the cash used in our operating activities, offset in part by $0.9 million of cash paid to the former stockholder of Performance Bridge as additional earnout consideration and $0.5 million of cash to acquire software.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Our financing activities provided cash of $69.4 million in 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities consisted of $66.3 million in net proceeds received from our sales of common stock, $2.1 million in proceeds received from the exercise of stock warrants and $1.1 million received from the exercise of stock options and purchases of shares under our ESPP. Proceeds received from loans that we received under the Paycheck Protection Program in April 2020 were repaid in full in May 2020.
Our financing activities provided cash of $24.6 million in 2019. Net cash provided by financing activities consisted of $23.9 million in net proceeds received from our sales of common stock and $0.8 million received from the exercise of stock options and purchases of shares under our ESPP.
Capital Resources
We have generated significant losses since inception and expect to continue to generate losses for the foreseeable future. We believe that our current cash and cash equivalents balances will be sufficient to fund our operations in the ordinary course of business for at least the next twelve months from the date of this filing. However, our current cash and cash equivalents may not be sufficient to support the development of our business to the point at which we have positive cash flows from operations. In addition, we intend to continue to evaluate potential acquisitions of and/or investments in companies or technologies that complement our business and may make such acquisitions and/or investments in the future. Accordingly, we may need to obtain additional sources of capital in the future. We plan to meet our future needs for additional capital through equity and/or debt financings. We currently have no available lines of credit for future borrowings. Future equity or debt financing may not be available on favorable terms or at all. If we are unable to obtain adequate financing or financing on terms satisfactory to us when required, our ability to continue to support our business growth, including through acquisitions, scale our infrastructure, develop product enhancements and respond to business challenges could be significantly impaired. If we are able to obtain additional financing, it may contain undue restrictions on our operations, in the case of debt financing, or cause substantial dilution for our stockholders, in the case of equity financing.
As of December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding debt obligations. We have no present agreements or commitments with respect to any material acquisitions of businesses or technologies or any other material capital expenditures.
Contractual Obligations
As a smaller reporting company, we are not required to provide the information required by Item 303(a)(5) of Regulation S-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements and do not have any holdings in variable interest entities.
Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (JOBS Act)
In April 2012, the JOBS Act was enacted. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to take advantage of such extended transition period. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that we can elect to opt out of the extended transition period at any time, which election is irrevocable. Subject to certain conditions, as an emerging growth company, we may rely on certain exemptions and reduced reporting requirements under the JOBS Act, including without limitation, (i) providing an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and (ii) complying with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements, known as the auditor discussion and analysis. We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier of (i) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more, (ii) the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of our IPO, (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in nonconvertible debt over a three-year period, or (iv) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the SEC.