ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
OVERVIEW
VF Corporation (together with its subsidiaries, collectively known as “VF” or the "Company”) is a global leader in the design, procurement, production, marketing and distribution of branded lifestyle apparel, footwear and related products. VF’s diverse portfolio meets consumer needs across a broad spectrum of activities and lifestyles. Our long-term growth strategy is focused on four drivers - drive and optimize our portfolio, distort investments to Asia, elevate direct channels and accelerate our consumer-minded, retail-centric, hyper-digital business model transformation.
VF is diversified across brands, product categories, channels of distribution, geographies and consumer demographics. We own
a broad portfolio of brands in the outerwear, footwear, apparel, backpack, luggage and accessories categories. Our products are marketed to consumers through our wholesale channel, primarily in specialty stores, national chains, mass merchants, department stores, independently-operated partnership stores and with strategic digital partners. Our products are also marketed to consumers through our own direct-to-consumer operations, which include VF-operated stores, concession retail stores, brand e-commerce sites and other digital platforms.
VF is organized by groupings of businesses represented by its reportable segments for financial reporting purposes. The three reportable segments are Outdoor, Active and Work.
BASIS OF PRESENTATION
VF operates and reports using a 52/53 week fiscal year ending on the Saturday closest to March 31 of each year. All references to the years ended March 2021 ("Fiscal 2021"), March 2020 ("Fiscal 2020") and March 2019 ("Fiscal 2019") relate to the 53-week fiscal year ended April 3, 2021 and the 52-week fiscal years ended March 28, 2020 and March 30, 2019, respectively.
The following discussion and analysis focuses on our financial results for the years ended March 2021 and 2020 and year-to-year comparisons between these years. A discussion of our results of operations for the year ended March 2020 compared to the year ended March 2019 is included in Part II, Item 7. "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended March 28, 2020, filed with the SEC on May 27, 2020, and is incorporated by reference into this Form 10-K.
All per share amounts are presented on a diluted basis. All percentages shown in the tables below and the discussion that follows have been calculated using unrounded numbers.
References to the year ended March 2021 foreign currency amounts below reflect the changes in foreign exchange rates from the year ended March 2020 and their impact on translating foreign currencies into U.S. dollars. VF’s most significant foreign currency exposure relates to business conducted in euro-based countries. Additionally, VF conducts business in other developed and emerging markets around the world with exposure to foreign currencies other than the euro.
On December 28, 2020, VF acquired 100% of the outstanding shares of Supreme Holdings, Inc. ("Supreme"). The business results for Supreme have been included in the Active segment. All references to contributions from acquisition below represent the operating results of Supreme from its date of acquisition. Refer to Note 3 to VF's consolidated financial statements for additional information on acquisitions.
On January 21, 2020, VF announced its decision to explore the divestiture of its Occupational Workwear business. The Occupational Workwear business is comprised primarily of the following brands and businesses: Red Kap®, VF Solutions®,
VF Corporation Fiscal 2021 Form 10-K 23
Bulwark®, Workrite®, Walls®, Terra®, Kodiak®, Work Authority® and Horace Small®. The business also includes the license of certain Dickies® occupational workwear products that have historically been sold through the business-to-business channel. As of March 28, 2020, the Occupational Workwear business met the held-for-sale and discontinued operations accounting criteria, which continued to be met as of April 3, 2021. Accordingly, the Company has reported the results of the Occupational Workwear business and the related cash flows as discontinued operations in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, respectively. The related held-for-sale assets and liabilities have been reported as assets and liabilities of discontinued operations in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. These changes have been applied for all periods presented. In late April 2021, VF entered into a definitive agreement to sell its Occupational Workwear business for approximately $605 million in net cash, subject to certain post-closing adjustments. The transaction is expected to close in the first quarter of Fiscal 2022, and is subject to customary closing conditions and regulatory approvals.
On May 22, 2019, VF completed the spin-off of its Jeans business, which included the Wrangler®, Lee® and Rock & Republic® brands, as well as the VF OutletTM business, into an independent, publicly traded company now operating under the name Kontoor Brands, Inc. ("Kontoor Brands"). As a result, VF reported the results for the Jeans business and the related cash flows as discontinued operations in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, respectively. These changes have been applied to all periods presented.
Refer to Note 4 for additional information on discontinued operations and other divestitures.
Unless otherwise noted, amounts, percentages and discussion for all periods included below reflect the results of operations and financial condition from VF's continuing operations.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of a novel coronavirus ("COVID-19") a pandemic. The pandemic significantly impacted global economic conditions, as well as VF's business operations and financial performance during Fiscal 2021. Throughout the global impact of COVID-19, VF has remained first and foremost focused on a people-first approach that prioritizes the health and well-being of its employees, customers, trade partners and consumers around the world. To help mitigate the spread of COVID-19 and in response to health advisors and governmental actions and regulations, VF has modified its business practices including the temporary closing of offices and retail stores, instituting travel bans and restrictions and implementing health and safety measures including social distancing and quarantines. VF has also implemented measures that are designed to ensure the health, safety and well-being of associates employed in its distribution, fulfillment and manufacturing centers around the world.
VF-operated retail stores across the globe were significantly impacted during Fiscal 2021 due to temporary closures for varying periods of time. In the Asia-Pacific region, all VF-operated retail stores reopened in the first quarter and nearly all remained opened during Fiscal 2021. In the Europe region, the majority of stores reopened by the end of the second quarter, however; certain stores reclosed during the third and fourth quarters. Approximately 50% of stores in the Europe region were closed at the end of the third quarter and approximately 60% of stores were closed at the end of the fourth quarter. Some stores in the Europe region have opened since the end of the fourth quarter and currently approximately 20% of stores are closed. In North America, the majority of stores reopened by the end of the second quarter, however; certain stores reclosed during the third and fourth quarters. Approximately 15% of stores were closed at the end of the third quarter. The majority of the closures were Vans® stores, predominantly based in California. At the end of the fourth quarter, less than 5% of stores were closed. Currently less than 5% of stores in North America remain closed. VF is continuing to monitor the COVID-19 outbreak globally and will comply with guidance from
government entities and public health authorities to prioritize the health and well-being of its employees, customers, trade partners and consumers. As COVID-19 uncertainty continues, retail store reclosures may occur.
Consistent with VF’s long-term strategy, the Company’s digital platform remains a high priority through which its brands stay connected with consumer communities while providing experiential content. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, consumer spending had started shifting to brand e-commerce sites and other digital platforms, which has accelerated due to changes in the retail landscape resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
COVID-19 has also impacted some of VF's suppliers, including third-party manufacturers, logistics providers and other vendors. At this time, the majority of VF's supply chain is operational. Suppliers are complying with local health advisories and governmental restrictions which has resulted in isolated product delays; however, VF is actively working with its suppliers to minimize disruption. VF's distribution centers are operational in accordance with local government guidelines while maintaining enhanced health and safety protocols.
In response to COVID-19, various government programs have been announced to provide financial relief to affected businesses including the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act ("CARES Act"). The CARES Act, among other things, provides employer payroll tax credits for wages paid to employees unable to work during the COVID-19 pandemic and options to defer payroll tax payments. Other foreign government programs available to VF also provide certain payroll tax credits and wage subsidies. The Company recognized $81.4 million during the year ended March 2021 as a result of relief from the CARES Act and other governmental packages, which were recorded as a reduction in selling, general and administrative expenses. The Company also intends to defer qualified payroll and other tax payments as permitted by the CARES Act and other governmental packages.
24 VF Corporation Fiscal 2021 Form 10-K
The COVID-19 pandemic is ongoing and dynamic in nature, and has driven global uncertainty and disruption. As a result, COVID-19 had a significant negative impact on the Company's business, including the consolidated financial condition, results
of operations and cash flows during the year ended March 2021. While we are not able to determine the ultimate length and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, we expect ongoing disruption to our business.
Enterprise Protection Strategy
VF has taken a number of actions to advance its Enterprise Protection Strategy in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
On April 23, 2020, VF closed its sale of senior unsecured notes, which provided net proceeds to the Company of approximately $2.97 billion. A portion of the net proceeds was used to repay borrowings under the Company's senior unsecured revolving credit facility (the "Global Credit Facility") and the remaining net proceeds will be used for general corporate purposes. At March 2021, VF had approximately $1.4 billion of cash and equivalents and short-term investments. Additionally, VF had approximately $2.2 billion available for borrowing against the Global Credit Facility, subject to certain restrictions including a $750.0 million minimum liquidity requirement.
Other actions VF has taken to support its business in response to the COVID-19 pandemic include the Company's decision to temporarily pause its share repurchase program. The Company currently has $2.8 billion remaining under its current share repurchase authorization. The Company paid a cash dividend of $1.94 per share during the year ended March 2021, and has declared a cash dividend of $0.49 per share that is payable in the first quarter of Fiscal 2022. Subject to approval by its Board of Directors, VF intends to continue to pay its regularly scheduled dividend and is not contemplating the suspension of its dividend at this time. VF's divestiture of the Occupational Workwear business is expected to provide an additional source of cash in Fiscal 2022.
VF has implemented cost controls to reduce discretionary spending to help mitigate the loss of sales and to conserve cash while continuing to support employees. The Company has also commenced a multi-year initiative designed to enable our ability to accelerate and advance VF's business model transformation. One of the key objectives of this initiative is to deliver global cost savings of approximately $125.0 million over a three-year period that will be used to support the transformation agenda and highest-priority growth drivers. As VF continues to actively monitor the situation and advance our business model transformation, we may take further actions that affect our operations.
We believe the Company has sufficient liquidity and flexibility to operate and continue to execute our strategy during the disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and related governmental actions and regulations and health authority advisories, and meet its obligations as they become due. However, due to the uncertainty of the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, governmental actions in response to the pandemic, and the impact on us and our consumers, customers and suppliers, there is no certainty that the measures we take will be sufficient to mitigate the risks posed by COVID-19. See "Item 1A. Risk Factors." for additional discussion.
HIGHLIGHTS OF THE YEAR ENDED MARCH 2021
•Year ended March 2021 revenues decreased 12% to $9.2 billion compared to the year ended March 2020, primarily due to the negative impact of COVID-19, and included a 2% favorable impact from foreign currency. The year ended March 2021 also included an extra week when compared to the year ended March 2020.
•Active segment revenues decreased 15% to $4.2 billion compared to the year ended March 2020, including a $142.0 million contribution from the Supreme acquisition and a 2% favorable impact from foreign currency.
•Outdoor segment revenues decreased 11% to $4.1 billion compared to the year ended March 2020, including a 2% favorable impact from foreign currency.
•Work segment revenues increased 7% to $945.7 million compared to the year ended March 2020, including a 1% favorable impact from foreign currency.
•Direct-to-consumer revenues were down 5% compared to the year ended March 2020, including a 2% favorable impact from foreign currency and a 4% contribution from the Supreme acquisition. Direct-to-consumer revenues accounted for 45% of VF’s total revenues in the year ended March 2021. VF opened 80 retail stores during the year ended March 2021 and acquired 12 Supreme® brand stores. E-commerce revenues increased 67% in the year ended March 2021 compared to the year ended March
2020, including a 3% favorable impact from foreign currency and a 9% contribution from the Supreme acquisition.
•International revenues decreased 7% compared to the year ended March 2020, including a 4% favorable impact from foreign currency. Greater China (which includes Mainland China, Hong Kong and Taiwan) revenues were up 24%, including a 4% favorable impact from foreign currency. International revenues represented 50% of VF’s total revenues in the year ended March 2021.
•Gross margin decreased 260 basis points to 52.7% in the year ended March 2021 compared to the year ended March 2020, primarily driven by elevated promotional activity and the timing of net foreign currency transaction activity.
•Cash flows provided by operating activities were $1.2 billion in the year ended March 2021.
•Earnings per share decreased 42% to $0.91 in the year ended March 2021 from $1.57 in the year ended March 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by the negative impact of COVID-19. The decrease was partially offset by the contribution from the Supreme acquisition and favorable impacts from foreign currency.
•VF returned $756.8 million to stockholders in cash dividends.
VF Corporation Fiscal 2021 Form 10-K 25
ANALYSIS OF RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Consolidated Statements of Operations
The following table presents a summary of the changes in net revenues for the year ended March 2021 compared to the year ended March 2020:
Year Ended March 2021 Compared to Year Ended March 2020
VF reported a 12% decrease in revenues in Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020, including a 2% favorable impact from foreign currency. The revenue decrease was primarily attributable to the negative impact of COVID-19, including closures of VF-operated retail and VF's wholesale customer stores, supply chain disruption and reduced consumer demand. Fiscal 2021 included a $142.0 million contribution from the Supreme acquisition, which closed on December 28, 2020. Fiscal 2021 also included an extra week when compared to Fiscal 2020 due to VF's 53-week Fiscal 2021.
VF reported a 23% increase in revenues in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021 compared to the Fiscal 2020 period, including a 4% favorable impact from foreign currency and a 7% contribution from the Supreme acquisition. The increase was driven by VF's largest brands, e-commerce growth and an increase in the Asia-Pacific region, which experienced a significant negative impact from COVID-19 in the Fiscal 2020 period. The fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021 also included an extra week when compared to the Fiscal 2020 period due to VF's 53-week Fiscal 2021.
Additional details on revenues are provided in the section titled “Information by Reportable Segment”.
The following table presents the percentage relationship to net revenues for components of the Consolidated Statements of Operations:
Year Ended March 2021 Compared to Year Ended March 2020
Gross margin decreased 260 basis points to 52.7% in Fiscal 2021 compared to 55.3% in Fiscal 2020. Gross margin in Fiscal 2021 was negatively impacted by increased promotional activity to clear elevated inventory levels, the timing of net foreign currency transaction activity, charges associated with cost optimization and other activities indirectly related to the strategic review of the Occupational Workwear business and costs related to a transformation initiative for our Asia-Pacific regional operations. The decrease was partially offset by a favorable mix shift to higher margin businesses and channels.
Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of total revenues increased 250 basis points in Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020. This increase was primarily due to lower leverage of operating expenses due to decreased revenues as a result of the negative impact of COVID-19 and continued investments in strategic growth initiatives. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $307.0 million in Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020 primarily due to cost controls taken in response to COVID-19 and payroll relief from the CARES Act and other governmental packages.
VF recorded a $20.4 million noncash impairment charge in Fiscal 2021 related to the write-off of certain trademark and customer relationship balances, which resulted from strategic actions taken by the Company. VF recorded a $323.2 million noncash impairment charge related to the Timberland reporting unit during the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020.
In Fiscal 2021, operating margin decreased 220 basis points, to 6.6% from 8.8% in Fiscal 2020, primarily due to the items described above.
Net interest expense increased $54.3 million to $126.5 million in Fiscal 2021. The increase in net interest expense was primarily due to additional borrowings of long-term debt and lower investment interest rates, partially offset by lower interest rates on borrowings. The Fiscal 2020 period also included a deferred loss on an interest rate hedging contract of $8.5 million recognized in net interest expense in connection with the full redemption of the aggregate principal amount of the outstanding 2021 notes.
26 VF Corporation Fiscal 2021 Form 10-K
Total outstanding interest-bearing debt averaged $5.8 billion and $2.6 billion for Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively, with short-term borrowings representing 4.2% and 15.2% of average debt outstanding for the respective years. The weighted average interest rate on outstanding debt was 2.1% in Fiscal 2021 and 3.0% in Fiscal 2020.
Loss on debt extinguishment of $59.8 million was recorded in Fiscal 2020 as a result of the premiums, amortization and fees associated with cash tender offers for VF's outstanding 2033 and 2037 notes, and the full redemption of VF's outstanding 2021 notes.
Other income (expense), net primarily consists of components of net periodic pension cost (excluding the service cost component), foreign currency gains and losses and other non-operating gains and losses. Other income (expense) netted to $(24.7) million and $(68.7) million in Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively. Included in other income (expense), net in Fiscal 2021 is $42.4 million expense related to the release of currency translation amounts associated with the substantial liquidation of foreign entities in certain countries in South America and $21.5 million of net periodic pension income driven by the return on plan assets. Included in other income (expense), net in Fiscal 2020 is $48.3 million expense related to the release of currency translation amounts associated with the substantial liquidation of foreign entities in certain countries in South America and $9.1 million of net periodic pension expense driven by $27.4 million of pension settlement charges.
The effective income tax rate was 22.3% in Fiscal 2021 compared to 13.5% in Fiscal 2020. The effective income tax rate is higher in Fiscal 2021 when compared to Fiscal 2020 primarily due to the discrete tax benefit in Fiscal 2020 associated with the transitional impact of Switzerland's Federal Act on Tax Reform and AHV Financing ("Swiss Tax Act"). The Fiscal 2021 effective income tax rate included a net discrete tax expense of $9.8 million, which included a $22.8 million net tax expense related to unrecognized tax benefits and interest, a $5.9 million tax benefit related to stock compensation, a $2.8 million tax benefit related to return to accrual adjustments and a $4.3 million tax benefit related to withholding taxes on prior foreign earnings. The $9.8 million net discrete tax expense in Fiscal 2021 increased the effective income tax rate by 2.2% compared to a favorable 12.7% impact of discrete items for Fiscal 2020. Excluding discrete items, the effective tax rate during Fiscal 2021 decreased by approximately 6.1% primarily due to nondeductible goodwill impairment charges during Fiscal 2020. The international effective tax rate was 14.7% for Fiscal 2021.
As a result of the above, income from continuing operations in Fiscal 2021 was $354.9 million ($0.91 per diluted share), compared to $629.1 million ($1.57 per diluted share) in Fiscal 2020.
Refer to additional discussion in the “Information by Reportable Segment” section below.
VF Corporation Fiscal 2021 Form 10-K 27
Information by Reportable Segment
VF's reportable segments are: Outdoor, Active and Work. We have included an Other category in the tables below for purposes of reconciliation of revenues and profit, but it is not considered a reportable segment. Included in this Other category are results primarily related to the sale of non-VF products.
The primary financial measures used by management to evaluate the financial results of VF's reportable segments are segment revenues and segment profit. Segment profit comprises the operating income and other income (expense), net line items of each segment.
Refer to Note 20 to the consolidated financial statements for a summary of results of operations by segment, along with a reconciliation of segment profit to income before income taxes.
Year Ended March 2021 Compared to Year Ended March 2020
The following tables present a summary of the changes in segment revenues and profit in the year ended March 2021 compared to the year ended March 2020 and revenues by region for our Top 4 brands for the years ended March 2021 and 2020:
(a) The global Timberland brand includes Timberland®, reported within the Outdoor segment and Timberland PRO®, reported within the Work segment.
28 VF Corporation Fiscal 2021 Form 10-K
The following sections discuss the changes in revenues and profitability by segment. For purposes of this analysis, royalty revenues have been included in the wholesale channel for all periods.
Outdoor
The Outdoor segment includes the following brands: The North Face®, Timberland®, Smartwool®, Icebreaker® and Altra®.
Year Ended March 2021 Compared to Year Ended March 2020
Global revenues for Outdoor decreased 11% in Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020, including a 2% favorable impact due to foreign currency. The decrease in revenues during the period was primarily related to the negative impact of COVID-19. Revenues in the United States decreased 19% in Fiscal 2021. Revenues in the Europe region decreased 5%, including a 5% favorable impact from foreign currency. Revenues in the Asia-Pacific region increased 11% in Fiscal 2021, with a 4% favorable impact from foreign currency. Revenues in the Americas (non-U.S.) region decreased 27% in Fiscal 2021, including a 1% favorable impact from foreign currency.
Global revenues for Outdoor increased 25% in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021 compared to the Fiscal 2020 period, including a 5% favorable impact from foreign currency, driven by growth in The North Face® and Timberland® brands, including an increase in the Asia-Pacific region, which experienced a significant negative impact from COVID-19 in the Fiscal 2020 period. The fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021 also included an extra week when compared to the Fiscal 2020 period due to VF's 53-week Fiscal 2021.
Global revenues for The North Face® brand decreased 9% in Fiscal 2021, including a 2% favorable impact from foreign currency. The decrease was due to the negative impact of COVID-19 primarily in the United States and Americas (non-U.S.) regions, which were partially offset by e-commerce growth and strong performance in the Asia-Pacific and Europe regions.
Global revenues for the Timberland® brand decreased 17% in Fiscal 2021, including a 3% favorable impact from foreign currency. The decrease was primarily due to the negative impact of COVID-19 primarily in the United States, Americas (non-U.S.) and Europe regions, partially offset by e-commerce growth and strong performance in the Asia-Pacific region.
Global direct-to-consumer revenues for Outdoor decreased 1% in Fiscal 2021, including a 3% favorable impact from foreign currency. The decrease was primarily due to the negative impact of COVID-19 and related closures of VF-operated retail stores, partially offset by e-commerce growth across all regions, which increased 64% in Fiscal 2021, including a 4% favorable impact from foreign currency. Global wholesale revenues for Outdoor decreased 17%, including a 2% favorable impact from foreign currency. The decrease was primarily driven by the negative impact of COVID-19.
Operating margin decreased in Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020, reflecting lower leverage of operating expenses due to decreased revenues, elevated sales promotional activity, negative impact from the timing of net foreign currency transaction activity and continued investments in digital strategic growth initiatives. The decrease was partially offset by cost controls taken in response to COVID-19 and payroll relief from the CARES Act and other governmental packages. The year ended March 2020 also included a gain of approximately $11 million on the sale of office real estate and related assets in connection with the relocation of VF's global headquarters and certain brands to Denver, Colorado.
VF Corporation Fiscal 2021 Form 10-K 29
Active
The Active segment includes the following brands: Vans®, Supreme®, Kipling®, Napapijri®, Eastpak®, JanSport® and Eagle Creek®.
Year Ended March 2021 Compared to Year Ended March 2020
Global revenues for Active decreased 15% in Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020, including a 2% favorable impact from foreign currency. The overall decrease in revenues during the period was primarily related to the negative impact of COVID-19. Revenues in the United States decreased 18% in Fiscal 2021. Revenues in the Europe region decreased 16%, including a 4% favorable impact from foreign currency. Revenues in the Asia-Pacific region increased 10% in Fiscal 2021, including a 2% favorable impact from foreign currency. Revenues in the Americas (non-U.S.) region decreased 42% in Fiscal 2021, including a 1% unfavorable impact from foreign currency. Included in these results are revenues from the Supreme acquisition of $142.0 million. Excluding revenues from Supreme, Active revenues decreased 18% in Fiscal 2021, including a 2% favorable impact from foreign currency.
Global revenues for Active increased 22% in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021 compared to the Fiscal 2020 period, including a 3% favorable impact from foreign currency and a 14% contribution from the Supreme acquisition. The increase was driven by growth in the Vans® brand, including an increase in the Asia-Pacific region, which experienced a significant negative impact from COVID-19 in the Fiscal 2020 period. The fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021 also included an extra week when compared to the Fiscal 2020 period due to VF's 53-week Fiscal 2021.
Vans® brand global revenues decreased 15% in Fiscal 2021, including a 1% favorable impact from foreign currency. The decrease was primarily due to the negative impact of COVID-19
in the United States, Americas (non-U.S.) and Europe regions, partially offset by e-commerce growth and growth in Greater China.
Global direct-to-consumer revenues for Active decreased 10% in Fiscal 2021, including a 1% favorable impact from foreign currency. Excluding revenues from acquisition, global direct-to-consumer revenues decreased 16%, including a 1% favorable impact from foreign currency. The decrease in the direct to-consumer channel was primarily due to the negative impact of COVID-19 and related closures of VF-operated retail stores, partially offset by e-commerce growth across all regions. E-commerce revenues increased 73% in Fiscal 2021, including a 3% favorable impact from foreign currency. Excluding revenues from acquisition, e-commerce revenues increased 53%, including a 2% favorable impact from foreign currency. Global wholesale revenues for Active decreased 20% in Fiscal 2021, primarily due to the negative impact of COVID-19, and included a 2% favorable impact from foreign currency.
Operating margin decreased in Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020, reflecting lower leverage of operating expenses due to decreased revenues, elevated sales promotional activity, negative impact from the timing of net foreign currency transaction activity and continued investments in direct-to-consumer and digital strategic growth initiatives. The decrease in Fiscal 2021 was partially offset by cost controls taken in response to COVID-19, contribution from the Supreme acquisition and payroll relief from the CARES Act and other governmental packages.
30 VF Corporation Fiscal 2021 Form 10-K
Work
The Work segment includes the following brands: Dickies® and Timberland PRO®.
Year Ended March 2021 Compared to Year Ended March 2020
Global Work revenues increased 7% in Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020, including a 1% favorable impact from foreign currency. The revenue increase was driven by overall growth in both the Dickies® and Timberland PRO® brands, partially offset by the negative impact of COVID-19. Revenues in the United States increased 3% in Fiscal 2021. Revenues in the Europe region were flat, including a 4% favorable impact from foreign currency. Revenues in the Asia-Pacific region increased 36%, including a 5% favorable impact from foreign currency. Revenues in the Americas (non-U.S.) region were flat in Fiscal 2021, including a 2% unfavorable impact from foreign currency.
Global Work revenues increased 23% in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021 compared to the Fiscal 2020 period, including a 3% favorable impact from foreign currency, driven by overall growth in both the Dickies® and Timberland PRO® brands, including an increase for the Dickies® brand in the Asia-Pacific region, which
experienced a significant negative impact from COVID-19 in the Fiscal 2020 period. The fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021 also included an extra week when compared to the Fiscal 2020 period due to VF's 53-week Fiscal 2021.
Dickies® brand global revenues increased 9% in Fiscal 2021, including a 2% favorable impact from foreign currency. The increase was driven by strong performance in work-inspired lifestyle products, and growth in e-commerce and the Asia-Pacific region.
Operating margin decreased in Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020. The decrease was primarily attributed to charges associated with cost optimization and other activities indirectly related to the strategic review of the Occupational Workwear business, partially offset by increased pricing and cost controls taken in response to COVID-19.
Reconciliation of Segment Profit to Consolidated Income Before Income Taxes
There are three types of costs necessary to reconcile total segment profit to consolidated income before income taxes. These costs are (i) impairment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, which is excluded from segment profit because these costs are not part of the ongoing operations of the respective businesses, (ii) interest expense, net, and loss on debt extinguishment which are excluded from segment profit because substantially all financing costs are managed at the corporate
office and are not under the control of segment management, and (iii) corporate and other expenses, which are excluded from segment profit to the extent they are not allocated to the segments. Impairment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets and net interest expense are discussed in the “Consolidated Statements of Operations” section, and corporate and other expenses are discussed below.
Following is a summary of VF’s corporate and other expenses:
Information Systems and Shared Services
These costs include management information systems and the centralized finance, supply chain, human resources, direct-to-consumer and customer management functions that support worldwide operations. Operating costs of information systems and shared services are charged to the segments based on utilization of those services. Costs to develop new computer applications are generally not allocated to the segments. Included in information systems and shared services costs in
Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020 are costs associated with software system implementations and upgrades and other strategic projects.
Corporate Headquarters’ Costs
Headquarters’ costs include compensation and benefits of corporate management and staff, legal and professional fees, and general and administrative expenses that have not been allocated to the segments. The decrease in corporate
VF Corporation Fiscal 2021 Form 10-K 31
headquarters’ costs in Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020 is primarily attributed to cost controls to reduce discretionary spending and lower costs related to the relocation of our global headquarters and certain brands to Denver, Colorado. The decrease in Fiscal 2021 was partially offset by expenses associated with the acquisition of Supreme, costs related to a transformation initiative for our Asia-Pacific regional operations and increased charges associated with cost optimization and other activities indirectly related to the strategic review of the Occupational Workwear business.
Other
This category includes (i) costs of corporate programs or corporate-managed decisions that are not allocated to the segments, (ii) costs of registering, maintaining and enforcing certain of VF’s trademarks, and (iii) miscellaneous consolidated
costs, the most significant of which is related to activity associated with VF’s centrally-managed U.S. defined benefit pension plans. The decrease in other expenses in Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020 is primarily due to lower pension settlement charges of $25.9 million for the periods compared. Included in other expense in Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020 is $42.4 million and $48.3 million, respectively, related to the release of currency translation amounts associated with the substantial liquidation of foreign entities in certain countries in South America. Also included in other expense in both Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020 are retained corporate overhead and other costs related to the Work and former Jeans segments associated with divestiture actions taken by the Company. The retained costs associated with the former Jeans segment have been largely offset by reimbursements from Kontoor Brands related to transition services provided in both periods.
International Operations
International revenues decreased 7% in Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020, primarily due to the negative impact of COVID-19. Foreign currency had a favorable impact of 4% on international revenues in Fiscal 2021. Revenues in the Europe region decreased 10% in Fiscal 2021, including a 5% favorable impact from foreign currency. In the Asia-Pacific region, revenues increased 13% in Fiscal 2021 over Fiscal 2020, driven by growth in Greater China. Foreign currency positively impacted revenues in the Asia-Pacific region by 3%. Revenues in Greater China increased 24% in Fiscal 2021, including a 4% favorable impact from foreign currency. Revenues in the Americas (non-U.S.) region decreased 34% in Fiscal 2021. International revenues
were 50% and 47% of total VF revenues in Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively.
International revenues increased 21% in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021 compared to the Fiscal 2020 period, including a 8% favorable impact from foreign currency and a 5% contribution from the Supreme acquisition. The increase was driven by growth in the Asia-Pacific region, which experienced a significant negative impact from COVID-19 in the Fiscal 2020 period. The fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021 also included an extra week when compared to the Fiscal 2020 period due to VF's 53-week Fiscal 2021.
Direct-to-Consumer Operations
Direct-to-consumer revenues decreased 5% in Fiscal 2021 over Fiscal 2020, including a 2% favorable impact from foreign currency and a 4% contribution from the Supreme acquisition. The decrease in direct-to-consumer revenues was primarily due to the negative impact of COVID-19 and related closures of VF-operated retail stores, as discussed in the "Impact of COVID-19" section above. Our e-commerce business grew 67% in Fiscal 2021, including a 3% favorable impact from foreign currency and a 9% contribution from the Supreme acquisition. The e-commerce growth occurred across all regions and partially offset the declines in our other direct-to-consumer operations in Fiscal 2021. VF opened 80 stores in Fiscal 2021 and acquired 12 Supreme® brand stores, bringing the total number of VF-owned retail stores to 1,374 at March 2021, which also reflects certain store closings during the period. There were 1,379 VF-owned
retail stores at March 2020. Direct-to-consumer revenues were 45% of total VF revenues in Fiscal 2021 compared to 41% in Fiscal 2020.
Direct-to-consumer revenues increased 36% in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021 compared to the Fiscal 2020 period, including a 4% favorable impact from foreign currency and a 17% contribution from the Supreme acquisition. Our e-commerce business grew 106% in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021 compared to the Fiscal 2020 period, including a 7% favorable impact from foreign currency and a 41% contribution from the Supreme acquisition. The fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021 also included an extra week when compared to the Fiscal 2020 period due to VF's 53-week Fiscal 2021.
32 VF Corporation Fiscal 2021 Form 10-K
ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION
Balance Sheets
The following discussion refers to significant changes in balances for continuing operations at March 2021 compared to March 2020:
•Decrease in inventories - primarily due to lower inventory purchases as part of our inventory management to ensure proper matching of supply and demand resulting from reduced consumer demand due to the impact of COVID-19.
•Increase in short-term investments - due to new investments of excess cash entered into during Fiscal 2021.
•Increase in intangible assets - primarily due to the acquired indefinite-lived Supreme® trademark intangible asset of $1.2 billion recorded in connection with the acquisition.
•Increase in goodwill - primarily due to the amounts recorded in connection with the Supreme acquisition of $1.25 billion.
•Increase in operating lease right-of-use assets - primarily due to the commencement of new distribution center leases in Europe and North America during Fiscal 2021.
•Increase in other assets - primarily due to amounts recorded in connection with the Supreme acquisition, increases in assets held for deferred compensation plans and an increase in net pension assets for certain defined benefit plans.
•Decrease in short-term borrowings - due to the net repayment of borrowings under the Global Credit Facility using a portion of the net proceeds from the issuance of senior unsecured fixed-rate notes in April 2020.
•Increase in accrued liabilities - primarily due to amounts recorded in connection with the Supreme acquisition, and an increase in current operating lease liabilities, derivative liabilities, accrued interest and compensation-related liabilities.
•Increase in long-term debt - due to the issuance of $3.0 billion of senior unsecured fixed-rate notes in April 2020.
•Increase in operating lease liabilities - primarily due to the commencement of new distribution center leases in Europe and North America during Fiscal 2021.
•Increase in other liabilities - primarily due to deferred taxes and the contingent consideration liability of $207.0 million recorded in connection with the Supreme acquisition.
Liquidity and Cash Flows
We consider the following to be measures of our liquidity and capital resources:
The increase in the current ratio at March 2021 compared to March 2020 was primarily due to a net decrease in current liabilities driven by lower short-term borrowings, as discussed in the "Balance Sheets" section above.
For the ratio of net debt to total capital, net debt is defined as short-term and long-term borrowings, in addition to operating lease liabilities, net of unrestricted cash. Total capital is defined as net debt plus stockholders’ equity. The increase in the net debt to total capital ratio at March 2021 compared to March 2020 was attributed to the increase in long-term debt, partially offset by the decrease in short-term borrowings, as discussed in the "Balance Sheets" section above. The increase was also attributed to a decrease in stockholders' equity, driven by payments of dividends, partially offset by current period income.
VF’s primary source of liquidity is its expected strong annual cash flow from operating activities. Cash from operations is typically lower in the first half of the calendar year as inventory builds to support peak sales periods in the second half of the calendar year. Cash provided by operating activities in the second half of the calendar year is substantially higher as inventories are sold and accounts receivable are collected. Additionally, direct-to-consumer sales are typically highest in the fourth quarter of the calendar year. VF's additional sources of liquidity include available borrowing capacity against its Global Credit Facility, available cash and investment balances and international lines of credit.
VF Corporation Fiscal 2021 Form 10-K 33
In summary, our cash flows from continuing operations were as follows:
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Cash flow related to operating activities is dependent on net income, adjustments to net income and changes in working capital. The increase in cash provided by operating activities in Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020 is primarily due to a decrease in net cash usage for working capital, partially offset by lower earnings for the periods compared.
Cash Used by Investing Activities
The increase in cash used by investing activities in Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020 related primarily to the cash paid to acquire Supreme of $2.0 billion, net of cash received, and purchases of short-term investments of $800.0 million, partially offset by proceeds from maturities of short-term investments of $200.0 million. Capital expenditures decreased $89.5 million and software purchases increased $29.9 million in Fiscal 2021 compared to the Fiscal 2020 period.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
The increase in cash provided by financing activities in Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020 was primarily due to the increase in net proceeds from long-term debt issuances of $1.9 billion, a $1.0 billion decrease in share repurchases and a $647.4 million decrease in payments on long-term debt, which was partially offset by a $1.8 billion net decrease in short-term borrowings for the periods compared. The increase was also partially offset by $906.1 million of cash received from Kontoor Brands, net of cash transferred, in Fiscal 2020.
Share Repurchases
VF did not purchase shares of its Common Stock in the open market during Fiscal 2021. During Fiscal 2020, VF purchased 12.0 million shares of its Common Stock in open market transactions at a total cost of $1.0 billion (average price per share of $83.33) under the share repurchase program authorized by VF's Board of Directors.
In response to the COVID-19 outbreak and to preserve financial liquidity, VF has made the decision to temporarily pause its share repurchase program. As of the end of Fiscal 2021, the Company had $2.8 billion remaining for future repurchases under its share repurchase program. VF will continue to evaluate its use of capital, giving first priority to enterprise protection and then to business acquisitions and direct shareholder return in the form of dividends and share repurchases.
Revolving Credit Facility and Short-term Borrowings
VF relies on its ability to generate cash flows to finance its ongoing operations. In addition, VF has significant liquidity from its available cash and investment balances and credit facilities. VF maintains a $2.25 billion senior unsecured revolving line of
credit (the “Global Credit Facility”) that expires December 2023. VF may request an unlimited number of one year extensions so long as each extension does not cause the remaining life of the Global Credit Facility to exceed five years, subject to stated terms and conditions. The Global Credit Facility may be used to borrow funds in both U.S. dollar and certain non-U.S. dollar currencies, and has a $50.0 million letter of credit sublimit. In addition, the Global Credit Facility supports VF’s U.S. commercial paper program for short-term, seasonal working capital requirements and general corporate purposes, including share repurchases and acquisitions. Outstanding short-term balances may vary from period to period depending on the level of corporate requirements. Borrowings under the Global Credit Facility are priced at a credit spread of 91.0 basis points over the appropriate LIBOR benchmark for each currency. VF is also required to pay a facility fee to the lenders, currently equal to 9.0 basis points of the committed amount of the facility. The credit spread and facility fee are subject to adjustment based on VF’s credit ratings.
In April 2020, VF entered into an amendment to the Global Credit Facility that resulted in certain changes to the restrictive covenants, including an increase to the consolidated indebtedness to consolidated capitalization ratio financial covenant to 70% (from 60%) and a revision to the calculation of consolidated indebtedness to be net of unrestricted cash. As of March 2021, the covenant calculation includes cash and equivalents and short-term investments, and excludes consolidated operating lease liabilities. In addition, the amendment requires VF and its subsidiaries to maintain minimum liquidity in the form of unrestricted cash and unused financing commitments of not less than $750.0 million. As of March 2021, VF was in compliance with all covenants.
VF has a commercial paper program that allows for borrowings up to $2.25 billion to the extent that it has borrowing capacity under the Global Credit Facility. There were no commercial paper borrowings as of March 2021. Standby letters of credit issued as of March 2021 were $24.1 million, leaving approximately $2.2 billion available for borrowing against the Global Credit Facility at March 2021. Additionally, VF had approximately $1.4 billion of cash and equivalents and short-term investments at March 2021.
VF has $63.9 million of international lines of credit with various banks, which are uncommitted and may be terminated at any time by either VF or the banks. Total outstanding balances under these arrangements were $11.1 million and $13.8 million at March 2021 and March 2020, respectively. Borrowings under these arrangements had a weighted average interest rate of 11.0% and 16.3% at March 2021 and March 2020, respectively.
Senior Notes Issuance
On April 23, 2020, VF closed its sale of senior unsecured notes including $1.0 billion of 2.050% notes due April 2022, $750.0 million of 2.400% notes due April 2025, $500.0 million of 2.800%
34 VF Corporation Fiscal 2021 Form 10-K
notes due April 2027 and $750.0 million of 2.950% notes due April 2030. The net proceeds received by the Company were approximately $2.97 billion. A portion of the net proceeds was used to repay outstanding borrowings under the Global Credit Facility resulting from actions taken by VF to strengthen the Company's cash position in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Rating Agencies
VF’s favorable credit agency ratings allow for access to additional liquidity at competitive rates. At the end of March 2021, VF’s long-term debt ratings were ‘A-’ by Standard & Poor’s ("S&P") Global Ratings and ‘Baa1’ by Moody’s Investors Service, both with 'stable' outlooks, and commercial paper ratings by those rating agencies were ‘A-2’ and ‘P-2’, respectively.
None of VF’s long-term debt agreements contain acceleration of maturity clauses based solely on changes in credit ratings. However, if there were a change in control of VF and, as a result
of the change in control, the notes were rated below investment grade by recognized rating agencies, then VF would be obligated to repurchase the notes at 101% of the aggregate principal amount, plus any accrued and unpaid interest, if required by the respective holders of the notes. The change of control provision applies to all notes, except for the 2033 note.
Dividends
Cash dividends totaled $1.94 per share in Fiscal 2021 compared to $1.90 in Fiscal 2020. The dividend payout ratio was 186.5% of diluted earnings per share in Fiscal 2021 compared to 111.8% in Fiscal 2020. The Company has declared a dividend of $0.49 per share that is payable in the first quarter of Fiscal 2022. Subject to approval by its Board of Directors, VF intends to continue to pay its regularly scheduled dividend and is not contemplating the suspension of its dividend at this time.
Contractual Obligations
Following is a summary of VF’s material contractual obligations and commercial commitments at the end of March 2021 that will require the use of funds:
(1)Long-term debt consists of required principal payments on long-term debt and finance lease obligations.
(2)Operating leases represent required lease payments during the noncancelable lease term. Variable payments for occupancy-related costs, real estate taxes, insurance and contingent rent are not included above. In addition, $23.1 million of leases (on an undiscounted basis) that have not yet commenced with terms of 2 to 10 years beginning in Fiscal 2022 are not included above.
(3)Interest payment obligations represent required interest payments on long-term debt and the interest portion of payments on finance leases. Amounts exclude amortization of debt issuance costs, debt discounts and acquisition costs that would be included in interest expense in the consolidated financial statements.
(4)Inventory obligations represent binding commitments to purchase finished goods, raw materials and contract production that are payable upon delivery of the inventory to VF. This obligation excludes the amount included in accounts payable at March 2021 related to inventory purchases.
VF had other financial commitments at the end of Fiscal 2021 that are not included in the above table but may require the use of funds under certain circumstances:
•$118.1 million of surety bonds, custom bonds, standby letters of credit and international bank guarantees are not included in the table above because they represent contingent guarantees of performance under self-insurance and other programs and would only be drawn upon if VF were to fail to meet its other obligations.
•Purchase orders for goods or services in the ordinary course of business are not included in the above table because they represent authorizations to purchase rather than binding commitments.
Management believes that VF’s cash and investment balances and expected funds to be provided by operating activities, as well
as its Global Credit Facility, additional borrowing capacity and access to capital markets, taken as a whole, provide (i) adequate liquidity to meet all of its current and long-term obligations when due, (ii) adequate liquidity to fund capital expenditures and to maintain the planned dividend, and (iii) flexibility to meet investment opportunities that may arise. There continues to be significant uncertainty about the duration and extent of the impact of COVID-19; however, management believes that VF has sufficient liquidity and flexibility to operate during and after the disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
VF does not participate in transactions with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships established to facilitate off-balance sheet arrangements or other limited purposes.
VF Corporation Fiscal 2021 Form 10-K 35
Risk Management
VF is exposed to risks in the ordinary course of business. Management regularly assesses and manages exposures to these risks through operating and financing activities and, when appropriate, by (i) taking advantage of natural hedges within VF, (ii) purchasing insurance from commercial carriers, or (iii) using derivative financial instruments. Some potential risks are discussed below:
Insured risks
VF is self-insured for a significant portion of its employee medical, workers’ compensation, vehicle and general liability exposures. VF purchases insurance from highly-rated commercial carriers to cover other risks, including directors and officers, property and umbrella, and to establish stop-loss limits on self-insurance arrangements.
Cash and equivalents risks
VF had $815.8 million of cash and equivalents at the end of Fiscal 2021. Management continually monitors the credit ratings of the financial institutions with whom VF conducts business. Similarly, management monitors the credit quality of cash equivalents.
Defined benefit pension plan risks
At the end of Fiscal 2021, VF’s defined benefit pension plans were overfunded by a net total of $13.7 million. The overfunded status includes a $117.6 million liability related to our U.S. unfunded supplemental defined benefit plan, $58.4 million of net liabilities related to our non-U.S. defined benefit plans, and a $189.7 million net asset related to our U.S. qualified defined benefit plan. VF will continue to evaluate the funded status and future funding requirements of these plans, which depends in part on the future performance of the plans’ investment portfolios. Management believes that VF has sufficient liquidity to make any required contributions to the pension plans in future years.
VF’s reported earnings are subject to risks due to the volatility of its pension cost (income), which has ranged in recent years from cost of $39.7 million in the year ended March 2019 to income of $5.7 million in the year ended March 2021. These fluctuations are primarily due to the decrease in service costs due to the freeze of future benefit accruals in the U.S. qualified and supplemental defined benefit plans as of December 31, 2018 and varying amounts of actuarial gains and losses that are deferred and amortized to future years’ expense. The assumptions that impact actuarial gains and losses include the rate of return on investments held by the pension plans, the discount rate used to value participant liabilities and demographic characteristics of the participants.
In Fiscal 2019, VF approved a freeze of all future benefit accruals under the U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan and supplemental defined benefit pension plan, effective December 31, 2018. During the year ended March 2020, VF took an additional step in managing pension risk by offering former employees in the U.S. qualified plan a lump-sum option to receive a distribution of their deferred vested benefits. The U.S. qualified plan participants were reduced by 10% as a result of this offer. No additional funding of the pension plan was required as all distributions were paid out of existing plan assets, and the
plan’s funded status remained materially unchanged. Refer to Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements.
VF has taken a series of steps to manage the risk and volatility in the pension plans and their impact on the financial statements. The U.S. qualified and supplemental defined benefit plans were closed to new entrants in 2005 and all future benefit accruals were frozen as of December 31, 2018. The investment strategy of the U.S. qualified plan continues to define dynamic asset allocation targets that are dependent upon changes in the plan’s funded status, capital market expectations, and risk tolerance. Management will continue to evaluate actions that may help to reduce VF’s risks related to its defined benefit plans.
Interest rate risks
VF limits the risk of interest rate fluctuations by managing the mix of fixed and variable interest rate debt. In addition, VF may use derivative financial instruments to manage risk. Since all of VF’s long-term debt has fixed interest rates, the exposure relates to changes in interest rates on variable rate short-term borrowings (which averaged approximately $244.0 million during Fiscal 2021). However, any change in interest rates would also affect interest income earned on VF’s cash equivalents. Based on the average amount of variable rate borrowings and cash equivalents during Fiscal 2021, the effect of a hypothetical 1% increase in interest rates would be an increase in reported net income of approximately $15.0 million and a hypothetical 1% decrease in interest rates would be a decrease in reported net income of approximately $15.0 million.
Foreign currency exchange rate risks
VF is a global enterprise subject to the risk of foreign currency fluctuations. Approximately 50% of VF’s revenues in the year ended March 2021 were generated in international markets. Most of VF’s foreign businesses operate in functional currencies other than the U.S. dollar. In periods where the U.S. dollar strengthens relative to the euro or other foreign currencies where VF has operations, there is a negative impact on VF’s operating results upon translation of those foreign operating results into the U.S. dollar. As discussed later in this section, management hedges VF’s investments in certain foreign operations and foreign currency transactions.
The reported values of assets and liabilities in these foreign businesses are subject to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. For net advances to and investments in VF’s foreign businesses that are considered to be long-term, the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates on those long-term advances is deferred as a component of accumulated OCI in stockholders’ equity. The U.S. dollar value of net investments in foreign subsidiaries fluctuates with changes in the underlying functional currencies. In February 2020, VF issued €1.0 billion of euro-denominated fixed-rate notes and in September 2016, VF issued €850 million of euro-denominated fixed-rate notes. These notes have been designated as net investment hedges of VF’s investment in certain foreign operations. Because this debt qualified as a nonderivative hedging instrument, foreign currency transaction gains or losses of the debt are deferred in the foreign currency translation and other component of accumulated OCI as an offset to the foreign currency translation adjustments on the hedged investments.
36 VF Corporation Fiscal 2021 Form 10-K
Any amounts deferred in accumulated OCI will remain until the hedged investment is sold or substantially liquidated.
VF monitors net foreign currency market exposures and enters into derivative foreign currency contracts to hedge the effects of exchange rate fluctuations for a significant portion of forecasted foreign currency cash flows or specific foreign currency transactions (relating to cross-border inventory purchases, production costs, product sales, operating costs and intercompany royalty payments). VF’s practice is to buy or sell foreign currency exchange contracts that cover up to 80% of foreign currency exposures for periods of up to 24 months. Currently, VF uses only foreign exchange forward contracts but may use options or collars in the future. This use of financial instruments allows management to reduce the overall exposure to risks from exchange rate fluctuations on VF’s cash flows and earnings, since gains and losses on these contracts will offset losses and gains on the transactions being hedged.
For cash flow hedging contracts outstanding at the end of Fiscal 2021, if there were a hypothetical 10% change in foreign currency exchange rates compared to rates at the end of Fiscal 2021, it would result in a change in fair value of those contracts of approximately $234 million. However, any change in the fair value of the hedging contracts would be substantially offset by a change in the fair value of the underlying hedged exposure impacted by the currency rate changes.
Counterparty risks
VF is exposed to credit-related losses in the event of nonperformance by counterparties to derivative hedging instruments. To manage this risk, we have established
counterparty credit guidelines and only enter into derivative transactions with financial institutions that have ‘A minus/A3’ investment grade credit ratings or better. VF continually monitors the credit rating of, and limits the amount hedged with, each counterparty. Additionally, management utilizes a portfolio of financial institutions to minimize exposure to potential counterparty defaults and adjusts positions as necessary. VF also monitors counterparty risk for derivative contracts within the defined benefit pension plans.
Commodity price risks
VF is exposed to market risks for the pricing of cotton, leather, rubber, wool and other materials, which we either purchase directly or in a converted form such as fabric or shoe soles. To manage risks of commodity price changes, management negotiates prices in advance when possible. VF has not historically managed commodity price exposures by using derivative instruments.
Deferred compensation and related investment security risks
VF has nonqualified deferred compensation plans in which liabilities to the plans’ participants are based on the market values of the participants’ selection of a hypothetical portfolio of investment funds. VF invests in a portfolio of securities that substantially mirrors the participants’ investment selections. The increases and decreases in deferred compensation liabilities are substantially offset by corresponding increases and decreases in the market value of VF’s investments, resulting in an insignificant net exposure to operating results and financial position.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
VF has chosen accounting policies that management believes are appropriate to accurately and fairly report VF’s operating results and financial position in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. VF applies these accounting policies in a consistent manner. Significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements.
The application of these accounting policies requires that VF make estimates and assumptions about future events and apply judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, contingent assets and liabilities, and related disclosures. These estimates, assumptions and judgments are based on historical experience, current trends and other factors believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Management evaluates these estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Because VF’s business cycle
is relatively short (i.e., from the date that inventory is received until that inventory is sold and the trade receivable is collected), actual results related to most estimates are known within a few months after any balance sheet date. In addition, VF may retain outside specialists to assist in valuations of business acquisitions and impairment testing of goodwill and intangible assets. If actual results ultimately differ from previous estimates, the revisions are included in results of operations when the actual amounts become known.
VF believes the following accounting policies involve the most significant management estimates, assumptions and judgments used in preparation of the consolidated financial statements or are the most sensitive to change from outside factors. The application of these critical accounting policies and estimates is discussed with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
Inventories
VF’s inventories are primarily comprised of finished goods and are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost includes all material, labor and overhead costs incurred to purchase or manufacture the finished goods. Overhead allocated to manufactured product is based on the normal capacity of plants and does not include amounts related to idle capacity or abnormal production inefficiencies. VF performs a detailed review at each business unit, at least quarterly, of all inventories on the basis of individual styles or individual style-size-color
stock keeping units to identify slow moving or excess products, discontinued and to-be-discontinued products, and off-quality merchandise. This review matches inventory on hand, plus current production and purchase commitments, with current and expected future sales orders. Management performs an evaluation to estimate net realizable value using a systematic and consistent methodology of forecasting future demand, market conditions and selling prices less costs of disposal. If the estimated net realizable value is less than cost, VF provides an
VF Corporation Fiscal 2021 Form 10-K 37
allowance to reflect the lower value of that inventory. This methodology recognizes inventory exposures at the time such losses are evident rather than at the time goods are actually sold. Historically, these estimates of future demand and selling prices have not varied significantly from actual results due to VF’s timely identification and ability to rapidly dispose of these distressed inventories.
Existence of physical inventory is verified through periodic physical inventory counts and ongoing cycle counts at most locations throughout the year. VF provides for estimated inventory losses that have likely occurred since the last physical inventory date. Historically, physical inventory shrinkage has not been material.
Business Combinations
VF accounts for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting. Under the acquisition method, the consolidated financial statements reflect the operations of an acquired business starting from the closing date of the acquisition. All assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at fair value as of the acquisition date. VF allocates the purchase price of an acquired business to the fair values of the tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with any excess purchase price recorded as goodwill. Contingent consideration, if any, is included within the purchase price and is recognized at its fair value on the acquisition date.
The application of the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations and determination of fair value requires management to make judgments and may involve the use of significant estimates, including assumptions related to estimated future revenues, growth rates, cash flows, discount rates and royalty rates, among other items. VF generally evaluates fair value at acquisition using three valuation techniques - the replacement cost, market and income methods - and weights the valuation methods based on what is most appropriate in the circumstances. The process of assigning fair values, particularly to acquired intangible assets, is highly subjective. VF also typically utilizes third-party valuation specialists to assist management in the determination of the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Management estimates of fair value are based on assumptions believed to be reasonable, but are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. If the actual results differ from the estimates and judgments used, the amounts recorded in the consolidated financial statements may be exposed to potential impairment of the intangible assets and goodwill, as discussed in the "Long-Lived Assets, Including Intangible Assets and Goodwill" section below.
During the measurement period, which is up to one year from the acquisition date, adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed may be recorded, with the corresponding offset to goodwill.
During the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021, VF completed the acquisition of Supreme Holdings, Inc. ("Supreme"). The preliminary purchase price for the transaction was $2.4 billion, which is comprised of $2.2 billion in cash and $0.2 billion for the estimated fair value of contingent consideration. The transaction also included $0.2 billion of cash acquired by VF. Management allocated the preliminary purchase price of the acquired Supreme business to the preliminary estimated fair values of the acquired assets and assumed liabilities at the date of acquisition, which resulted in excess purchase price of $1.25 billion that has been recorded as goodwill. The acquired assets include the estimated fair value of $1.20 billion for the Supreme® trademark, which is an identifiable intangible asset management believes to have an indefinite life. The estimated fair value of the Supreme® trademark was determined using the relief-from-royalty method of the income valuation approach, which required the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including future revenues, growth rates, royalty rate, tax rates and discount rate associated with the acquired intangible asset. Management's estimates and assumptions utilized internal forecasts of Supreme's future business performance and relevant market information. Management also utilized a third-party valuation specialist to assist in the determination of the estimated fair value of the Supreme® trademark.
Management believes the assumptions used in determining the estimated fair value of the Supreme® trademark are reasonable, but are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. As a result, actual results may differ from estimates. Future business and economic conditions, as well as significant changes in any of the assumptions used to estimate the acquisition date fair value of the Supreme® trademark, may result in a future impairment charge that could have a material effect on VF’s consolidated financial position and results of operations.
Refer to Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information related to acquisitions.
Long-Lived Assets, Including Intangible Assets and Goodwill
Definite-Lived Assets
VF’s depreciation policies for property, plant and equipment reflect judgments on the estimated economic lives and residual value, if any. VF’s amortization policies for definite-lived intangible assets reflect judgments on the estimated amounts and duration of future cash flows expected to be generated by those assets. In evaluating the amortizable life for customer relationship intangible assets, management considers historical attrition patterns for various groups of customers. In determining the lease term used to amortize operating lease right-of-use assets, VF considers initial terms and any renewal or termination options that may exist. When deemed reasonably
certain, the renewal and termination options are included in the determination of lease term.
VF’s policy is to review property, plant and equipment, definite-lived intangible assets and operating lease right-of-use assets for potential impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. VF tests for potential impairment at the asset or asset group level, which is the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows that are largely independent. VF measures recoverability of the carrying value of an asset or asset group by comparison to the estimated pre-tax undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the asset.
38 VF Corporation Fiscal 2021 Form 10-K
If the forecasted pre-tax undiscounted cash flows to be generated by the asset are not expected to be adequate to recover the asset’s carrying value, a fair value analysis must be performed, and an impairment charge is recorded if there is an excess of the asset’s carrying value over its estimated fair value.
When testing property, plant and equipment for potential impairment, VF uses the income-based discounted cash flow method using the estimated cash flows of the respective asset or asset group. The estimated pre-tax undiscounted cash flows of the asset or asset group through the end of its useful life are compared to its carrying value. If the pre-tax undiscounted cash flows of the asset or asset group exceed its carrying value, there is no impairment charge. If the pre-tax undiscounted cash flows of the asset or asset group are less than its carrying value, the estimated fair value of the asset or asset group is calculated based on the after-tax discounted cash flows using an appropriate weighted average cost of capital ("WACC"), and an impairment charge is recognized for the difference between the estimated fair value of the asset or asset group and its carrying value.
When testing customer relationship intangible assets for potential impairment, management considers historical customer attrition rates and projected revenues and profitability related to customers that existed at acquisition. Management uses the multi-period excess earnings method, which is a specific application of the discounted cash flow method, to value customer relationship assets. The estimated pre-tax undiscounted cash flows of the asset through the end of its useful life are compared to its carrying value. If the pre-tax undiscounted cash flows of the asset exceed its carrying value, there is no impairment charge. If the pre-tax undiscounted cash flows of the asset are less than its carrying value, the estimated fair value of the asset is calculated based on the present value of the after-tax cash flows expected to be generated by the customer relationship asset after deducting contributory asset charges, and an impairment charge is recognized for the difference between the estimated fair value of the asset and its carrying value.
When testing operating lease right-of-use assets for potential impairment, VF uses the income-based discounted cash flow method using the estimated cash flows of the respective asset or asset group. The estimated pre-tax undiscounted cash flows of the asset or asset group through the end of its useful life are compared to its carrying value. If the pre-tax undiscounted cash flows of the asset exceed its carrying value, there is no impairment charge. If the pre-tax undiscounted cash flows of the asset or asset group are less than its carrying value, the estimated fair value of the asset or asset group is calculated considering what a market participant would pay to lease the asset for its highest and best use, and an impairment charge is recognized for the difference between the estimated fair value of the asset or asset group and its carrying value. The impairment loss is allocated to the long-lived assets of the group on a pro-rata basis using the relative carrying amounts of those assets.
Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets and Goodwill
Fair value for acquired intangible assets is generally based on the present value of expected cash flows. Indefinite-lived trademark or trade name intangible assets (collectively referred to herein as “trademarks”) represent individually acquired trademarks, some of which are registered in multiple countries. Goodwill represents the excess of cost of an acquired business
over the fair values of the tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, and is assigned at the reporting unit level.
VF’s policy is to evaluate indefinite-lived intangible assets and goodwill for possible impairment as of the beginning of the fourth quarter of each fiscal year, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the fair value of such assets may be below their carrying amount. As part of its annual impairment testing, VF may elect to assess qualitative factors as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform quantitative impairment testing. If management’s assessment of these qualitative factors indicates that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of the intangible asset or reporting unit is less than its carrying value, then no further testing is required. Otherwise, the intangible asset or reporting unit must be quantitatively tested for impairment.
An indefinite-lived intangible asset is quantitatively tested for possible impairment by comparing the estimated fair value of the asset to its carrying value. Fair value of an indefinite-lived trademark is based on an income approach using the relief-from-royalty method. Under this method, forecasted revenues for products sold with the trademark are assigned a royalty rate that would be charged to license the trademark (in lieu of ownership), and the estimated fair value is calculated as the present value of those forecasted royalties avoided by owning the trademark. The appropriate discount rate is based on the reporting unit’s WACC that considers market participant assumptions, plus a spread that factors in the risk of the intangible asset. The royalty rate is selected based on consideration of (i) royalty rates included in active license agreements, if applicable, (ii) royalty rates received by market participants in the apparel industry, and (iii) the current performance of the reporting unit. If the estimated fair value of the trademark intangible asset exceeds its carrying value, there is no impairment charge. If the estimated fair value of the trademark is less than its carrying value, an impairment charge would be recognized for the difference.
Goodwill is quantitatively evaluated for possible impairment by comparing the estimated fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying value. Reporting units are businesses with discrete financial information that is available and reviewed by management.
For goodwill impairment testing, VF estimates the fair value of a reporting unit using both income-based and market-based valuation methods. The income-based approach is based on the reporting unit’s forecasted future cash flows that are discounted to present value using the reporting unit’s WACC as discussed above. For the market-based approach, management uses both the guideline company and similar transaction methods. The guideline company method analyzes market multiples of revenues and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) for a group of comparable public companies. The market multiples used in the valuation are based on the relative strengths and weaknesses of the reporting unit compared to the selected guideline companies. Under the similar transactions method, valuation multiples are calculated utilizing actual transaction prices and revenue/EBITDA data from target companies deemed similar to the reporting unit.
Based on the range of estimated fair values developed from the income and market-based methods, VF determines the estimated fair value for the reporting unit. If the estimated fair
VF Corporation Fiscal 2021 Form 10-K 39
value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, the goodwill is not impaired and no further review is required. However, if the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, VF calculates the impairment loss as the difference between the carrying value of the reporting unit and the estimated fair value.
The income-based fair value methodology requires management’s assumptions and judgments regarding economic conditions in the markets in which VF operates and conditions in the capital markets, many of which are outside of management’s control. At the reporting unit level, fair value estimation requires management’s assumptions and judgments regarding the effects of overall economic conditions on the specific reporting unit, along with assessment of the reporting unit’s strategies and forecasts of future cash flows. Forecasts of individual reporting unit cash flows involve management’s estimates and assumptions regarding:
•Annual cash flows, on a debt-free basis, arising from future revenues and profitability, changes in working capital, capital spending and income taxes for at least a 10-year forecast period.
•A terminal growth rate for years beyond the forecast period. The terminal growth rate is selected based on consideration of growth rates used in the forecast period, historical performance of the reporting unit and economic conditions.
•A discount rate that reflects the risks inherent in realizing the forecasted cash flows. A discount rate considers the risk-free rate of return on long-term treasury securities, the risk premium associated with investing in equity securities of comparable companies, the beta obtained from comparable companies and the cost of debt for investment grade issuers. In addition, the discount rate may consider any company-specific risk in achieving the prospective financial information.
Under the market-based fair value methodology, judgment is required in evaluating market multiples and recent transactions. Management believes that the assumptions used for its impairment tests are representative of those that would be used by market participants performing similar valuations of VF’s reporting units.
Fiscal 2021 Impairment Testing
Management performed its annual goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment testing as of the beginning of the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021. VF elected to bypass the qualitative analysis for the Kipling reporting unit goodwill and indefinite-lived trademark intangible asset. See additional discussion in the "Kipling Reporting Unit and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Asset Impairment Analysis" section below. Management performed a qualitative analysis for all other reporting units and trademark intangible assets, as discussed below in the “Other Reporting Units - Qualitative Impairment Analysis” section.
Kipling Reporting Unit and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Asset Impairment Analysis
In conjunction with VF's annual goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment testing as of the beginning of the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021, management performed a quantitative impairment analysis of the Kipling reporting unit goodwill and indefinite-lived trademark intangible asset. This
decision to bypass the optional qualitative impairment assessment and proceed directly to a quantitative impairment analysis was based on continued deterioration in Kipling financial results. Based on the analysis, management concluded the goodwill and indefinite-lived trademark intangible asset were not impaired. For goodwill, the estimated fair value of the reporting unit exceeded the carrying value by 19%. The estimated fair value of the indefinite-lived trademark intangible asset exceeded its carrying value by a significant amount. The carrying values of the reporting unit goodwill and indefinite-lived trademark intangible asset at the December 27, 2020 testing date were $192.9 million and $50.1 million, respectively.
The Kipling® brand, acquired in 2004, offers handbags, luggage, backpacks, totes, and accessories. Products are sold globally through department, specialty and luggage stores, independently-operated partnership stores, independent distributors, concession retail stores, VF-operated stores, on websites with strategic digital partners and online. The Kipling reporting unit is included in the Active reportable segment.
Management's revenue and profitability forecasts used in the Kipling reporting unit and indefinite-lived trademark intangible asset valuations considered historical performance, strategic initiatives and industry trends. Assumptions used in the valuations were similar to those that would be used by market participants performing independent valuations of the business.
Key assumptions developed by management and used in the quantitative analysis of the Kipling reporting unit and indefinite-lived trademark intangible asset include:
•Financial projections and future cash flows, including a base year reflecting deterioration of actual results including the impact of COVID-19, delayed and extended recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic in relation to other VF brands, ultimately trending towards growth rates and profitability in-line with historical trends and terminal growth rates based on the expected long-term growth rate of the brand;
•Tax rates based on the statutory rates for the countries in which the brand operates and the related intellectual property is domiciled;
•Royalty rates based on market data as well as active license agreements with similar VF brands; and,
•Market-based discount rates.
The valuation model used by management in the impairment testing assumes recovery over an extended period of time from the recent downturn in the brand's operating results, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the return to growth rates and profitability more in-line with historical operating trends. If the brand is unable to achieve the financial projections, an impairment on the indefinite-lived trademark intangible asset or the reporting unit goodwill could occur in the future.
Other Reporting Units - Qualitative Impairment Analysis
For all other reporting units, VF elected to perform a qualitative assessment during the annual goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment testing to determine whether it was more likely than not that the goodwill and indefinite-lived trademark intangible assets in those reporting units were impaired. In this qualitative assessment, VF considered relevant events and circumstances for each reporting unit, including (i) current year results and performance versus management's
40 VF Corporation Fiscal 2021 Form 10-K
annual and strategic plans, (ii) financial outlook based on the latest strategic plan, (iii) changes in the reporting unit carrying value since prior year and the amounts relative to the size of the respective business, (iv) industry and market conditions in which the reporting unit operates, (v) macroeconomic conditions, including discount rate changes, and (vi) changes in products or services offered by the reporting unit. If applicable, performance in recent years was compared to forecasts included in prior valuations. Based on the results of the qualitative assessment, VF concluded it was not more likely than not the carrying values of the goodwill and indefinite-lived trademark intangible assets were greater than their fair values, and that further quantitative testing was not necessary.
Management’s Use of Estimates and Assumptions
Management made its estimates based on information available as of the date of our assessments, using assumptions we believe market participants would use in performing an independent valuation of the business. It is possible that VF’s conclusions regarding impairment or recoverability of goodwill or indefinite-
lived intangible assets in any reporting unit could change in future periods. There can be no assurance that the estimates and assumptions used in our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment testing will prove to be accurate predictions of the future, if, for example, (i) the businesses do not perform as projected, (ii) overall economic conditions in Fiscal 2022 or future years vary from current assumptions (including changes in discount rates), (iii) business conditions or strategies for a specific reporting unit change from current assumptions, including loss of major customers, (iv) investors require higher rates of return on equity investments in the marketplace, or (v) enterprise values of comparable publicly traded companies, or actual sales transactions of comparable companies, were to decline, resulting in lower multiples of revenues and EBITDA.
A future impairment charge for goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets could have a material effect on VF’s consolidated financial position and results of operations.
Income Taxes
As a global company, VF is subject to income taxes and files income tax returns in over 100 U.S. and foreign jurisdictions each year. Due to economic and political conditions, tax rates in various jurisdictions may be subject to significant change. The Company could be subject to changes in its tax rates, the adoption of new U.S. or international tax legislation or changes in interpretation of existing tax laws and regulations or rulings by courts or government authorities leading to exposure to additional tax liabilities. In particular, tax authorities and the courts have increased their focus on income earned in no- or low-tax jurisdictions or income that is not taxed in any jurisdiction. Tax authorities have also become skeptical of special tax rulings provided to companies offering lower taxes than may be applicable in other countries. VF makes an ongoing assessment to identify any significant exposure related to increases in tax rates in the jurisdictions in which VF operates.
Furthermore, in February 2015, the European Union Commission (“EU”) opened a state aid investigation into Belgium’s tax rulings. On January 11, 2016, the EU announced its decision that these rulings were illegal and ordered that tax benefits granted under these rulings should be collected from the affected companies, including VF. On March 22, 2016, the Belgium government filed an appeal seeking annulment of the EU decision. Additionally, on June 21, 2016, VF Europe BVBA filed its own application for annulment of the EU decision. On December 22, 2016, Belgium adopted a law which entitled the Belgium tax authorities to issue tax assessments and demand timely payments from companies which benefited from the excess profits regime. On January 10, 2017, VF Europe BVBA received an assessment for €31.9 million tax and interest related to excess profits benefits received in prior years. VF Europe BVBA remitted €31.9 million ($33.9 million) on January 13, 2017, which was recorded as an income tax receivable in 2017 based on the expected success of the aforementioned requests for annulment. An additional assessment of €3.1 million ($3.8 million) was received and paid in January 2018. On February 14, 2019 the General Court annulled the EU decision and on April 26, 2019 the EU appealed the General Court’s annulment. Both listed requests for annulment remain open and unresolved. Additionally, the EU has initiated proceedings related to individual rulings granted by Belgium, including the ruling
granted to VF. If this matter is adversely resolved, these amounts will not be collected by VF.
The calculation of income tax liabilities involves uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations, which are subject to legal interpretation and significant management judgment. VF’s income tax returns are regularly examined by federal, state and foreign tax authorities, and those audits may result in proposed adjustments. VF has reviewed all issues raised upon examination, as well as any exposure for issues that may be raised in future examinations. VF has evaluated these potential issues under the “more-likely-than-not” standard of the accounting literature. A tax position is recognized if it meets this standard and is measured at the largest amount of benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized. Such judgments and estimates may change based on audit settlements, court cases and interpretation of tax laws and regulations. Income tax expense could be materially affected to the extent VF prevails in a tax position or when the statute of limitations expires for a tax position for which a liability for unrecognized tax benefits or valuation allowances have been established, or to the extent VF is required to pay amounts greater than the established liability for unrecognized tax benefits. VF does not currently anticipate any material impact on earnings from the ultimate resolution of income tax uncertainties. There are no accruals for general or unknown tax expenses.
As of March 2021, VF has $326.4 million of gross deferred income tax assets related to operating loss and capital loss carryforwards, and $270.0 million of valuation allowances against those assets. Realization of deferred tax assets related to operating loss and capital loss carryforwards is dependent on future taxable income in specific jurisdictions, the amount and timing of which are uncertain, and on possible changes in tax laws. If management believes that VF will not be able to generate sufficient taxable income or capital gains to offset losses during the carryforward periods, VF records valuation allowances to reduce those deferred tax assets to amounts expected to be ultimately realized. If in a future period management determines that the amount of deferred tax assets to be realized differs from the net recorded amount, VF would
VF Corporation Fiscal 2021 Form 10-K 41
record an adjustment to income tax expense in that future period.
On May 19, 2019, Switzerland voted to approve the Federal Act on Tax Reform and AHV Financing (“Swiss Tax Act”). Provisions of the Swiss Tax Act were enacted for Swiss federal purposes during the second quarter of Fiscal 2020, and later enacted for certain cantons during the fourth quarter. In addition to changes to the federal and cantonal tax rates, there were transitional measures allowing companies to recognize a step-up in tax
basis that is subsequently amortized over a period of time. Calculation of the additional tax basis involves estimates and application of specific guidelines determined by the Swiss federal authorities as well as through ongoing discussions with Swiss cantonal tax authorities. These provisions resulted in adjustments to deferred tax assets and liabilities such that a net tax benefit of $93.6 million was recorded in the year ended March 2020.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Standards
Refer to Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements for discussion of recently issued and adopted accounting standards.