ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements for the two years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the related notes thereto, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth under the section heading “Item 1A. Risk Factors” above and elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. See section heading “Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” above.
All dollar amounts stated herein are in U.S. dollars in thousands, unless specified otherwise, except per share-related amounts. References to AUD or A$ refer to Australian currency and USD or $ to United States currency. The scientific and technical disclosures about Mt Todd in this discussion and analysis have been reviewed and approved by John W. Rozelle, Senior Vice President of Vista. Mr. Rozelle is a qualified person as defined by NI 43-101.
Overview
Vista Gold Corp. and its subsidiaries (collectively, “Vista,” the “Company,” “we,” “our,” or “us”) operates in the gold mining industry. We are focused on evaluation, acquisition, exploration and advancement of gold exploration and potential development projects, which may lead to gold production or value adding strategic transactions such as earn-in right agreements, option agreements, leases to third parties, joint venture arrangements with other mining companies, or outright sales of assets for cash and/or other consideration. We look for opportunities to improve the value of our gold projects through exploration drilling and/or technical studies focused on optimizing previous engineering work. We do not currently generate cash flows from mining operations.
The Company’s flagship asset is its 100% owned Mt Todd gold project (“Mt Todd” or the “Project”) in Northern Territory Australia. Mt Todd is the largest undeveloped gold project in Australia. Since acquiring Mt Todd in 2006, we have invested substantial financial resources to systematically explore, evaluate, engineer, permit and de-risk the Project. We believe these efforts have increased the total gold resources and reserves, added substantially to the underlying value of the Project, and demonstrated its development potential.
In September 2019, Vista announced the positive results of an updated preliminary feasibility study for Mt Todd and subsequently amended this study in September 2020 to correct and/or clarify certain items (the “2019 PFS”). Key improvements reflected in the 2019 PFS included increased estimated gold recovery and production, and selection of vertical milling equipment that is expected to be better suited for the anticipated grinding requirements and to reduce energy consumption. Mt Todd will benefit from these improvements, other design efficiencies, and utilization of certain existing infrastructure, which have reduced the Project’s estimated development costs.
Vista held other non-core assets at December 31, 2020, including royalty interests in the United States and Indonesia, payments receivable upon cancellation of a royalty on a gold/silver project in Mexico sold in 2020, mill equipment not in use and listed for sale, and other holdings of third-party equity securities.
COVID-19 Pandemic Update
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to have a significant impact on human life and health, and on the global economy, financial markets and commodities. The full extent and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in human and financial terms remains unknown. The slowdown in economic activity resulting from the global response to slow the spread of COVID-19 has elevated the prospects of a severe global recession, which has caused many countries to introduce economic stimulus measures. Certain market segments have declined significantly and remain highly volatile. Precious metals, while volatile, have generally demonstrated an upward trend.
The global response undertaken to slow the spread of COVID-19 commonly includes travel restrictions, stay-at-home orders and social distancing. These and other actions caused many entities to temporarily suspend operations, re-direct resources
and defer activities. Many entities have re-started operations in some capacity, but have and will continue to experience adverse financial impacts. The impact on investors, banking institutions, businesses, the global economy or financial and commodity markets may have a material adverse impact on the Company’s financial condition and results of operations.
Vista’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic has been to ensure the health and safety of its employees and other stakeholders. Corporate activities continue with personnel working remotely and on a limited in-office basis. Corporate travel and participation in conferences has been replaced by video conferencing. In Northern Territory, Australia, Covid-19 cases are almost nil and control measures have been significantly relaxed. Australia’s international borders remain closed, with the exception of its citizens, residents, and immediate family members. Mt Todd continues to operate under a COVID-19 Management and Mitigation Plan. Direct costs to implement and maintain this plan have been minimal. To date, our workforce remains healthy. Vista experienced a decline in the value of its other investments during the initial stages of the pandemic, but has since seen the share prices of its other investments recover to pre-pandemic levels and higher. Management expects to incur ongoing costs while certain corporate objectives, including efforts to seek a strategic development partner, are extended. These and other conditions may ultimately have a material adverse impact on the Company’s financial condition and results of operations. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” and “Risk Factors” for additional information.
Results from Operations
Summary
Consolidated net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $420, or $0.00 per common share in the capital of Vista (each, a “Common Share”) on both a basic and diluted basis. Consolidated net loss for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $9,386, or $0.09 per Common Share on both a basic and diluted basis. The principal components of our 2020 net income and the year-over-year changes are discussed below.
The Company had cash and short-term investments totaling $8,162, working capital of $8,281 and no debt as of December 31, 2020.
Gain on Disposal of Mineral Property Interests, Net
In May 2020, the Company received $2,400 to cancel both a 1% net smelter return royalty (“NSR”) on the first 1,250,000 gold ounces produced at the Awak Mas project and a 1.25% NSR on the next 1,250,000 gold ounces produced. Including recognition of the associated deferred option gain, the Company recognized a gain of $2,568 upon receipt of the payment. In July 2020, the Company received the final Los Reyes option payment and transferred control of the project to Prime Mining. Including recognition of the associated deferred option gain, we recognized a gain of $3,540 upon completion of the transfer. No such gains were recognized in 2019.
Exploration, Property Evaluation and Holding costs
Exploration, property evaluation and holding costs, including fixed costs, discretionary programs, and non-cash stock-based compensation, were $4,545 and $4,093 during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. These costs were predominantly associated with Mt Todd and were comprised of fixed costs and discretionary costs.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 our fixed exploration, property evaluation and holding costs totaled $3,266 and $3,028, respectively. These costs included expenditures necessary to ensure that we preserve our property rights and meet our safety, regulatory and environmental responsibilities. The principal components of the increase in 2020 included greater direct involvement by corporate personnel on specific Mt Todd activities, offset by lower environmental monitoring costs and lower care and maintenance costs.
Mt Todd 2020 discretionary costs totaled $1,279. Discretionary programs during 2020 included geotechnical and exploration drilling, activities to support the government’s review of Vista’s operational MMP, modification of our agreement with the Jawoyn Association Aboriginal Corporation (the “Jawoyn Association”) and the strategic initiative to secure a development partner for Mt Todd. The 2019 discretionary programs totaled $1,065. The 2019 discretionary programs included additional ore sorting testing and an update of the Mt Todd preliminary feasibility study.
Included in the 2020 and 2019 exploration, property evaluation and holding costs were non-cash stock-based compensation of $332 and $172, respectively.
Corporate Administration
Corporate administration costs were $3,777 and $3,940 during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Included in the 2020 and 2019 corporate administration costs is non-cash stock-based compensation of $581 and $593, respectively. Costs were generally lower during 2020 due to reduced travel as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by higher costs for legal services and insurance.
Non-Operating Income and Expenses
Gain/(loss) on Other Investments
Gain/(loss) on other investments was $2,405 and $(1,643) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. These amounts are the net result of changes in fair value of our marketable securities, mainly Midas Gold Shares, and the realized gain upon sale of Midas Gold Shares. The Company sold all of its remaining 6,882,115 Midas Gold Shares and received net proceeds of $5,788 during the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company sold 920,500 shares of Midas Gold and received net proceeds of $413 during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Financial Position, Liquidity and Capital Resources
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $6,955 and $7,053 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decline in net cash used in operating activities resulted from higher cash expenditures for exploration, property evaluation and holding costs and corporate administration, offset by net sources of cash from changes in working capital items.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities of $11,628 for the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted primarily from $5,788 received from the sale of our Midas Gold Shares, $3,048 received for both the partial cancellation of the Awak Mas royalty and the receipt of the final Guadalupe de los Reyes option payment, and $2,860 of net redemptions of short-term investments comprised of U.S. Government Treasury bills and notes.
Net Cash provided by investing activities of $7,377 for the year ended December 31, 2019 resulted primarily from $3,737 received for net redemptions of short-term investments comprised of U.S. Government Treasury bills and notes and receipt of $3,167 under the Guadalupe de los Reyes option agreement.
Financing Activities
Net cash of $1,681 for the year ended December 31, 2020 was provided mainly from net proceeds from equity financing of $1,768, which was received upon issuance of 1,849,399 Common Shares under our at-the-market offering agreement (the “ATM Agreement”).
Net cash of $13 for the year ended December 31, 2019 was provided by $89 received from exercised stock options less $76 for payment of certain employee withholding tax obligations in lieu of the issuance of common shares under the Company’s long-term equity incentive plan.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company had working capital of $8,281 as of December 31, 2020. This amount included a deferred option gain of $68 related to the Awak Mas transaction, which will ultimately be recognized as income and not require any use of current assets. Consequently, the components of working capital affecting Vista’s liquidity and capital resources as of December 31, 2020 included current assets totaling $9,407 offset by accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $1,058. This compares to current assets totaling $8,826 offset by accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $662 at December 31, 2019. Furthermore, cash plus short-term investments totaled $8,162 at December 31, 2020 compared to $4,668 at December 31, 2019.
Vista’s liquidity improved primarily through successful monetization of its non-core assets, which generated total net cash proceeds of $8,836 during the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company’s ATM Program (defined below) generated additional net proceeds to the Company of $1,768 during the year ended December 31, 2020 and our expenditures for operating activities remained relatively constant at $6,955. For additional details see the “Results from Operations” section above and the preceding discussions in this section of operating activities, investing activities and financing activities.
Vista’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic has been to ensure the health and safety of its employees and other stakeholders. To date, the direct effect on Vista’s liquidity and capital resources has been limited to ongoing costs incurred and extension of some corporate strategic objectives. This has been offset by cash inflows from non-core asset monetization and use of the Company’s ATM Program. Despite the recent improvement in Vista’s liquidity and capital resources and a generally upward trend in the gold price, the duration of global travel restrictions and the pace and extent of economic recovery may affect the Company’s ability to raise additional working capital on reasonable terms, or at all, and are likely to continue to extend the time required to accomplish strategic initiatives. Extended delays will affect Vista’s liquidity and capital resources and may ultimately have a material adverse effect on Vista’s short-term and long-term financial position and results of operations.
Despite these conditions, we believe our existing working capital as of December 31, 2020, together with other potential future sources of non-dilutive financing, will be sufficient to fully fund our currently planned corporate expenses and Project holding costs, which we expect to be generally consistent with 2020 costs, and discretionary programs for more than 12 months.
The Company continues to focus on monetizing non-dilutive sources of funding. The Company received $1,100 in January 2021 under the Los Reyes agreement and has agreements in place to realize up to an additional $3,500 over the next five months from the cancellation of its royalty rights in the Los Reyes and Awak Mas gold projects. The Company also owns another royalty interest and holds listed equity securities. Additionally, the Company’s used mill equipment is being marketed by a third-party mining equipment dealer.
If other potential sources of non-dilutive financing cannot be realized within the timeframe or for the amounts required to meet obligations when due, Vista will need to raise additional capital through equity issuances, or other means. A public offering or private placement would be the most likely approach to raising additional capital if the Company determines that larger scale programs are deemed appropriate. The Company also has an at-the-market offering agreement (the “ATM Agreement”) in place with H. C. Wainwright & Co., LLC (“Wainwright”) to provide balance sheet flexibility at a potentially lower cost than other means of equity issuances.
Under the ATM Agreement the Company may, but is not obligated to, issue and sell Common Shares through Wainwright for aggregate sales proceeds of up to $10,000 (the “ATM Program”). The ATM Agreement was amended in June 2020 to remain in force until terminated by either party. During the year ended December 31, 2020 the Company sold 2,028,334 Common Shares under the ATM Program for net proceeds of $1,959, which included $191 that settled in January 2021. Offers or sales of Common Shares under the ATM Program will be made only in the United States in an “at the market offering” as defined in Rule 415 under the United States Securities Act of 1933, as amended, subject to an effective registration statement under the U.S. Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and no offers or sales of Common Shares under the ATM Agreement will be made in Canada. The Common Shares will be distributed at market prices prevailing at the time of sale.
Vista’s viability beyond 12 months is dependent upon our ability to maintain a low expenditure profile, realize value from non-dilutive assets, and, if necessary, issue additional equity or find other means of financing to secure sufficient funding. Our objective is to maintain adequate liquidity and seek to preserve and enhance the value of our core assets in order to assure positive equity returns to our shareholders. The underlying value and recoverability of the amounts shown as mineral properties and plant and equipment in our Condensed Consolidated Balance Sheets are dependent on our ability to attract sufficient capital resources to execute our strategy and the ultimate success of our programs to enhance value, most importantly at Mt Todd.
Fair Value Accounting
The following table sets forth the Company’s assets measured at fair value within the fair value hierarchy. As required by accounting guidance, assets are classified in their entirety based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement.
Other investments are classified as Level 1 of the fair value hierarchy as they are valued at unadjusted quoted market prices in an active market and are included in other investments on the Consolidated Balance Sheets for each period presented.
There were no material transfers between levels nor were there any changes in valuation techniques in 2019.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements required to be disclosed in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Contractual Obligations
We have no material contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020.
Summary of Quarterly Results
Critical Accounting Policies and Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Critical Accounting Policies
Principles of Consolidation
The Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of Vista and more-than-50%-owned subsidiaries that it controls. All significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated. The Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Use of Estimates
Preparation of the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, income and expenses during the reporting period. The more significant areas requiring the use of management estimates and assumptions are: the fair value and accounting treatment of financial instruments; useful lives of assets for asset depreciation purposes; valuation allowances for deferred tax assets; the fair value and accounting treatment of stock-based compensation; the provision for environmental liabilities; and asset impairments. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Accordingly, actual results will likely differ from the amounts estimated in these financial statements.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents include cash on hand and government securities with original maturities of 90 days or less when purchased. Because of the short maturity of these investments, the carrying amounts approximate their fair values.
Foreign Currency Transactions
Our functional currency is the U.S. dollar. Foreign currency transactions denominated in currency other than the functional currency are recorded at the approximate rate of exchange at the transaction date and any gains/(losses) resulting therefrom are recorded in other expense. For each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded insignificant net foreign currency gains/(losses).
Short-term Investments
Short-term investments consist of securities with original maturity dates greater than 90 days and less than one year. These securities are typically United States government treasury bills and/or notes. Short-term investments are recorded at amortized cost and are classified as debt securities held-to-maturity as the Company has the intention and ability to hold these instruments until their original maturity date at the time of purchase.
Mineral Properties
Mineral property acquisition costs, including directly related costs, are capitalized when incurred, and mineral property exploration costs are expensed as incurred. When we determine that a mineral property can be economically developed and reserves are established under SEC Industry Guide 7, costs incurred thereafter to develop such property will be capitalized. Capitalized costs will be depleted using the units-of-production method over the estimated life of the proven and probable reserves. If mineral properties are subsequently sold or abandoned, any undepleted costs will be charged to expense in that period.
The recoverability of the carrying values of our mineral properties is dependent upon economic reserves being discovered or developed on the properties, permitting, financing, start-up, and commercial production from, or the sale/lease of, or other strategic transactions related to these properties. Development and/or start-up of any of these projects will depend on, among other things, management’s ability to raise sufficient capital for these purposes. Proceeds received from option or sale agreements are ascribed to recovery of the carrying value of the related project until the carrying value reaches
zero. Thereafter, any additional proceeds received are recognized as a contract liability (deferred option gain) until control has transferred to the buyer or the related contract terminates.
We assess the carrying value of mineral properties for impairment whenever information or circumstances indicate the potential for impairment. This would include events and circumstances such as our inability to obtain all the necessary permits, changes in the legal status of our mineral properties, government actions, the results of exploration activities and technical evaluations and changes in economic conditions, including the price of gold and other commodities or input prices. Such evaluations compare estimated future net cash flows with our carrying costs and future obligations on an undiscounted basis. If it is determined that the estimated future undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying value of the property, a write-down to the estimated fair value will then be reported in our Consolidated Statement of Income/(Loss) for the period. Where estimates of future net cash flows are not determinable and where other conditions indicate the potential for impairment, management uses available market information and/or third-party valuation experts to assess if the carrying value can be recovered and to estimate fair value.
Impairment
Carrying values of long-lived assets, other than mineral properties, are evaluated for impairment at such time that information becomes available indicating that the carrying value may not be recoverable. If it is determined that the fair value is less than the carrying value an impairment charge equal to the difference between the fair value and the carrying value will be recorded in our Consolidated Statements of Income/(Loss).
Stock-Based Compensation
Under our stock option, long-term incentive, and deferred share unit plans, the Company can grant stock incentive options, restricted share units, and deferred share units to executives, employees, consultants and non-employee directors as applicable. Compensation expense for such grants is recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Income/(Loss) as a component of exploration, property evaluation and holding costs and corporate administration, with a corresponding increase to Common Shares in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The fair value of option grants is calculated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The fair value of restricted and deferred share units is based on the closing price of our Common Shares on the grant date, and in certain cases, adjusted by a Brownian motion price model. The expense is based on the fair value of the grant on the grant date and is recognized over the vesting period specified for each grant. Forfeitures of unvested awards for all stock-based compensation result in expense reversal upon forfeiture.
Financial Instruments
Accounting Standards Codification Topic 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures (“ASC 820”) of the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. ASC 820 establishes a fair value hierarchy based on the level of independent, objective evidence surrounding the inputs used to measure fair value. A financial instrument’s categorization within the fair value hierarchy is based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. ASC 820 prioritizes the inputs into three levels that may be used to measure fair value:
● Level 1 - Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date for identical, unrestricted assets or liabilities.
● Level 2 - Observable inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly, including quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar assets and liabilities in markets that are not active; or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data by correlation or other means.
● Level 3 - Prices or valuation techniques requiring inputs that are both significant to the fair value measurement and unobservable.
Our financial instruments include cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities, short-term investments, accounts payable and certain other current assets and liabilities. Due to the short-term nature of our cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, accounts payable and certain other current assets and liabilities, we believe that their carrying amounts approximate fair value. Our other investments are accounted for at fair value based on quoted market prices in an active market and are included in Level 1 of the fair value hierarchy.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
No recent accounting pronouncements are applicable to Vista at this time.
Non-U.S. GAAP Financial Measures
In this report, we have provided information prepared or calculated according to U.S. GAAP, as well as provided some non-U.S. GAAP prospective financial performance measures. Because the non-U.S. GAAP performance measures do not have any standardized meaning prescribed by U.S. GAAP, they may not be comparable to similar measures presented by other companies. These measures should not be considered in isolation or as substitutes for measures of performance prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. There are limitations associated with the use of such non-U.S. GAAP measures. Since these measures do not incorporate revenues, changes in working capital and non-operating cash costs, they are not necessarily indicative of potential operating profit or loss, or cash flow from operations as determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
The non-U.S. GAAP measures Total Cash Costs, Cash Costs per ounce and All-in Sustaining Costs (“AISC”) per ounce are not, and are not intended to be, presentations in accordance with U.S. GAAP. As referenced in the 2019 PFS, these measures represent, respectively, our prospective cash costs and all-in sustaining costs related to our Project.
We believe that these metrics help investors understand the economics of the Project. We present the Non-U.S. GAAP financial measures for our Project in the tables below. Actual U.S. GAAP results may vary from the amounts disclosed. Other companies may calculate these measures differently.
Total Cash Costs and All-In Sustaining Costs
Total Cash Costs, Cash Costs per ounce, and AISC per ounce are non-U.S. GAAP metrics developed by the World Gold Council to provide transparency into the costs associated with producing gold and provide a comparable standard. The Company reports Cash Costs and AISC per ounce because it believes that these metrics more completely reflect mining costs over the life of a mine. These metrics are widely used in the gold mining industry as a benchmark for performance.
Total Cash Costs consist of operating costs net of power sales, refining costs, and non-government royalties, and exclude depreciation and amortization. The sum of these costs is divided by the corresponding gold ounces estimated to be sold to determine a Cash Cost per ounce amount. The Company’s Total Cash Costs exclude the allocation of corporate general and administrative costs.
AISC consist of Total Cash Costs (as described above), plus sustaining capital costs. The sum of AISC is divided by the corresponding gold ounces estimated to be sold to determine AISC per ounce.
Costs excluded from Total Cash Costs and All-in Sustaining Costs are income taxes, government royalties, financing charges, costs related to business combinations, asset acquisitions other than sustaining capital, and asset dispositions.
The following table reconciles the Mt Todd Total Cash Costs, Cash Costs per ounce and AISC per ounce amounts with the Project costs described in the 2019 PFS.