ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements.”
Our Industries and Developments
Viavi Solutions Inc. (VIAVI, also referred to as the Company, we, our, and us) is a global provider of network test, monitoring and assurance solutions for communications service providers (CSPs), enterprises, network equipment manufacturers (NEMs), original equipment manufacturers (OEMs), government and avionics. We help these customers harness the power of instruments, automation, intelligence and virtualization to Command the network. VIAVI is also a leader in management solutions for 3D sensing, anti-counterfeiting, consumer electronics, industrial, aerospace, automotive and medical applications.
To serve our markets, during fiscal 2021 we operated the following business segments:
•Network Enablement (NE);
•Service Enablement (SE); and
•Optical Security and Performance Products (OSP).
Refer to “Item 1 Business” for information related to our business segments.
COVID-19 Pandemic Update
The COVID-19 pandemic has prompted authorities worldwide to implement measures to contain the virus, which include and are not limited to, travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, temporary business closures among others. The COVID-19 pandemic and these aforementioned measures, have had and continue to have, a substantial macroeconomic impact on businesses and economies worldwide. These conditions may continue and could result in an adverse impact to our operations.
Worldwide distribution by central governments of the vaccines commenced in late 2020. There have been logistical and operational challenges with the rollout and global demand for the vaccine has far exceeded supply. It will take some time for the global population to receive vaccines, allowing for widespread immunity to develop. At the same time, new and potentially more contagious variants of the virus are developing in several countries and regions in which we operate.
Our priority during the COVID-19 pandemic has remained focused on protecting the health and safety of our employees, customers, suppliers, and communities, including implementing early and regular updates to our health and safety policies and procedures. We continued to follow the strict COVID-19 pandemic protocols as required by local, state and federal guidelines during the fiscal first half of 2021 and began to relax these restrictions based on government guidelines during the fiscal second half 2021. These COVID-19 pandemic protocols have not thus far had a substantial net impact on our liquidity position. We continue to generate operating cash flows to meet our short-term liquidity needs, and we expect to maintain access to the capital markets. To date, we have not observed any material or materially adverse indication of impairments under the authoritative guidance, to any of our assets or a significant change to the fair value of assets due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
We have experienced and may continue to experience disruption of our facilities, suppliers and contract manufacturers, which has impacted and may continue to negatively impact our sales and operating results. In addition, we have experienced and may continue to experience shipping and logistics challenges as many of our customers have also closed their facilities and are operating under similar restrictions. NSE has experienced some impact to customer demand. Customer demand will continue to be challenging to calibrate, due to the nature and timing of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, we operate a shared services center in Pune, India that provides important finance and IT support services. The recent substantial increase of reported COVID-19 transmission rates in that country due to the emergence of a more virulent variant of the virus has led to a significant spike in illness and death rates. If the situation in India does not improve, our operations and employees there could be negatively impacted. We will continue to take the measures described above to ensure the health and safety of our employees and those they come in contact with.
We have a global supply chain footprint with our primary manufacturing partners located in China, France, Germany, United Kingdom and the United States. We have experienced increased freight and logistics costs due to supply chain shortages resulting in extended lead times with respect to our NE Field Instrument products. Our supply chain team has been working to meet our customer needs by executing on a risk mitigation plan, including multi-sourcing, pre-ordering components, transforming our logistics network, prioritizing critical customers, working with local government agencies to understand challenges, and partnering on solutions that limit disruptions to our operations while ensuring the safety of our employees, partners and suppliers. Nonetheless, surges in infection rate, new shutdowns, emergence of new and potentially more contagious variants of the virus and the slow pace of vaccine rollout may impact our suppliers and our ability to source materials in a timely manner. COVID-19 has brought unprecedented challenges, we believe that we have a robust and adaptable supply chain. While our industry faced supply chain challenges resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic such as diminished manufacturing capacity and materials shortages resulted in extended lead-times, increased logistics costs, and product volume impact these factors did not materially impact our business in fiscal year 2021.
While capital markets and worldwide economies have stabilized and recovered since being significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, on June 8, 2020 the National Bureau of Economic Research announced that the U.S. was in a recession. As the pandemic spread across the globe in Spring 2020, there was a tightening of the credit markets. We entered into a $300 million secured credit facility in May 2020 to strengthen our liquidity position but have not drawn on this facility to date. If there is a prolonged global recession, we could face future liquidity challenges and may not be able to obtain additional financing on favorable terms or at all.
Despite the continued challenges that we are facing due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we remain confident that the actions that we are taking to manage such challenges, combined with our strong liquidity, position us well to navigate through the current economic environment and continue to execute on our long-term value creation strategy. We expect our principal growth drivers, 5G Wireless, Fiber and 3D Sensing to continue driving growth and profitability in fiscal 2022.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to “Note 2. Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements” under Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, regarding the effect of certain recent accounting pronouncements on our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (U.S. GAAP), which require management to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, net revenue and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Our estimates are based on historical experience and assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. We believe that the accounting estimates employed and the resulting balances are reasonable; however, actual results may differ from these estimates and such differences may be material. We believe the following critical accounting policies are affected by significant estimates, assumptions or judgments used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition
We derive revenue from a diverse portfolio of network solutions and optical technology products and services, as follows:
•Products: NE and SE products include instruments, microprobes and perpetual software licenses that support the development, production, maintenance and optimization of network systems. Our OSP products include proprietary pigments used for optical security and product enhancement applications as well as optical filters and Engineered Diffusers™ used in a range of applications for the consumer electronics, government, automotive and industrial markets.
•Services: We also offer a range of product support and professional services designed to comprehensively address customer requirements. These include repair, calibration, extended warranty, software support, technical assistance, training and consulting services. Implementation services provided in conjunction with hardware or software solution projects include sale of the products along with project management, set-up and installation.
Steps of revenue recognition
We account for revenue in accordance with the revenue standard, in which the following five steps are applied to recognize revenue:
1.Identify the contract with a customer: Generally, we consider customer purchase orders which, in some cases are governed by master sales or other purchase agreements, to be the customer contract. All of the following criteria must be met before we consider an agreement to qualify as a contract with a customer under the revenue standard: (i) it must be approved by all parties; (ii) each party’s rights regarding the goods and services to be transferred can be identified; (iii) the payment terms for the goods and services can be identified; (iv) the customer has the ability and intent to pay and collection of substantially all of the consideration is probable; and, (v) the agreement has commercial substance. We exercise reasonable judgment to determine the customer’s ability and intent to pay, which is based upon various factors, including the customer’s historical payment experience or credit and financial information and credit risk management measures that we implement.
2.Identify the performance obligations in the contract: We assess whether each promised good or service is distinct for the purpose of identifying the various performance obligations in each contract. Promised goods and services are considered distinct provided that: (i) the customer can benefit from the good or service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer; and (ii) our promise to transfer the good or service to the customer is separately identifiable or distinct from other promises in the contract. Our performance obligations consist of a variety of products and services offerings, which include networking equipment; proprietary pigment; optical filters; proprietary software licenses; and support and maintenance, which includes hardware support that extends beyond our standard warranties, software maintenance, installation, professional and implementation services, and training.
Identifying and evaluating whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations may require significant judgment particularly in NSE due to the underlying nature of the product and service offerings. We may enter into contracts that involve a significant level of integration and interdependency between a software license and installation services. Judgment may be required to determine whether the software license is considered distinct in the context of the contract and accounted for separately, or not distinct in the context of the contract and accounted for together with the installation service.
3.Determine the transaction price: Transaction price reflects the amount of consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring goods or services to the customer. Our contracts may include terms that could cause variability in the transaction price, including rebates, sales returns, market incentives and volume discounts. Variable consideration is generally accounted for at the portfolio level and estimated based on historical information. If a contract includes a variable amount, the price adjustments are estimated at contract inception. In both cases, estimates are updated at the end of each reporting period as additional information becomes available.
4.Allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract: If the contract contains a single performance obligation, the entire transaction price is allocated to that performance obligation. Many of our contracts include multiple performance obligations with a combination of distinct products and services, maintenance and support, professional services and/or training. Contracts may also include rights or options to acquire future products and/or services, which are accounted for as separate performance obligations by us, only if the right or option provides the customer with a material right that it would not receive without entering into the contract. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the total transaction value to each distinct performance obligation based on relative standalone selling price (SSP). Judgment is required to determine the SSP for each distinct performance obligation. The best evidence of SSP is the observable price of a good or service when we sell that good or service separately under similar circumstances to similar customers. If a directly observable price is not available, the SSP must be estimated based on multiple factors including, but not limited to, historical pricing practices, internal costs, and profit objectives as well as overall market conditions.
5.Recognize revenue when (or as) performance obligations are satisfied: Revenue is recognized at the point in time control is transferred to the customer. For hardware sales, transfer of control to the customer typically occurs at the point the product is shipped or delivered to the customer’s designated location. For software license sales, transfer of control to the customer typically occurs upon shipment, electronic delivery, or when the software is available for download by the customer. For sales of implementation service and solution contracts or in instances where software is sold along with essential installation services, transfer of control occurs and revenue is typically recognized upon customer acceptance. In certain instances, acceptance is deemed to have occurred if all acceptance provisions lapse, or if we have evidence that all acceptance provisions will be, or have been, satisfied. For fixed-price support and extended warranty contracts, or certain software arrangements, which provide customers with a right to access over a discrete period, control is deemed to transfer over time and revenue is recognized on a straight-line basis over the contract term due to the stand-ready nature of the performance obligation. Revenue from hardware repairs and calibration services outside of an extended warranty or support contract is recognized at the time of completion of the related service. For other professional services or time-based labor contracts, revenue is recognized as we perform the services and the customers receive and/or consume the benefits.
Business Combinations
We use the acquisition method of accounting under the authoritative guidance on business combinations. Each acquired company’s operating results are included in our Consolidated Financial Statements beginning on the date of acquisition. The purchase price is equivalent to the fair value of consideration transferred. Tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of the date of acquisition are recorded at their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date. Goodwill is recognized for the excess of purchase price over the net fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
The allocation of purchase price requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions in determining the fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. With respect to intangible assets, critical estimates in valuing intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future cash flows from customer relationships, developed technology, trade names, acquired patents and discount rates. Management estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur which may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results.
Goodwill Valuation
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price paid over the net fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. We test goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level at least annually, during the fourth quarter of each fiscal year, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstance indicate that the asset may be impaired.
The accounting guidance provides us the option to perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether further impairment testing is necessary. The qualitative assessment considers events and circumstances that might indicate that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carry amount. These events and circumstances include macro-economic conditions, such as a significant adverse change in our operating environment, industry or market considerations; entity-specific events such as increasing costs, declining financial performance, or loss of key personnel; or other events, such as the sale of a reporting unit, adverse regulatory developments or a sustained decrease in our stock price.
If it is determined, as a result of the qualitative assessment, that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, a quantitative test is required. Otherwise, no further testing is required.
Under the quantitative test, if the carrying amount of the reporting unit goodwill exceeds the implied fair value of that goodwill, an impairment loss is recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Operations as impairment of goodwill. Measurement of the fair value of a reporting unit is based on one or more of the following fair value measures: (i) using present value techniques of estimated future cash flows; (ii) using valuation techniques based on multiples of earnings or revenue; or, (iii) a similar performance measure.
Application of the goodwill impairment test requires judgments, including identification of the reporting units, assigning assets and liabilities to reporting units, assigning goodwill to reporting units, a qualitative assessment to determine whether there are any impairment indicators and determining the fair value of each reporting unit. We generally estimate the fair value of a reporting unit using a combination of the income approach, which estimates the fair value based on the future discounted cash flows, and the market approach, which estimates the fair value based on comparable market prices. Our significant estimates in the income approach include our weighted average cost of capital, long-term rate of growth and profitability of the reporting unit’s business and working capital effects. The market approach estimates the fair value of the business based on a comparison of the reporting unit to comparable publicly traded companies in similar lines of business. Significant estimates in the market approach include identifying similar companies with comparable business factors such as size, growth, profitability, risk and return on investment, and assessing comparable revenue and operating income multiples in estimating the fair value of the reporting unit.
We base our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions about the future that we believe are reasonable based on available information. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur that affect the accuracy of our assumptions, estimates and judgments. For example, if the price of our common stock were to significantly decrease combined with other adverse changes in market conditions, thus indicating that the underlying fair value of our reporting units may have decreased, we might be required to reassess the value of our goodwill in the period such circumstances were identified.
In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, we performed the goodwill impairment test in accordance with the authoritative guidance for NE, SE and OSP reporting units, and determined no indicator of impairment. Refer to “Note 9. Goodwill” under Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Income Taxes
In accordance with the authoritative guidance on accounting for income taxes, we recognize income taxes using an asset and liability approach. This approach requires the recognition of taxes payable or refundable for the current year and deferred tax liabilities and assets for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our Consolidated Financial Statements or tax returns. The measurement of current and deferred taxes is based on provisions of the enacted tax law and the effects of future changes in tax laws or rates are not anticipated.
The authoritative guidance provides for recognition of deferred tax assets if the realization of such deferred tax assets is more likely than not to occur based on an evaluation of both positive and negative evidence and the relative weight of the evidence. With the exception of certain international jurisdictions, we have determined that at this time it is more likely than not that deferred tax assets attributable to the remaining jurisdictions will not be realized, primarily due to uncertainties related to our ability to utilize our net operating loss carryforwards before they expire. Accordingly, we have established a valuation allowance for such deferred tax assets. If there is a change in our ability to realize our deferred tax assets for which a valuation allowance has been established, then our tax provision may decrease in the period in which we determine that realization is more likely than not. Likewise, if we determine that it is not more likely than not that our deferred tax assets will be realized, then a valuation allowance may be established for such deferred tax assets and our tax provision may increase in the period in which we make the determination.
The authoritative guidance on accounting for uncertainty in income taxes prescribes the recognition threshold and measurement attributes for financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. Additionally, it provides guidance on recognition, classification and disclosure of tax positions. We are subject to income tax audits by the respective tax authorities in all of the jurisdictions in which we operate. The determination of tax liabilities in each of these jurisdictions requires the interpretation and application of complex and sometimes uncertain tax laws and regulations. We recognize liabilities based on our estimate of whether, and the extent to which, additional tax liabilities are more likely than not. If we ultimately determine that the payment of such a liability is not necessary, then we reverse the liability and recognize a tax benefit during the period in which the determination is made that the liability is no longer necessary.
The recognition and measurement of current taxes payable or refundable and deferred tax assets and liabilities requires that we make certain estimates and judgments. Changes to these estimates or a change in judgment may have a material impact on our tax provision in a future period.
Contingencies
We are subject to various potential loss contingencies arising in the ordinary course of business. In determining a loss contingency, we consider the likelihood of loss or impairment of an asset or the incurrence of a liability, as well as its ability to reasonably estimate the amount of loss. An estimated loss is accrued when it is probable that an asset has been impaired, a liability has been incurred and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. We regularly evaluate current information available to determine whether such accruals should be adjusted and whether new accruals are required.
Contingent liabilities include contingent consideration in connection with our acquisitions, which represent earn-out payments recognized at fair value on the acquisition date and remeasured each reporting period with subsequent adjustments recognized in the Selling, General and Administrative (SG&A) expense of our Consolidated Statements of Operations. Contingent consideration is valued using significant inputs that are not observable in the market pursuant to fair value measurement accounting. While we believe the estimates and assumptions are reasonable, there is significant judgment and uncertainty involved.
Pursuant to instruction 1 of the instructions to paragraph 303(a) of Regulation S-K, discussion of the results of operations for the fiscal year ended June 27, 2020 and fiscal year ended June 29, 2019 has been omitted. Such omitted discussion can be found under Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 27, 2020, filed with the SEC on August 24, 2020.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The results of operations for the current period are not necessarily indicative of results to be expected for future periods. The following table summarizes selected Consolidated Statements of Operations items as a percentage of net revenue:
Financial Data for Fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes selected Consolidated Statement of Operations items (in millions, except for percentages):
Foreign Currency Impact on Results of Operations
While the majority of our net revenue and operating expenses are denominated in U.S. dollar, a portion of our international operations are denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. Changes in foreign exchange rates may significantly affect revenue and expenses. While we use foreign currency hedging contracts to mitigate some foreign currency exchange risk, these activities are limited in the protection that they provide us and can themselves result in losses. We have presented below “constant dollar” comparisons of our net sales and operating expenses which exclude the impact of currency exchange rate fluctuations. Constant dollar net revenue and operating expenses are non-GAAP financial measures, which is information derived from consolidated financial information but not presented in our financial statements prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Our management believes these non-GAAP measures, when considered in conjunction with the corresponding U.S. GAAP measures, may facilitate a better understanding of changes in net revenue and operating expenses.
Fiscal 2021 and 2020
If currency exchange rates had been constant in fiscal 2021 and 2020, our consolidated net revenue in “constant dollars” would have decreased by approximately $15.5 million, or 1.3% of net revenue, which primarily impacted our NE and SE segments. The impact of foreign currency fluctuations on net revenue was not indicative of the impact on net income due to the offsetting foreign currency impact on operating costs and expenses. If currency exchange rates had been constant in fiscal 2021 and 2020, our consolidated operating expenses in “constant dollars” would have decreased by approximately $9.8 million, or 0.8% of net revenue.
The Results of Operations are presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP and not using constant dollars. Refer to