ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Financial Statements of our Company and notes thereto included elsewhere in this report.
Forward Looking Statements
The following information specifies certain forward-looking statements of the management of our Company. Forward- looking statements are statements that estimate the happening of future events and are not based on historical fact. Forward-looking statements may be identified by the use of forward-looking terminology, such as may, shall, could, expect, estimate, anticipate, predict, probable, possible, should, continue, or similar terms, variations of those terms or the negative of those terms. The forward-looking statements specified in the following information statement have been compiled by our management on the basis of assumptions made by management and considered by management to be reasonable. Our future operating results, however, are impossible to predict and no representation, guaranty, or warranty is to be inferred from those forward-looking statements.
All forward-looking statements in this Form 10-K are based on information available to us as of the date of this report, and we assume no obligation to update any forward-looking statements.
Business Overview
The Company serves as the holding company for ViCapsys, Inc., a Florida corporation incorporated on April 19, 2013 (“ViCapsys” or “VI”), which became a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company on December 22, 2017 pursuant to the Share Exchange Agreement. Other than its interests in ViCapsys, VLS does not have any material assets or operations.
Our strategy is to develop and commercialize, on a worldwide basis, various intellectual property rights (patents, patent applications, know how, etc.) relating to a series of encapsulated product candidates that incorporate proprietary derivatives of the chemokine CXCL12 for creating a zone of immunoprotection around cells, tissues, organs and devices for therapeutic purposes. The product name VICAPSYN™ is the Company’s line of proprietary product candidates that is applied to transplantation therapies and related stem-cell applications in the transplantation field. The lead product candidate embodiment in transplantation therapy to treat Type 1 Diabetes (T1D) is an encapsulated human islet cell cluster that is intended to restore normal glucose control when implanted into the peritoneal cavity of a patient. During the research and development process in transplantation, the Company and its related academic researchers had a novel and unexpected finding. The transplanted islet clusters were absolutely free of any signs of fibrotic encapsulation. This anti-fibrotic effect was reconfirmed in additional research studies and the Company has now moved into the development of another product candidate line based on CXCL12 with the trade name of VYBRIN™. The clinical applications of VYBRIN™ are being explored in several areas including (1) prevention of post-surgical adhesions in abdominal surgery, (2) coating of implantable medical devices and other implants to eliminate fibrosis and (3) wound healing with a focus on diabetic ulcers.
Results of Operations
The Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues
The Company did not have any revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Expenses
Operating expenses consist of personnel costs, research and development expenses, professional fees, travel expenses and general and administrative expenses. Our total operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, were $765,844 compared to $1,033,909 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in operating expenses was primarily due to the negative impact of COVID-19, which hindered the Company’s ability to raise the additional capital necessary to maintain operations and continue research and development activities. The decreases were comprised of a decrease in personnel costs of $120,080, professional fees of $144,028 and a decrease in general and administrative expenses of $7,154 in 2020 from 2019 and an increase in research and development expenses to a related party of $3,197.
As a result of the foregoing, the Company had a net loss of $765,844 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a net loss of $1,409,696 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company is not currently generating revenues. At December 31, 2020, we had $1,269 cash on hand and an accumulated deficit of $13,892,754.
From January 1, 2021 through August 31, 2021, the Company raised $385,000 from the sale of 1,540,000 shares of common stock at $0.25 per share. The Company sold the 400 shares of AEI preferred stock to a related party and received as part of the IAR agreement for $100,000.
However, we will require additional capital to meet our liquidity needs and do not believe that we have enough cash on hand to operate our business during the next 12 months. We anticipate we will need to raise an additional $1 million through the issuance of debt or equity securities to sustain base operations during the next 12 months, excluding development work. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interests of our common stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholder. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include conversion discounts or covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through government or other third-party funding, marketing and distribution arrangements or other collaborations, or strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our future revenue streams, products or therapeutic candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern as well as our recurring losses from operations, deficit in equity, and the need to raise additional capital to fund operations. This “going concern” could impair our ability to finance our operations through the sale of debt or equity securities.
To date, we have financed our operations through our sale of equity and debt securities. Failure to generate revenue or to raise funds could cause us to go out of business, which would result in the complete loss of your investment.
We did not generate revenues from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, and no substantial revenues are anticipated until we have implemented our full plan of operations. To implement our strategy to grow and expand per our business plan, we intend to generate working capital via a private placement of equity or debt securities, or secure a loan. If we are unsuccessful in raising capital, we could be required to cease business operations and investors would lose all of their investment.
Additionally, we will have to meet all the financial disclosure and reporting requirements associated with being a publicly reporting company. Our management will have to spend additional time on policies and procedures to make sure our Company is compliant with various regulatory requirements, especially that of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. This additional corporate governance time required of management could limit the amount of time management has to implement our business plan and may impede the speed of our operations.
Cash Flows (in thousands)
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities from continuing operations was $262,897 which primarily consisted of our net loss from continuing operations of $765,844, adjusted for non-cash expenses of $31,424 of amortization and $14,781 of stock-based compensation expense. Net changes of $456,742 in operating assets and liabilities reduced the cash used in operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in operating activities from continuing operations was $837,434, which consisted of our net loss from continuing operations of $1,033,909, adjusted for non-cash expenses of $149,948 including, $31,299 of amortization expenses, and $118,649 of stock-based compensation expenses and the increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $46,527.
Investing Activities
There were no investing activities from continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019.
Financing Activities
There were no financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities from continuing operations was $971,500. The net cash provided was related to of proceeds received from the sale of our common stock and warrants.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, there were no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We evaluate, on an ongoing basis, our estimates and judgments, including those related to the useful life of the assets. We base our estimates on historical experience and assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
The methods, estimates and judgments we use in applying our most critical accounting policies have a significant impact on the results that we report in our consolidated financial statements. The Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”), considers an entity’s most critical accounting policies to be those policies that are both most important to the portrayal of a company’s financial condition and results of operations and those that require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain at the time of estimation.
We believe the following critical accounting policies, among others, require significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our interim condensed consolidated financial statements.
Basis of Presentation and Principles of Consolidation
The accompanying consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles in the United States of America (“US GAAP”). The consolidated financial statements of the Company include the consolidated accounts of VLS and its’ wholly owned subsidiary VI. All intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
Emerging Growth Companies
The Company qualifies as an “emerging growth company” under the 2012 JOBS Act. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. As an emerging growth company, the Company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reported period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Significant estimates for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 include useful life of property and equipment and intangible assets, valuation allowance for deferred tax asset and non-cash equity transactions and stock-based compensation.
Cash
The Company considers all highly liquid investments with an original term of three months or less to be cash equivalents. These investments are carried at cost, which approximates fair value. The Company held no cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020, and 2019. Cash balances may, at certain times, exceed federally insured limits. If the amount of a deposit at any time exceeds the federally insured amount at a bank, the uninsured portion of the deposit could be lost, in whole or in part, if the bank were to fail.
Intangible Assets
Costs for intangible assets are accounted for through the capitalization of those costs incurred in connection with developing or obtaining such assets. Capitalized costs are included in intangible assets in the consolidated balance sheets. The Company’s intangible assets consist of costs incurred in connection with securing an Exclusive Patent License Agreement with The General Hospital Corporation, d/b/a Massachusetts General Hospital (“MGH”), as amended (the “License Agreement”). These costs are being amortized over the term of the License Agreement which is based on the remaining life of the related patents being licensed.
Long-Lived Assets
The Company recognizes impairment losses on long-lived assets used in operations when indicators of impairment are present and the undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than the assets’ carrying values. Management has reviewed the Company’s long-lived assets for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, and no such impairments were identified.
Discontinued Operations
In accordance with ASC 205-20 Presentation of Financial Statements: Discontinued Operations, a disposal of a component of an entity or a group of components of an entity is required to be reported as discontinued operations if the disposal represents a strategic shift that has (or will have) a major effect on an entity’s operations and financial results when the components of an entity meets the criteria in paragraph 205-20-45-10. In the period in which the component meets held-for-sale or discontinued operations criteria the major current assets, other assets, current liabilities, and noncurrent liabilities shall be reported as components of total assets and liabilities separate from those balances of the continuing operations. At the same time, the results of all discontinued operations, less applicable income taxes (benefit), shall be reported as components of net income (loss) separate from the net income (loss) of continuing operations.
The Company disposed of a component of its business pursuant to the IAR Agreement in May 2019, which met the definition of a discontinued operation. Accordingly, the operating results of the business transferred are reported as a loss from discontinued operations in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2019. For additional information, see Note 9- Discontinued Operations in the consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019.
Equity Method Investment
The Company accounts for investments in which the Company owns more than 20% or has the ability to exercise significant influence of the investee, using the equity method in accordance with ASC Topic 323, Investments-Equity Method and Joint Ventures. Under the equity method, an investor initially records an investment in the stock of an investee at cost and adjusts the carrying amount of the investment to recognize the investor’s share of the earnings or losses of the investee after the date of acquisition. The amount of the adjustment is included in the determination of net income by the investor, and such amount reflects adjustments similar to those made in preparing consolidated statements including adjustments to eliminate intercompany gains and losses, and to amortize, if appropriate, any difference between investor cost and underlying equity in net assets of the investee at the date of investment. The investment of an investor is also adjusted to reflect the investor’s share of changes in the investee’s capital. Dividends received from an investee reduce the carrying amount of the investment. A series of operating losses of an investee or other factors may indicate that a decrease in value of the investment has occurred which is other than temporary, and which should be recognized even though the decrease in value is in excess of what would otherwise be recognized by application of the equity method.
In accordance with ASC 323-10-35-20 through 35-22, the investor ordinarily shall discontinue applying the equity method if the investment (and net advances) is reduced to zero and shall not provide for additional losses unless the investor has guaranteed obligations of the investee or is otherwise committed to provide further financial support for the investee. An investor shall, however, provide for additional losses if the imminent return to profitable operations by an investee appears to be assured. For example, a material, nonrecurring loss of an isolated nature may reduce an investment below zero even though the underlying profitable operating pattern of an investee is unimpaired. If the investee subsequently reports net income, the investor shall resume applying the equity method only after its share of that net income equals the share of net losses not recognized during the period the equity method was suspended.
Equity and cost method investments are classified as investments. The Company periodically evaluates its equity and cost method investments for impairment due to declines considered to be other than temporary. If the Company determines that a decline in fair value is other than temporary, then a charge to earnings is recorded as an impairment loss in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
The Company’s equity method investment consists of equity owned in Athens Encapsulation Inc (AEI) which was given to the Company as part of an investment and restructuring agreement. Therefore, as of December 31, 2019, the Company has no cost basis in the investment. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company’s proportionate share of net income was insignificant.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
ASC 825, “Disclosures about Fair Value of Financial Instruments,” requires disclosure of fair value information about financial instruments. ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurements” defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value in generally accepted accounting principles, and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. Fair value estimates discussed herein are based upon certain market assumptions and pertinent information available to management as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The carrying amounts of the Company’s financial assets and liabilities, such as cash, prepaid expenses, accounts payable and accrued liabilities, payables with related parties, approximate their fair values because of the short maturity of these instruments.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue recognition is accounted for under ASC Topic 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (“ASC 606”) and all the related amendments.
The core principle of ASC 606 requires that an entity recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. ASC 606 defines a five-step process to achieve this core principle and, in doing so, it is possible more judgment and estimates may be required within the revenue recognition process than required under U.S. GAAP including identifying performance obligations in the contract, estimating the amount of variable consideration to include in the transaction price and allocating the transaction price to each separate performance obligation.
The Company’s contracts with customers are generally on a contract and work order basis and represent obligations that are satisfied at a point in time, as defined in the new guidance, generally upon delivery or has services are provided. Accordingly, revenue for each sale is recognized when the Company has completed its performance obligations. Any costs incurred before this point in time, are recorded as assets to be expensed during the period the related revenue is recognized. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company provided research and development services to a third party, completed the study and recognized revenue of $50,000 which is included in net loss of discontinued operations.
Stock Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation is accounted for based on the requirements of ASC 718 - “Compensation -Stock Compensation,” which requires recognition in the financial statements of the cost of employee, non-emplyee and director services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments over the period the employee or director is required to perform the services in exchange for the award (presumptively, the vesting period). The ASC also requires measurement of the cost of employee and director services received in exchange for an award based on the grant-date fair value of the award. The Company has elected to recognize forfeitures as they occur, and the cumulative impact of this change did not have any effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
Research and Development
Costs and expenses that can be clearly identified as research and development are charged to expense as incurred. For the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, the Company recorded $102,180 and $98,984 of research and development expenses, respectively.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740-10, Income Taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized to reflect the estimated future tax effects, calculated at the tax rate expected to be in effect at the time of realization. A valuation allowance related to a deferred tax asset is recorded when it is more likely than not that some portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted for the effects of the changes in tax laws and rates of the date of enactment.
ASC 740-10 prescribes a recognition threshold that a tax position is required to meet before being recognized in the financial statements and provides guidance on recognition, measurement, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure and transition issues. Interest and penalties are classified as a component of interest and other expenses. To date, the Company has not been assessed, nor paid, any interest or penalties.
Uncertain tax positions are measured and recorded by establishing a threshold for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. Only tax positions meeting the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold at the effective date may be recognized or continue to be recognized.
Earnings (Loss) Per Share
The Company reports earnings (loss) per share in accordance with ASC 260, “Earnings per Share.” Basic earnings (loss) per share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during each period. Diluted earnings per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock, common stock equivalents and other potentially dilutive securities outstanding during the period. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, the Company’s dilutive securities are convertible into approximately 17,138,006 and 17,688,006 shares of common stock, respectively. This amount is not included in the computation of dilutive loss per share because their impact is antidilutive. The following table represents the classes of dilutive securities as of December 31, 2020, and 2019:
The following is management’s discussion and analysis of certain significant factors that have affected our financial position and operating results during the periods included in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, as well as information relating to the plans of our current management. This report includes forward-looking statements. Generally, the words “believes,” “anticipates,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “expect,” “intend,” “estimate,” “continue,” and similar expressions or the negative thereof or comparable terminology are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Such statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties, including the matters set forth in this report or other reports or documents we file with the Securities and Exchange Commission from time to time, which could cause actual results or outcomes to differ materially from those projected. Undue reliance should not be placed on these forward-looking statements which speak only as of the date hereof. We undertake no obligation to update these forward-looking statements.
Going Concern
The independent auditors’ reports on our financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 includes a “going concern” explanatory paragraph that describes substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Management’s plans in regard to the factors prompting the explanatory paragraph are discussed below and also in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements filed herewith.
While our financial statements are presented on the basis that we are a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business over a reasonable length of time, our auditors have raised a substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements including arrangements that would affect our liquidity, capital resources, market risk support and credit risk support or other benefits.