ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included elsewhere in this prospectus. References in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations to “us,” “we,” “our,” and similar terms refer to Gaucho Group Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation, and its subsidiaries. This discussion includes forward-looking statements, as that term is defined in the federal securities laws, based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors. Words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “plan,” “continuing,” “ongoing,” “expect,” “believe,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” and similar expressions are used to identify forward-looking statements.
We caution you that these statements are not guarantees of future performance or events and are subject to a number of uncertainties, risks and other influences, many of which are beyond our control, which may influence the accuracy of the statements and the projections upon which the statements are based. See “Special Note - Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors discussed in “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this prospectus. Any one or more of these uncertainties, risks and other influences could materially affect our results of operations and whether forward-looking statements made by us ultimately prove to be accurate. Our actual results, performance and achievements could differ materially from those expressed or implied in these forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether from new information, future events or otherwise.
A 15:1 reverse stock split of the Company’s common stock was effected on February 16, 2021 (the “Reverse Stock Split”). All share and per share information has been retroactively adjusted to give effect to the Reverse Stock Split for all periods presented, unless otherwise indicated.
Special Note Regarding Emerging Growth Company Status and Smaller Reporting Company Status
Currently we qualify as both an “emerging growth company” and as a “smaller reporting company” (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). We are allowed and have elected to comply with the smaller reporting company rules which allows us to omit certain information, including three years of year-to-year comparisons and tabular disclosure of contractual obligations, from this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. However, we have provided all information for the periods presented that we believe to be appropriate and necessary.
Overview
Gaucho Group Holdings, Inc. (“GGH” or the “Company”) positions its e-commerce leather goods, accessories, and fashion brand, Gaucho - Buenos Aires™, as one of luxury, creating a platform for the global consumer to access their piece of Argentine style and high-end products. With a concentration on leather goods, ready-to-wear and accessories, this is the luxury brand in which Argentina finds its contemporary expression. By the end of the first quarter of 2021, the Company anticipates launching Gaucho Casa, a Home & Living line of luxury textiles and home accessories, which will be marketed and sold on the Gaucho - Buenos Aires e-commerce platform. Gaucho Casa challenges traditional lifestyle collections with its luxury textiles and home accessories rooted in the singular spirit of the gaucho aesthetic. GGH seeks to grow its direct-to-consumer online products to global markets in the United States, Asia, the United Kingdom, Europe, and Argentina. We intend to focus on e-commerce and scalability of the Gaucho - Buenos Aires and Gaucho Casa brands, as real estate in Argentina is politically sensitive.
GGH’s goal is to become recognized as the LVMH (“Louis Vuitton Moët Hennessy”) of South America’s leading luxury brands. Through one of its wholly owned subsidiaries, GGH also owns and operates legacy investments in the boutique hotel, hospitality and luxury vineyard property markets. This includes a golf, tennis and wellness resort, as well as an award winning, wine production company concentrating on Malbecs and Malbec blends. Utilizing these wines as its ambassador, GGH seeks to further develop its legacy real estate, which includes developing residential vineyard lots located within its resort.
Until May 31, 2020, the Company’s senior management was based at its corporate office in New York City. Due to COVID-19, we have terminated the corporate office lease and senior management works remotely. GGH’s local operations are managed by professional staff with substantial hotel, hospitality and resort experience in Buenos Aires and San Rafael, Argentina.
Recent Developments and Trends
We temporarily closed our hotel, restaurant, winery operations, and golf and tennis operations. Recently, we have been able to reopen the Algodon Mansion as of November 11, 2020 with COVID-19 measures implemented. We have also been able to reopen our winery and golf and tennis facilities recently with COVID-19 measures implemented. Also due to COVID-19, construction on homes was temporarily halted from March to September but has resumed. However, as of December 21, 2020, international tourism by foreign residents, except those foreign residents of neighboring countries, is prohibited through January 31, 2021. Additionally, on December 24, 2020, Argentina removed the exception for foreign residents of neighboring countries through January 9, 2021.
We reduced expenses by negotiating an early termination of our office lease at 135 Fifth Avenue in New York City, and all employees and contractors are currently working from home. In addition, we are reviewing our labor needs to run the administrative side of the Company in New York.
On April 13, 2020, GGI’s warehouse and fulfillment center, Bergen Logistics, announced it would operate on a four-day schedule from Monday through Thursday, allowing for a 72-hour window from Friday through Sunday for any possible surface viruses to self-eliminate. On June 12, 2020, Bergen Logistics announced that it would increase its warehouse operations to a Sunday through Friday schedule. The warehouse stores and ships all of the items that are for sale on our e-commerce website. Any e-commerce orders that may be received during the time of shutdown are only be fulfilled once the fulfillment center re-opens. Likewise, during their shutdown, the warehouse would not be able to receive and process any returned merchandise from customers, nor would the warehouse be able to receive any merchandise from our manufacturers.
Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, we also experienced significant delays in product development, production, and shipping from our overseas manufacturing partners, many of whom have been on complete lockdown for the safety of their workers. Some of our manufacturing partners have even had to close permanently. Because of this, we are in the process of pursuing new vendors.
Due to the events stated above, it was necessary for us to reduce our email marketing efforts to our customer database, as we were not able to fulfill orders. This resulted in a significant reduction in our web traffic and sales.
We expect that the cash on hand, which includes the net proceeds from the Offering, as well as the forecasted cash generated from operating activities which includes projected increases in revenues, will fund our operations for a least 12 months after the issuance date of these financial statements.
Since inception, our operations have primarily been funded through proceeds received in equity and debt financings. We believe we have access to capital resources and continue to evaluate additional financing opportunities. There is no assurance that we will be able to obtain funds on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. There is also no assurance that the amount of funds we might raise will enable us to complete our development initiatives or attain profitable operations.
The Company is continuing to monitor the outbreak of COVID-19 and the related business and travel restrictions, and changes to behavior intended to reduce its spread, and the related impact on the Company’s operations, financial position and cash flows, as well as the impact on its employees. Due to the rapid development and fluidity of this situation, the magnitude and duration of the pandemic and its impact on the Company’s future operations and liquidity is uncertain. While there could ultimately be a material impact on operations and liquidity of the Company, as of the date of this prospectus, the impact cannot be determined at this time.
On May 6, 2020, the Company entered into a potentially forgivable loan from the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”) pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) enacted by Congress under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (15 U.S.C. 636(a)(36)) (the “CARES Act”), resulting in net proceeds of $242,487 (the “PPP Loan”). To facilitate the PPP Loan, the Company entered into a note payable agreement with Santander Bank, N.A. as the lender. On March 26, 2021, the SBA forgave the PPP Loan in full
Under the terms of the CARES Act, as amended by the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act of 2020, the Company is eligible to apply for and receive forgiveness for all or a portion of their respective PPP Loan. Such forgiveness will be determined, subject to limitations, based on the use of the loan proceeds for certain permissible purposes as set forth in the PPP, including, but not limited to, payroll costs (as defined under the PPP) and mortgage interest, rent or utility costs (collectively, “Qualifying Expenses”) incurred during the 24 weeks subsequent to funding, and on the maintenance of employee and compensation levels, as defined, following the funding of the PPP Loan. The Company used the proceeds of the PPP Loan for Qualifying Expenses. However, no assurance is provided that the Company will be able to obtain forgiveness under state law of the PPP Loan in whole or in part. It is possible that the loan may not be forgiven in full under state law, which could have a negative impact on the Company’s cash flow.
The extent of the impact, if any, will depend on future developments, including actions taken to contain COVID-19. See also “Risk Factors” for more information.
In December 2020, the independent members of our Board approved an extension to our President and CEO’s employment agreement to expire on June 30, 2021. Please see “Executive Compensation” for additional information.
In January 2021, Wine Enthusiast rated and reviewed our Algodon 2012 PIMA Red Blend Mendoza and awarded it 91 points.
Investment in foreign real estate requires consideration of certain risks typically not associated with investing in the United States. Such risks include, trade balances and imbalances and related economic policies, unfavorable currency exchange rate fluctuations, imposition of exchange control regulation by the United States or foreign governments, United States and foreign withholding taxes, limitations on the removal of funds or other assets, policies of governments with respect to possible nationalization of their industries, political difficulties, including expropriation of assets, confiscatory taxation and economic or political instability in foreign nations or changes in laws which affect foreign investors. See also Risk Factors for more information.
Over the past nine months, GGH has been the process of pivoting operations to focus primarily on e-commerce sales of our Gaucho-Buenos Aires brand, in addition to our wines which also serve as ambassador to our 4,138-acre wine and real estate development. We believe that the change in focus and ongoing restructuring of our Argentine operations can have a positive impact and overall improvement on our business.
Our goal for 2021 is to focus on actions that can result in immediate revenues, such as e-commerce sales, continued deeding of lots and real estate sales and greater distribution of our wines by supporting our importer and their network partners. We began our big push of e-commerce sales through our launch of the Gaucho-Buenos Aires brand at New York Fashion Week on September 12, 2019 to create momentum through the holiday season and bring in revenue.
In November 2020, we hired a communications agency, Skoog Co., to provide exposure to all of our brands. Skoog Co. specializes in brand strategy, communications, media relations, and social and digital content development, and their goals for us is to create a wholistic marketing campaign to drive awareness and sales for Gaucho - Buenos Aires, Gaucho Casa, Algodon Fine Wines, as well as our real estate business segments.
In the fourth quarter of 2020 we micro tested U.S. markets and focus groups to gauge demand and iron out early details of our digital marketing strategy. We continue to test campaigns with micro audiences in the first quarter of 2021, in anticipation of a larger roll out of campaigns after the offering closes.
In the third quarter of 2021, we anticipate launching a popup shop in Los Angeles for the summer season, assuming our production schedule is on track to receive our products here in the U.S. With popup shops, we can for example, work with local public relations (“PR”) companies to get the word out, as these opportunities are typically promoted via direct mail, PR and digital marketing efforts, as well as word of mouth and strategic geographic positioning. See page 57 below for more information on popup shops.
In 2021, we expect that our Gaucho brand sales will grow to represent a majority of our revenue, with our wine and real estate business making up the remainder.
Financings
In 2020 and 2019, we raised, net of repayments, approximately $4,687,000 and $5,700,000, respectively of new capital through the issuance of debt and equity. We used the net proceeds from the closings of these private placement offerings for general working capital and capital expenditures.
On February 19, 2021, the Company closed on an underwritten public offering of 1,333,334 Units at $6.00 per unit for approximate gross proceeds of $8 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses. We used the net proceeds for general working capital and capital expenditures.
Initiatives
We have implemented a number of initiatives designed to expand revenues and control costs. Revenue enhancement initiatives include expanding marketing, investment in additional winery capacity and developing new real estate development revenue sources. Our goal for 2021 is to focus on actions that can result in immediate revenues, such as e-commerce sales, continued deeding of lots and real estate sales and greater distribution of our wines by supporting our importer and their network partners.
Cost reduction initiatives include investment in equipment that will decrease our reliance on subcontractors, plus outsourcing and restructuring of certain functions. Further, we have begun to reduce operational expenses by approximately $800,000 per year by reducing administrative costs including non-renewal of the lease in August 2020 for our New York headquarters and reduction in workforce hours and marketing expenses. Some of these significant savings will be immediate, others will be unfolding throughout time. Our goal is ultimately to reduce expenses of between $1-2 million in 2021. Our goal is to become more self-sufficient and less dependent on outside financing.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table represents selected items in our consolidated statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively:
Overview
We reported net losses of approximately $5.8 million and $7.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in net loss is primarily the result of the decrease in revenues as described below.
Revenues
Revenues from operations were approximately $636,000 and $1,284,000 during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, reflecting a decrease of approximately $648,000 or 50%. Decreases in revenues are primarily due to approximately $329,000 resulting from the impact of the decline in the value of the Argentine peso vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar and decreases in hotel and restaurant revenues of approximately $321,000 resulting from closures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The average exchange rate of the Argentina peso increased from 48.1676 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 73.5358 for the year ended December 31, 2020, which represents a decrease in the average worth of the Argentine peso from US $0.02 to $0.01.
Total sales from Argentina were approximately ARS $42.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to approximately ARS $58.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, reflecting a net decrease of approximately ARS $15.4 million or 27%. Hotel room and event revenues were approximately ARS $16.8 million and ARS $35.7 million during years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing a decrease of approximately ARS $18.9 million, or 53% resulting from closures as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Restaurant revenues were approximately ARS $8.9 million and ARS 7.9 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing an increase of approximately ARS $1.0 million or 13%. Argentine winemaking revenues were approximately ARS $6.9 million and ARS $6.0 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing an increase of approximately ARS $0.9 million or $15%. Other revenues, including golf, tennis and agricultural revenues, were ARS $9.7 million and ARS $8.5 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing an increase of approximately ARS $1.2 million or 14%, of which approximately ARS $0.6 million represents an increase in agricultural revenues, approximately ARS $1.7 million represents an increase in maintenance fees, partially offset by approximately ARS $1.1 million represents a decrease in other operating income.
Gross profit
We generated a gross loss of approximately $91,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a gross profit of approximately $244,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing a decrease of $335,000 or 137%, primarily as a result of the decrease in revenues as described above and from grapes which were sold at a loss. Due to COVID-19 during 2020, we had to temporarily close our hotel, restaurant, winery operations, and golf and tennis operations. The gross loss during 2020 was primarily due to the hotel and restaurants fixed costs included in the cost of sales which did not decrease during the COVID-19.
Cost of sales, which consists of real estate lots, raw materials, direct labor and indirect labor associated with our business activities, decreased by approximately $313,000 from $1,040,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $727,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Decreases in cost of sales are primarily due to approximately $367,000 resulting from the impact of the decline in the value of the Argentine peso vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar, and a decrease of approximately $84,000 in hotel and restaurant costs resulting from the temporary closure of our hotel and restaurants due to government restrictions as of a result of COVID-19, partially offset by an increase in the cost of grapes sold during the period of approximately $121,000.
Selling and marketing expenses
Selling and marketing expenses were approximately $321,000 and $483,000, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing a decrease of approximately $162,000 or 34%, primarily resulting from the impact of COVID-19 shut-downs as well as a Gaucho Group marketing event that was held in the second quarter of 2019.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses were approximately $4,814,000 and $6,429,000 from operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing a decrease of approximately $1,615,000 or 25%. The decrease results primarily from the decreases of approximately $261,000 in professional fees, approximately $292,000 in travel expenses, approximately $483,000 resulting from the impact of the decline in the value of the Argentine peso vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar, and approximately $592,000 in exchange rate gains.
Depreciation and amortization expense
Depreciation and amortization expense were approximately $170,000 and $196,000 during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing a decrease of approximately $26,000 or 13%.
Gain from insurance settlement
Gain from insurance settlement was approximately $30,000 and $166,000 during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing a decrease of $136,000 or 82%. Insurance proceeds received during the year ended December 31, 2019 were to cover for fire damage to property and equipment as a result of a fire at the Company’s hotel. Insurance proceeds received during the year ended December 31, 2020 were to cover revenues lost during the rebuilding and repair period after the fire.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense was approximately $245,000 and $360,000 during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing a decrease of approximately $115,000 or 32%. The decrease is primarily the result of (i) decrease in the average balance of debt outstanding during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, and (ii) the decrease in interest expenses to the Federal Administration of Public Revenues in Argentine due to renegotiating the payment plan.
Loss on extinguishment of debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt of approximately $356,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020 represents the loss realized from the debt extinguishment due to the modification of convertible debt.
Gain on debt restructuring
Gain on debt restructuring of approximately $130,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020 represents the gain realized from the restructuring of debt during the period.
Gain on settlement of payables
Gain on settlement of payables of approximately $2,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020 represents the gain realized from the settlement of accounts payable during the period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We measure our liquidity in variety of ways, including the following:
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we financed our activities from proceeds derived from debt and equity financings occurring in prior periods. A significant portion of the funds have been used to cover working capital needs and personnel, office expenses and various consulting and professional fees.
During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we have relied primarily on debt and equity offerings to third party independent, accredited investors, related parties, and the government to sustain operations. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received proceeds of approximately $3,222,000 from the issuance of convertible debt, proceeds of approximately $1,572,000 from proceeds from common stock offering, proceeds from related party loans payable and non-related party loans payable of approximately $574,000 and $28,000, respectively, and proceeds from the PPP Loan of approximately $242,000, and proceeds from the EIDL of $94,000.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, working capital deficiency, and an accumulated deficit of $134,536, $2,574,361 and $93,534,828, respectively. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we incurred a net loss of $5,781,683 and $6,956,815, respectively, and used cash in operating activities of $4,943,758 and $6,080,411, respectively.
On February 19, 2021, the Company closed on an underwritten public offering and sold and issued an aggregate of 1,333,334 shares of common stock and 1,533,333 warrants to purchase common stock at $6.00 per share for approximate gross proceeds of $8 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses. See Note 18 - Subsequent Events.
The proceeds from these financing activities were used to fund our existing operating deficits, legal and accounting expenses associated with being a public company and the general working capital needs of the business.
We expect that the cash on hand, which includes the net proceeds from the Offering, as well as the forecasted cash generated from operating activities which includes projected increases in revenues, will fund our operations for a least 12 months after the issuance date of these financial statements.
Since inception, our operations have primarily been funded through proceeds received in equity and debt financings. We believe we have access to capital resources and continue to evaluate additional financing opportunities. There is no assurance that we will be able to obtain funds on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. There is also no assurance that the amount of funds we might raise will enable us to complete our development initiatives or attain profitable operations.
Our operating needs include the planned costs to operate our business, including amounts required to fund working capital and capital expenditures. Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of our available funds will depend on many factors, including our ability to successfully commercialize our products and services, competing technological and market developments, and the need to enter into collaborations with other companies or acquire other companies or technologies to enhance or complement our product and service offerings.
Availability of Additional Funds
As a result of the above developments, we have been able to sustain operations. However, we will need to raise additional capital in order to meet our future liquidity needs for operating expenses and capital expenditures, including GGI inventory production, development of the GGI e-commerce platform, expansion of our winery and additional investments in real estate development. If we are unable to obtain adequate funds on reasonable terms, we may be required to significantly curtail or discontinue operations.
Sources and Uses of Cash for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, amounted to approximately $4,944,000 and $6,080,000, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the net cash used in operating activities was primarily attributable to the net loss of approximately $5,782,000, adjusted for approximately $980,000 of non-cash expenses and $142,000 of cash used to fund changes in the levels of operating assets and liabilities. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the net cash used in operating activities was primarily attributable to the net loss of approximately $6,957,000, adjusted for approximately $1,141,000 of non-cash expenses and $264,000 of cash used to fund changes in the levels of operating assets and liabilities.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 amounted to approximately $115,000 and $214,000, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020 the net cash used in investing activities was primarily attributable to the purchase of property and equipment of approximately $115,000. During the year ended December 31, 2019 the net cash used in investing activities was primarily attributable to the purchase of property and equipment of approximately $139,000 and a purchase of an Argentine government bond of approximately $75,000.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 amounted to approximately $ 4,687,000 and $5,700,000, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the net cash provided by financing activities resulted from approximately $3,222,000 of proceeds from convertible debt obligations, approximately $1,572,000 of proceeds from common stock offering, approximately $574,000 and $28,000, respectively, from the proceeds from the issuance of related party loans payable and non-related party loans payable, approximately $242,000 of proceeds from the PPP Loan, and $94,000 of proceeds from the EIDL, partially offset by loan repayments of approximately $1,029,000 and the repurchase of preferred stock of $16,000 from a shareholder. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the net cash provided by financing activities resulted primarily from approximately $786,000 of proceeds from convertible debt obligations, approximately $4,611,000 of proceeds from common stock offerings, approximately $566,000 from the proceeds from the issuance of related party loans payable, and proceeds from investor deposits of approximately $30,000, partially offset by convertible debt and loan repayments of approximately $293,000.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Contractual Obligations
As a smaller reporting company, we are not required to provide the information required by paragraph (a)(5) of this Item.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. GAAP. These accounting principles require us to make estimates and judgments that can affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements as well as the reported amounts of revenue and expense during the periods presented. We believe that the estimates and judgments upon which it relies are reasonably based upon information available to us at the time that it makes these estimates and judgments. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our financial results will be affected. The accounting policies that reflect our more significant estimates and judgments and which we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results are described below.
The following is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all of our accounting policies or estimates. Our accounting policies are more fully described in Note 3 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in our financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report.
Revenue Recognition
We earn revenues from the sale of real estate lots and sales of food and wine as well as hospitality, food & beverage, other related services, and from the sale of clothing and accessories. Revenue from the sale of food, wine, agricultural products, clothes and accessories is recorded when the customer obtains control of the goods purchased. Revenues from hospitality and other services are recognized as earned at the point in time that the related service is rendered, and the performance obligation has been satisfied. Revenues from gift card sales are recognized when the card is redeemed by the customer. We do not recognize revenue for the portion of gift card values that is not expected to be redeemed (“breakage”) due to the lack of historical data. Revenue from real estate lot sales is recorded when the lot is deeded, and legal ownership of the lot is transferred to the customer.
The timing of our revenue recognition may differ from the timing of payment by our customers. A receivable is recorded when revenue is recognized prior to payment and we have an unconditional right to payment. Alternatively, when payment precedes the provision of the related services, we record deferred revenue until the performance obligations are satisfied. Deferred revenues associated with real estate lot sale deposits are recognized as revenues (along with any outstanding balance) when the lot sale closes, and the deed is provided to the purchaser. Other deferred revenues primarily consist of deposits accepted by us in connection with agreements to sell barrels of wine, advance deposits received for grapes and other agricultural products, and hotel deposits. Wine barrel and agricultural product advance deposits are recognized as revenues (along with any outstanding balance) when the product is shipped to the purchaser. Hotel deposits are recognized as revenue upon occupancy of rooms, or the provision of services.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure the cost of services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the fair value of the award on the date of grant. The fair value amount of the shares expected to ultimately vest is then recognized over the period for which services are required to be provided in exchange for the award, usually the vesting period. The estimation of stock-based awards that will ultimately vest requires judgment, and to the extent actual results or updated estimates differ from original estimates, such amounts are recorded as a cumulative adjustment in the period that the estimates are revised. We account for forfeitures as they occur.
Long-Lived Assets
When circumstances, such as adverse market conditions, indicate that the carrying value of a long-lived asset may be impaired, we perform an analysis to review the recoverability of the asset’s carrying value, which includes estimating the undiscounted cash flows (excluding interest charges) from the expected future operations of the asset. These estimates consider factors such as expected future operating income, operating trends and prospects, as well as the effects of demand, competition and other factors. If the analysis indicates that the carrying value is not recoverable from future cash flows, an impairment loss is recognized to the extent that the carrying value exceeds the estimated fair value. Any impairment losses are recorded as operating expenses, which reduce net income.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes pursuant to the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes pursuant to FASB ASC 740, “Income Taxes.” Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for taxable temporary differences and operating loss carry forwards. Temporary differences are the differences between the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax bases. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted for the effects of changes in tax laws and rates on the date of enactment.
Operating Leases
In February 2016, the FASB issued a new standard related to leases to increase transparency and comparability among organizations by requiring the recognition of operating lease right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and lease liabilities on the balance sheet. Most prominent among the changes in the standard is the recognition of ROU assets and lease liabilities by lessees for those leases classified as operating leases. Under the standard, disclosures are required to meet the objective of enabling users of financial statements to assess the amount, timing, and uncertainty of cash flows arising from leases. We are also required to recognize and measure new leases at the adoption date and recognize a cumulative-effect adjustment in the period of adoption using a modified retrospective approach, with certain practical expedients available.
We adopted ASC 842, “Leases” (“ASC 842”) effective January 1, 2019 and elected to apply the available practical expedients and implemented internal controls and key system functionality to enable the preparation of financial information on adoption. ASC 842 requires us to make significant judgments and estimates. As a result, we implemented changes to our internal controls related to lease evaluation. These changes include updated accounting policies affected by ASC 842 as well as redesigned internal controls over financial reporting related to ASC 842 implementation. Additionally, we have expanded data gathering procedures to comply with the additional disclosure requirements and ongoing contract review requirements. The standard had an impact on our consolidated balance sheets but did not have an impact on our consolidated statements of operations or consolidated statements of cash flows upon adoption