Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. This
discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, including those set forth under “Cautionary Statement About Forward-Looking Statements.” Actual results and experience could differ materially from the anticipated results and other expectations expressed in our forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including but not limited to those discussed in this Item and in Item 1A - “Risk Factors.” Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those discussed in our forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a development-stage biotechnology company focused on advancing novel antiviral therapies to treat diseases associated with a viral triggered abnormal immune response such as FM. Overactive immune response related to activation of tissue resident HSV-1 has been postulated to be a potential root cause of chronic illnesses such as FM, IBS, chronic fatigue syndrome and functional somatic syndrome, all of which are characterized by a waxing and waning manifestation of disease. While not completely understood, there is general agreement in the medical community that activation of HSV-1 is triggered by some form of environmental and/or health stressor. Our lead product, IMC-1, is a novel, proprietary, fixed dose combination of famciclovir and celecoxib. IMC-1 represents a novel combination, dual mechanism, antiviral therapy designed to synergistically suppress HSV-1 activation and replication, with the end goal of reducing viral mediated disease burden.
IMC-1 combines two specific mechanisms of action purposely designed to inhibit HSV-1 activation and replication, thereby keeping HSV-1 in a latent (dormant) state or “down-regulating” HSV-1 from a lytic (active) state back to latency. The famciclovir component of IMC-1 inhibits viral DNA replication. The celecoxib component of IMC-1 inhibits cyclooxegenase-2 (“COX-2”) and to a lesser degree COX-1, enzymes used by HSV-1 to amplify or accelerate its own replication. We are unaware of any other antivirals in development for the treatment of FM specifically used to inhibit both HSV-1 activation and subsequent HSV-1 replication, with the goal of keeping tissue resident HSV-1 tissue in a latent state. This novel approach was a germane consideration in FDA designating IMC-1 for fast-track review status for the treatment of FM. IMC-1 has also been granted a synergy patent based on the fact that neither of the individual components has proven effective in the management of fibromyalgia, yet the dual mechanism combination therapy generated a result that is greater than the sum of its parts.
On December 16, 2020, immediately prior to the effectiveness of our registration statement, we converted into a Delaware corporation pursuant to a statutory conversion, and changed our name from Virios Therapeutics, LLC to Virios Therapeutics, Inc., in what we call the “Corporate Conversion”. As a result of the Corporate Conversion, all of the membership interests held by the existing members of Virios Therapeutics, LLC converted into shares of common stock of Virios Therapeutics, Inc. Prior to the Corporate Conversion, we operated as an Alabama limited liability company.
We have never been profitable and have incurred losses since inception. Our net losses were $10,346,395 and $2,473,627 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and our accumulated deficit at December 31, 2020 was $27,965,105. We expect to incur losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect these losses to increase as we continue to develop and seek regulatory approvals for our product candidate. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when, or if, we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability.
The development of our drug candidates could be disrupted and materially adversely affected in the future by the COVID-19 pandemic. We are still assessing our business plans and the impact COVID-19 may have on our ability to advance the development of our drug candidates, delays in starting or completing clinical trials, the suspension of clinical trials or to raise financing to support the development of our drug candidates, but no assurances can be given that this analysis will enable us to avoid part or all of any impact
from the spread of COVID-19 or its consequences, including downturns in business sentiment generally or in our sector in particular.
Financial Operations Overview
The following discussion sets forth certain components of our statements of operations as well as factors that impact those items.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist of expenses incurred in development and clinical studies relating to our product candidate, including:
● payments to third-party contract research organizations, or CROs;
● payments to third-party contract development and manufacturing organizations, or CMOs; and
● payments to contract laboratories and independent consultants.
We expense all research and development costs as incurred, to date all of which have been external. Clinical development expenses for our product candidate is a significant component of our current research and development expenses. Products in later stage clinical development generally have higher research and development expenses than those in earlier stages of development, primarily due to increased size and duration of the clinical trials. We track and record information regarding research and development expenses for each study or trial we conduct. We use third-party CROs, CMOs, contractor laboratories and independent contractors. All research and development costs incurred to date have been external and have been for our lead candidate, IMC-1. We recognize the expenses associated with third parties performing services for us in our clinical studies based on the percentage of each study completed at the end of each reporting period.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. We expect our research and development expenses in 2021 to be higher than in 2020 as a result of increased expenditures for our Phase 2b study in FM. These expenditures are subject to numerous uncertainties regarding timing and cost to completion. Completion of our clinical development and clinical trials may take several years or more. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we cannot determine with certainty the duration and completion costs of the current or future studies and clinical trials or if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenues from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for our product candidates. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of our product candidates will depend on a variety of factors, including:
● successful enrollment in, and completion of, clinical trials;
● successful completion of Investigational New Drug-enabling activities, including for IMC-1 for indications other than FM;
● receipt of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
● making arrangements with third-party manufacturers or establishing our own commercial manufacturing capabilities;
● obtaining and maintaining patent and trade secret protection and non-patent exclusivity;
● launching commercial sales of IMC-1, if approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others;
● acceptance of IMC-1, if approved, by patients, the medical community and third-party payors;
● effectively competing with other therapies and treatment options;
● a continued acceptable safety profile following approval;
● enforcing and defending intellectual property and proprietary rights and claims; and
● achieving desirable medicinal properties for the intended indications.
A change in the outcome of any of these factors could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of our current and future product candidates. For example, if the FDA, or another regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we currently anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development, or if we experience significant delays in execution of or enrollment in any of our clinical trials, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development. We expect our research and development expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of IMC-1 and other potential product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and equity and share-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance, operations and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include public company costs, directors and officer’s insurance professional fees for legal, including patent related expenses, consulting, auditing and tax services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future to support continued research and development activities and potential commercialization of our product candidates and increased costs of operating as a public company. These increases will likely include increased costs related to the hiring of additional personnel and fees to outside consultants, lawyers and accountants, among other expenses.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other (expense) income, net, primarily consists of interest expense on the convertible promissory notes and amortization of related debt issuance costs that converted into membership interests at our Corporate Conversion.
Related Parties
The Company uses Tanner & Guin for general counsel legal services and for other administrative needs. Partners of the law firm are stockholders of the Company.
The Company uses Way, Ray, Shelton & Co., for tax accounting services. A retired partner of the firm is also a stockholder of the Company.
The Company uses Gendreau Consuling, LLC, for drug development, clinical trial design and planning, implementation and execution of contracted activies with CROs. The managing member of the firm is also the Company’s CMO effective January 1, 2021. The Company will continue to contract the CMO’s spouse as well as an administrative assistant through the firm to perform certain activities in connection with its planned clinical trial in FM.
Upon the completion of the Corporate Conversion, our President, Richard Burch, resigned his position as President and was appointed to our board of directors.
For a full discussion of related party transactions see Note 9 to the Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Income Taxes
The Company has estimated net operating loss carryforwards (“NOLs”) of $2,315,510 for both Federal income tax purposes and for Georgia income tax purposes as of December 31, 2020. These net operating losses can be carried forward and applied against future taxable income, if any. These losses currently have no expiration date and may be carried forward indefinitely. As the tax year ended December 31, 2020 is the Company’s initial tax year as a C-Corporation, there are no previously filed corporate returns open under statute.
The Company has recorded a full valuation allowance against its net deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 because the Company has determined that it is more likely than not that these assets will not be fully realized due to historic net operating losses incurred. The ultimate realization of the deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which these temporary differences become deductible.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. We believe that several accounting policies are important to understanding our historical and future performance. We refer to these policies as critical because these specific areas generally require us to make judgments and estimates about matters that are uncertain at the time we make the estimate, and different estimates - which also would have been reasonable - could have been used. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those described in greater detail below. We base our estimates on historical experience and other market-specific or other relevant assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10K, we believe the following accounting policies to be most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Research and Development
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred and are comprised of external research and development expenses incurred under arrangements and contracts with third parties, such as contract research organizations (“CROs”), contract development and manufacturing organizations (“CMOs”) and consultants. As part of the process of preparing its financial statements, the Company may be required to estimate some of its expenses resulting from its obligations under these arrangements and contracts. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiations which vary from contract to contract and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided. The Company’s objective is to reflect the appropriate expenses in its financial statements by matching those expenses with the period in which services are rendered. The Company determines any accrual estimates based on account discussions with applicable personnel and outside service providers as to the progress or state of completion. The Company makes estimates of its accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on the facts and circumstances known at that time. The Company’s estimates are dependent upon the timely and accurate reporting of CROs, CMOs and other third-party vendors. At the end of each reporting
period, the Company compares the payments made to each service provider to the estimated progress towards completion of the related project. Factors that the Company considers in preparing these estimates include the number of patients enrolled in studies, milestones achieved, and other criteria related to the efforts of its vendors. These estimates will be subject to change as additional information becomes available. Depending on the timing of payments to vendors and estimated services provided, the Company will record net prepaid or accrued expenses related to these costs.
Equity and Share-Based Compensation
The Company recognizes compensation expense relating to equity-based payments based on the fair value of the equity or liability instrument issued. For equity-based instruments, the expense is based upon the grant date fair value and recognized over the service period. For awards with a performance condition, compensation expense is recognized over the requisite service period if it is probable that the performance condition will be satisfied. For awards to non-employees, the Company recognizes compensation expense in the same manner as if the Company had paid cash for the goods or services. The Company esimates the fair value of options and warrants granted using an options pricing model. Expense is recognized within general and administrative expenses and forfeitures are recognized as they are incurred.
Results of Operations
Operating expenses and other (expense) income were comprised of the following:
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses decreased by $0.6 million or 75.8%, to $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to decreases in expenses for our human PK study conducted in 2019. All of the research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were external.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $8.4 million, or 612.1%, to $9.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily the result of non-cash expenses related to equity-based compensation of $2.0 million related to membership interests awarded to our founder and share-based compensation expense of $5.4 million related to stock options issued pursuant to executive employment agreements upon our IPO. Contributing further to the increase was an increase in expenses for salaries and benefits, legal and accounting fees and other costs
associated with being a public company of $1.3 million offset by decreases in business development expenses of $0.3 million.
Other (Expense) Income
Other (expense) income increased by $0.05 million or 15.5% to $0.34 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $0.29 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to the increase in interest expense of $0.09 million related to the issuance of convertible promissory notes in 2020 offset by an increase in other income of $0.04 million for a vendor concession.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception in 2012, we have devoted most of our cash to research and development and general and administrative activities. We have financed our operations primarily with the proceeds from the sale memberhip interests, convertible promissory notes and with common stock through our recent IPO. To date, we have not generated any revenues from the sale of products, and we do not anticipate generating any revenues from the sales of products for the foreseeable future. We have incurred losses and generated negative cash flows from operations since inception. As of December 31, 2020 our principal source of liquidity was our cash, which totaled $29.8 million.
The COVID-19 global pandemic has resulted in travel restrictions and temporary shut-downs of non-essential businesses in many states in the U.S. We are able to remain open and all employees work from home. Due to many uncertainties, we are unable to estimate the pandemic’s financial impact or duration at this time.
Equity Financings
We closed our IPO on December 21, 2020, raising gross proceeds of $34.5 million and net proceeds of approximately $31.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses.
Debt Financings
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we received net proceeds from the sale of convertible promissory notes of $1.9 million and $2.4 million, respectively.
In 2019, we issued an aggregate of $3.7 million principal amount of convertible promissory notes, $1.2 million of which were related to the conversion of redeemable preferred convertible interests that were issued in 2018. All of these notes were outstanding for the year ended December 31, 2019. In 2020, we issued an aggregate of $2.0 million principal amount of convertible promissory notes. At the Corporate Conversion, these notes converted to common interests at the price of $400,000 per 1% of common interests. There was no debt outstanding for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Non-voting Preferred Members’ Interest
In 2018, we sold an aggregate of $1.3 million of redeemable preferred members’ interests. In 2019, $1.2 million of the redeemable preferred members’ interests were converted into convertible promissory notes. The remaining principle of the preferred members’ interests of $0.1 million was repaid upon the closing of our IPO. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were principle amounts outstanding of $0 and $0.1 million respectively.
Future Capital Requirements
We estimate our current cash of $29.8 million at December 31, 2020 is sufficient to fund our operations and capital requirements through the end of 2022. We believe that these available funds will be sufficient to
complete our Phase 2b clinical trial for IMC-1 and commence the planning of our Phase 3 study in FM for this product candidate. However, it is difficult to predict our spending for our product candidate prior to obtaining FDA approval. Moreover, changing circumstances may cause us to expend cash significantly faster than we currently anticipate, and we may need to spend more cash than currently expected because of circumstances beyond our control.
To the extent that our capital resources are insufficient to meet our future operating and capital requirements, we will need to finance our cash needs through public or private equity offerings, debt financings, collaboration and licensing arrangements or other financing alternatives. We have no committed external sources of funds. Additional equity or debt financing or collaboration and licensing arrangements may not be available on acceptable terms, if at all.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities.
Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Operating Activities
Of the net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $10.3 million, the net cash used in operating activities was only $3.9 million with non-cash operating expense items of $7.4 million offset with a net change in operating assets and liabilities of $1.0 million. The net change in operating assets and liabilities included an increase in prepaid expenses of $1.7 million offset by a net increase in operating liabilities of $0.7 million. Non-cash items consisted primarily of equity and share-based compensation of $7.4 million. We expect cash used in operating activities to continue to increase in 2021 as compared to 2020 due to an expected increase in our operating losses associated with ongoing development of our product candidate and operating as a public company.
Net cash used in operating activities was $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and consisted of a net loss of $2.5 million offset by a net change in operating assets and liabilities of $0.3 million and non-cash items of $0.1 million. The change in operating assets and liabilities included a net increase in in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $0.3 million. The net increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses is largely due to increases in accrued interest on convertible promissory notes issued in our Fourth Offering and an increase in accrued expenses for incurred but unbilled costs related to our human PK study. Non-cash items consisted of amortization of debt issuance costs of $0.1 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $33.4 million. We received cash proceeds from our IPO of $31.3 million, net of deal costs and other expenses, $1.9 million net proceeds from the issuance of convertible promissory notes and $0.2 million proceeds from the exercise of warrants to purchase our common stock.
Net cash provided by financing activities the year ended December 31, 2019 was $2.4 million representing the net proceeds from the issuance of convertible promissory notes.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements or relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-07, “Compensation Stock Compensation (Topic 718), improvements to Non-Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting.” Under legacy guidance, the accounting for non-employee share-based payments differs from that applied to employee awards, particularly with regard to the measurement date and the impact of performance conditions. ASU 2018-07 provides that existing employee guidance will apply to non-employee share-based transactions (as long as the transaction is not effectively a form of financing), with the exception of specific guidance related to the attributions of compensation cost. The cost of non-employee awards will continue to be recorded as if the grantor had paid cash for the goods or services. In addition, the contractual term will be able to be used in lieu of an expected term in the option-pricing model for non-employee awards. The Company has adopted this standard and applied the application of the new standard to the underwriters warrants.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, "Income Taxes (ASC 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes." The standard eliminates the need for an organization to analyze whether the following apply in a given period: (1) the exception to the incremental approach for intraperiod tax allocation; (2) the exceptions to accounting for basis differences when there are ownership changes in foreign investments; and (3) the exception in interim periods income tax accounting for year-to-date losses that exceed anticipated losses. The ASU also is designed to improve financial statement preparers’ application of income tax-related guidance and simplify GAAP for (1) franchise taxes that are partially based on income, (2) transactions with a government that result in a step-up in the tax basis of goodwill, (3) separate financial statements of legal entities that are not subject to tax, (4) enacted changes in tax laws in interim periods and (5) certain income tax accounting for employee stock ownership plans and affordable housing projects. The amendments in this Update are effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020. The Company does not expect adoption to have a material impact on its financial statements.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, “Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)”. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the beneficial conversion and cash conversion accounting models for convertible instruments. It also amends the accounting for certain contracts in an entity’s own equity that are currently accounted for as derivatives because of specific settlement provisions. The new guidance also modifies how particular convertible instruments and certain contracts that may be settled in cash or shares impact the diluted EPS computation. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those annual periods. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those annual periods. ASU 2020-06 allows companies to adopt the guidance through either a modified retrospective method of transition or a fully retrospective method of transition. The Company is still evaluating the impacts the ASU will have on its financial statements.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or JOBS Act, was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, reduce certain reporting requirements for an “emerging growth company.” As an “emerging growth company,” we are electing to take advantage of the
extended transition period afforded by the JOBS Act for the implementation of new or revised accounting standards.
Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, as an “emerging growth company,” we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the chief executive officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply until the fifth anniversary of the completion of our initial public offering or until we no longer meet the requirements for being an “emerging growth company,” whichever occurs first.