ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition as of December 31, 2020 and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report.
This discussion and analysis contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), and the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, which involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. All statements, other than statements of historical facts, are “forward-looking statements” for purposes of these provisions, including without limitation any statements relating to Sunesis’ ability to satisfy the required conditions and otherwise complete its planned merger with Viracta on a timely basis or at all; the expected benefits and potential value created by the Merger for Sunesis’ stockholders, including the ownership percentage of its stockholders in the combined organization immediately following the consummation of the Merger; the continued development and potential of its kinase inhibitor pipeline, including the additional preclinical findings and IND-enabling studies related to SNS-510; Sunesis' strategy of addressing anticipated PI3Ki toxicities through dose regiment optimization and strategies that mitigate glucose dysregulation; the clinical and commercial potential of SNS-510; the anticipated submission of an IND for SNS-510 and the timing thereof; the therapeutic potential of vecabrutinib and potential partnerships or licensing arrangements related to vecabrutinib; Sunesis’ ability to receive potential milestone or royalty payments under license and collaboration agreements and the timing of receipt of those payments, including those related to TAK 580 and vosaroxin; Sunesis' ability to maintain and operate Sunesis' business, in light of the recent COVID-19 pandemic; Sunesis’ future research and development activities, including clinical testing and the costs and timing thereof, the potential of Sunesis’ existing product candidates to lead to the development of commercial products; sufficiency of Sunesis’ cash resources and expenses, including those related to the consummation of the Merger, capital requirements and needs for additional financing, and ability to obtain additional financing and to continue as a going concern if the Merger is not completed; developments and projections relating to Sunesis' competitors or Sunesis' industry and any statement of assumptions underlying any of the foregoing. In some cases, forward-looking statements can be identified by the use of terminology such as “anticipates,” “believe,” “continue,” “estimates,” “expects,” “intend,” “look forward,” “may,” “could,” “seeks,” “plans,” “potential,” or “will” or the negative thereof or other comparable terminology. Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements contained herein are reasonable, there can be no assurance that such expectations or any of the forward-looking statements will prove to be correct, and actual results could differ materially from those projected or assumed in the forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including but not limited to those set forth under “Risk Factors,” and elsewhere in this report. We urge you not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date of this report. All forward-looking statements included in this report are based on information available to us on the date of this report, and we assume no obligation to update any forward-looking statements contained in this report. Please also see “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
In this report, “Sunesis,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” and “our” refer to Sunesis Pharmaceuticals, Inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiary, except where it is made clear that the term refers only to the parent company.
Overview
Sunesis is a biopharmaceutical company focused on the development of novel targeted inhibitors for the treatment of hematologic and solid cancers. Sunesis is developing SNS-510, a PDK1 inhibitor licensed from Millennium Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (“Takeda Oncology”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited. SNS-510 interaction with PDK1 inhibits both PI3K-dependent and independent signaling pathways integral to many malignancies, and PDK1 can also be overexpressed in breast, lung, prostate, hematologic and other cancers. Evaluation of SNS-510 in the Eurofins Oncopanel™, a panel of >300 genomically profiled cancer cell lines from diverse tissue origins, indicated that tumors with mutations or deletions of the Cyclin Dependent Kinase Inhibitor 2A (“CDKN2A”) gene are particularly sensitive to SNS-510. CDKN2A alterations are common in human cancers and may prove to be useful biomarkers for broad investigation of SNS-510 as a monotherapy and in combination with other anticancer agents. In other in vitro studies, SNS-510 had strong activity against a broad range of sarcoma cell lines. SNS-510 showed synergistic activity when combined with inhibitors of CDK4/6, KRAS G12C, or BCL-2 in breast cancer, sarcoma, KRAS-mutant, and lymphoma cell lines. In in vivo studies, SNS-510 demonstrated potent, pathway-mediated antitumor activity in FLT3-mutated and wild-type AML xenograft mouse models, as well as in a myc-activated, CDKN2A-deleted lymphoma xenograft mouse model. Sunesis is completing reporting of Investigational New Drug-enabling studies for SNS-510 and is evaluating the next steps for the program.
Sunesis’s second program is vecabrutinib, a selective non-covalent inhibitor of Bruton’s Tyrosine Kinase (“BTK”) with activity against both wild-type and C481S-mutated BTK, the most common mutation associated with resistance to covalent BTK inhibitors. In June 2020, Sunesis announced that it will not advance its non-covalent BTK inhibitor vecabrutinib in the planned Phase 2 portion of the Phase 1b/2 trial for adults with relapsed or refractory chronic lymphocytic leukemia (“CLL”) and other B-cell malignancies. The decision was made after assessing the totality of the data including the 500 mg cohort, the highest dose studied in the trial, as Sunesis
found insufficient evidence of activity in BTK-inhibitor resistant disease to move the program into Phase 2. Sunesis has completed the Phase 1b portion of the Phase 1b/2 trial and is evaluating the best path forward for vecabrutinib.
Sunesis also has two partnered programs: DAY101 (formerly TAK-580) and vosaroxin. Sunesis has a license agreement with DOT Therapeutics-1 (“DOT-1”) where Sunesis is eligible to receive potential pre-commercialization, event-based milestone payments and royalty payments on future sales of DAY101, when and if approved and commercialized. On February 10, 2021, Sunesis received a $3.0 million development milestone payment from DOT-1 pursuant to the license agreement. In addition, Sunesis has a license agreement with Denovo Biopharma where Sunesis is eligible to receive potential regulatory and commercial milestones, and royalties on future sales of vosaroxin, when and if approved and commercialized.
To conserve its cash resources, Sunesis has substantially reduced its workforce and has reduced its research and development activities. In July 2020, Sunesis reduced its workforce by 30% to focus on development of its PDK1 inhibitor SNS-510 while evaluating its strategic alternatives with a goal to enhance stockholder value, including asset in-licensing, partnering, and mergers and acquisitions. Sunesis recognized one-time employee severance expenses of $0.2 million related to the reduction in workforce in the third quarter of 2020.
The Sunesis Board commenced a process of evaluating strategic alternatives to maximize stockholder value. To assist with this process, the Sunesis Board engaged MTS Health Partners, L.P. to help explore Sunesis’s available strategic alternatives, including possible mergers and business combinations, a sale of part or all of Sunesis’s assets, and collaboration and licensing arrangements. On November 30, 2020, Sunesis and Viracta Therapeutics, Inc. (“Viracta”) announced the signing of an Agreement and Plan of Merger and Reorganization, dated November 29, 2020, as may be amended from time to time (the “Merger Agreement”). Upon the terms and subject to the satisfaction of the conditions described in the Merger Agreement, including approval of the transaction by Sunesis’s stockholders, a wholly owned subsidiary of Sunesis will be merged with and into Viracta, with Viracta surviving the Merger as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Sunesis (the “Merger”).
Although Sunesis has entered into the Merger Agreement and intends to consummate the Merger, there is no assurance that it will be able to successfully consummate the Merger on a timely basis, or at all. If, for any reason, the proposed Merger is not completed, Sunesis will reconsider its strategic alternatives and could pursue one or more of the following courses of action:
•
Pursue potential collaborative, partnering or other strategic arrangements for Sunesis’s assets, including a sale or other divestiture of its assets. Sunesis may elect to seek potential collaborative, partnering or other strategic arrangements for its programs, including a sale or other divestiture of its assets which could allow Sunesis’s technology to continue being developed. Sunesis may be unable to divest its assets in a timely manner, or at all, and therefore may not receive any return on Sunesis’ investment in its program assets.
•
Pursue another strategic transaction like the Merger. The Sunesis Board may elect to pursue an alternative strategy, one of which may be a strategic transaction similar to the Merger.
•
Dissolve and liquidate Sunesis’s assets. If, for any reason, the Merger is not consummated and Sunesis is unable to identify and complete an alternative strategic transaction like the Merger or potential collaborative, partnering or other strategic arrangements for its assets, or to continue to operate its business due to its inability to raise additional funding, Sunesis may be required to dissolve and liquidate its assets. In such case, Sunesis would be required to pay all of its debts and contractual obligations, and to set aside certain reserves for potential future claims, and there can be no assurances as to the amount or timing of available cash left to distribute to Sunesis’s stockholders after paying its debts and other obligations and setting aside funds for reserves.
On December 18, 2020, due to the entry into the Merger Agreement, Sunesis reduced its workforce by approximately 40% to preserve cash resources while completing the proposed Merger. As a result of the workforce reduction, Sunesis recognized one-time employee severance expenses of $1.3 million, which were included in accrued compensation on the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020, and noncash stock compensation expenses related to accelerated vesting of certain employee stock options of $0.1 million, both of which were recorded as operating expenses on the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Impact of Coronavirus (“COVID-19”) on Our Operations
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, otherwise known as COVID-19, was reported in Wuhan, China. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization (the “WHO”) declared COVID-19 a pandemic, and on March 13, 2020, the United States declared a national emergency with respect to the coronavirus outbreak. This outbreak has severely impacted global economic activity, and many countries and many states in the United States have reacted to the outbreak by instituting quarantines, mandating business and school closures and restricting travel. Our employees have been working from home since March 16, 2020, when California’s San Mateo County issued its first shelter-in-place order.
To date, our programs have not experienced significant COVID-19 related delays. The continued COVID-19 pandemic may negatively impact our workforce and our research and development activities.
As of the date of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, management is evaluating all options to conserve cash to complete the Merger, to permit the Company to continue operations. See Item 1A - “Risk Factors” for additional information regarding the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Recent Financial History
Reverse Stock Split
On September 2, 2020, we effected a one-for-ten reverse split of our outstanding common stock (the "Reverse Split"), as previously authorized and approved at the annual meeting of stockholders on June 16, 2020. As a result of the Reverse Split, every ten shares of common stock were combined into one share of common stock. The Reverse Split affected the shares of our common stock: (a) outstanding immediately prior to the effective time of the Reverse Split, (b) available for issuance under our equity incentive plans, (c) issuable upon the exercise of outstanding stock options and warrants and (d) issuable upon conversion of the outstanding non-voting Series E and Series F Convertible Preferred Stock. All share and per-share data in our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto give retroactive effect to the Reverse Split for all periods presented.
Underwritten Offering
In July 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 5,999,999 shares of our common stock, including the full exercise of the underwriter’ option to purchase 782,608 shares of common stock to cover over-allotments, at a price to the public of $2.30 for each share of common stock. Gross proceeds from the sale were approximately $13.8 million, and net proceeds were approximately $12.6 million.
SVB Repayment
In July 2020, we repaid in full all outstanding indebtedness and terminated all commitments and obligations under the existing term loan agreement (the “SVB Loan Agreement”). The repayment to Silicon Valley Bank (“SVB”) was approximately $5.7 million, which satisfied all of our debt obligations, including a final interest payment equal to 4% of the original principal amount of the borrowing.
Controlled Equity Offerings
Cantor Controlled Equity Offering
In August 2011, we entered into a Controlled Equity OfferingSM sales agreement (the “Sales Agreement”), with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. (“Cantor”), as agent and/or principal, pursuant to which we could issue and sell shares of common stock. The Sales Agreement, as amended, provides for an aggregate gross sales of $45.0 million. We will pay Cantor a commission of up to 3.0% of the gross proceeds from any common stock sold under the Sales Agreement, as amended. During 2020, no shares of common stock were sold under the Sales Agreement, as amended.
Aspire Common Stock Purchase Agreement
In June 2018, we entered into a Common Stock Purchase Agreement (the “CSPA”) with Aspire Capital Fund, LLC (“Aspire”), pursuant to which we could issue and sell shares of our common stock having an aggregate gross sales price of up to $15.5 million. The CSPA with Aspire expired on June 25, 2020 and no shares were issued under the CSPA in 2020 prior to its expiration.
Capital Requirements
We have incurred significant losses in each year since our inception. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $20.4 million and an accumulated deficit of $704.4 million. We expect to continue to incur significant losses for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of our kinase inhibitor pipeline, including our PDK1 inhibitor, SNS-510. We have product candidates that are still in the early stages of development and will require significant additional investment.
We expect our current cash and cash equivalents of $20.4 million are not sufficient to support our operations for a period of twelve months from the date the financial statements are available to be issued. We will require additional financing to fund working capital and pay our obligations as they come due. Additional financing might include one or more offerings and one or more of a combination of equity securities, debt arrangements or partnership or licensing collaborations. However, there can be no assurance
that we will be successful in completing the Merger or acquiring additional funding at levels sufficient to fund our operations or on terms favorable to us. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for a period of one year from the date these financial statements are available to be issued. If we are unsuccessful in our efforts to complete the Merger, seek other strategic alternatives, or raise additional financing in the near term, we will be required to significantly reduce or cease operations. The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming we will continue to operate as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the settlement of liabilities in the normal course of business. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts of liabilities that may result from uncertainty related to our ability to continue as a going concern.
Critical Accounting Policies and the Use of Estimates
The accompanying discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements and the related disclosures, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires our management to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements and accompanying notes, including reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. We evaluate our estimates, assumptions and judgments on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Management has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report. We believe the following critical accounting policies reflect our more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We account for our contract revenues under Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“Topic 606”). Our contract revenues consist of license revenue primarily generated through agreements with strategic partners for the development and commercialization of our product candidates. The terms of the agreement typically include non-refundable upfront fees, payments based upon achievement of milestones and royalties on net product sales. We have both fixed and variable consideration. Non-refundable upfront fees are considered fixed, while milestone payments are identified as variable consideration.
In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under these agreements, we perform the following steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations based on estimated selling prices; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation.
Licenses of intellectual property: If the license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenues from non-refundable, up-front fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer, and the customer can use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, up-front fees. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Milestone payments: At the inception of each arrangement that includes milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being achieved and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the value of the associated milestone is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our control are not included in the transaction price until they become probable of being achieved.
Royalties: For arrangements that include sales-based royalties and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (a) when the related sales occur, or (b) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). We are applying the practical exemption allowed under ASC 606 and does not disclose the value of variable consideration that is a sale-based royalty promised in exchange for
a license of intellectual property. To date, we have not recognized any royalty revenue resulting from any of our licensing arrangements.
Clinical Trial Accounting
We record accruals for estimated clinical trial costs, which include payments for work performed by contract research organizations (“CROs”), and participating clinical trial sites. These costs are generally a significant component of research and development expense. Costs incurred for setting up clinical trial sites for participation in trials are generally non-refundable, and are expensed as incurred, with any refundable advances related to enrollment of the first patient recorded as prepayments and assessed for recoverability on a quarterly basis. Costs related to patient enrollment are accrued as patients progress through the clinical trial, including amortization of any first-patient prepayments. This amortization generally matches when the related services are rendered, however, these cost estimates may or may not match the actual costs incurred by the CROs or clinical trial sites, and if we have incomplete or inaccurate information, our clinical trial accruals may not be accurate. The difference between accrued expenses based on our estimates and actual expenses has not been significant to date.
Leases
We determine if an arrangement is or contains a lease at inception. In determining whether an arrangement is a lease, we consider whether (1) explicitly or implicitly identified assets have been deployed in the arrangement and (2) we obtain substantially all of the economic benefits from the use of that underlying asset and direct how and for what purpose the asset is used during the term of the contract.
Right-of-Use (“ROU”), assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term, and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Operating lease ROU assets and liabilities are recognized based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. When an implicit rate is not readily determinable, we use our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at commencement date for new leases or effective date for existing leases, in determining the present value of lease payments.
Leases may contain initial periods of free rent and/or periodic escalations. When such items are included in a lease agreement, we record rent expense on a straight-line basis over the initial term of a lease. The difference between the rent payment and the straight-line rent expense is recorded as a deferred rent liability. We expense any additional payments under its operating leases for taxes, insurance, or other operating expenses as incurred.
Overview of Revenues
We have not generated any revenue from the sale of commercial products. Our current and past revenue have been generated through license and collaboration agreements. We cannot predict if our licensees will continue development or whether we will receive any additional event-based payments or royalties from these agreements in the foreseeable future, or at all.
Overview of Operating Expenses
Research and development expense. Research and development expense consists primarily of clinical trial costs, which include: payments for work performed by our contract research organizations, clinical trial sites, labs and other clinical service providers and for drug packaging, storage and distribution; drug manufacturing costs, which include costs for producing drug substance and drug product, and for stability and other testing; personnel costs, including non-cash stock-based compensation; other outside services and consulting costs; and payments under license agreements. We expense all research and development costs as they are incurred.
The table below sets forth our research and development expense by program for each period presented:
We are currently focused on the development of SNS-510, a PDK1 inhibitor, for the treatment of solid tumor and hematologic malignancies. Research and development costs typically increase as product development candidates move from early stage to later stage, larger clinical trials. As a result, our research and development costs may increase in the future. Due to the above uncertainties and other risks inherent in the development process, we are unable to estimate the costs we will incur in the development of our product candidates in the future.
If we engage a development or commercialization partner for our development programs, or if, in the future, we acquire additional product candidates, our research and development expenses could be significantly affected. We cannot predict whether future licensing or collaborative arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements.
General and administrative expense. General and administrative expense consists primarily of personnel costs for the related employees, including non-cash stock-based compensation; outside service costs, including fees paid to external legal advisors, marketing consultants and our independent registered public accounting firm; facilities expenses; and other administrative costs.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue. Total revenue was $0.1 million in 2020 compared to $2.1 million in 2019. Revenue in both periods was derived from license agreements. The decrease of $2.0 million in 2020 was primarily due to revenue recognized in 2019 from the upfront payments received under the license agreements with DOT-1 and Denovo.
Research and development expense. Research and development expense was $12.3 million in 2020 as compared to $15.4 million in 2019, primarily relating to the SNS-510 and vecabrutinib development programs in each year, respectively. The decrease of $3.1 million in 2020 was primarily due to a $1.8 million decrease in clinical expenses and a $0.2 million decrease in professional service expenses due to the decision not to advance our clinical trial for vecabrutinib into Phase 2, and a $1.6 million decrease in salary and personnel expenses due to lower headcount and less business-related travel, partially offset by $0.7 million increase in severance expense related to the workforce reductions in 2020.
General and administrative expense. General and administrative expense was $10.2 million in 2020 compared to $9.9 million in 2019. The increase of $0.3 million in 2020 was primarily due to a $0.9 million increase in professional services expenses due to higher legal and consulting expenses related to the Merger, a $0.2 million increase in director and officer insurance premiums, and a $0.4 million increase in severance expenses related to the workforce reductions in 2020, partially offset by a $1.3 million decrease in salary and personnel expenses due to lower headcount and stock-based compensation.
Interest expense. Interest expense was $0.3 million in 2020 compared to $0.5 million in 2019. The decrease in 2020 was primarily due the lower interest paid due to the lower interest rate on the lower principal amount under the SVB Loan Agreement.
Other income, net. Net other income was $1.0 million in 2020 as compared to $0.5 million in 2019. The $0.5 million increase in 2020 was primarily due to a $0.8 million gain on equity investments, partially offset by a $0.4 million decrease in interest income from short term investments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
We have incurred significant losses in each year since our inception. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $20.4 million and an accumulated deficit of $704.4 million. We expect to continue to incur significant losses for the foreseeable future. Our products are still in the early stages of approval and will require significant additional investment.
We expect our current cash and cash equivalents of $20.4 million as of December 31, 2020, are not sufficient to support our operations for a period of twelve months beyond the date the financial statements are available to be issued. We will require additional financing to fund working capital and pay our obligations as they come due, so substantial doubt exists about our ability to continue as a going concern. Additional financing might include one or more of a combination of offerings of equity securities or debt arrangements or partnerships or licensing collaborations. However, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in completing the Merger and acquiring additional funding at levels sufficient to fund our operations or on terms favorable to us.
In July 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 5,999,999 shares of our common stock, including the full exercise of the underwriter’s option to purchase 782,608 shares of common stock to cover over-allotments, at a price to the public of $2.30 for each share of common stock. Gross proceeds from the sale were approximately $13.8 million, and net proceeds were approximately $12.6 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, no shares of common stock were sold under the Sales Agreement with Cantor and no shares were issued under the CSPA with Aspire to its expiration on June 25, 2020.
Our cash and cash equivalents was $20.4 million as of December 31, 2020, compared to cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash, and marketable securities of $34.6 million as of December 31, 2019. The decrease of $14.2 million was primarily due cash used in operating activities, mainly resulting from our net loss of $21.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, the $5.5 million principal payment on the SVB Loan Agreement, partially offset by the $12.6 million net proceeds from issuance of common stock.
In April 2019, we entered into the SVB Loan Agreement, pursuant to which we borrowed $5.5 million. In April 2020, we entered into the SVB Deferral Agreement, which extended the interest-only payment period through June 30, 2021 and deferred the maturity date of the borrowing under the SVB Loan Agreement to June 1, 2023. In July 2020, we repaid in full all outstanding indebtedness and terminated all commitments and obligations under the SVB Loan Agreement. The repayment to SVB was approximately $5.7 million, which satisfied all of our debt obligations, including a final interest payment equal to 4% of the original principal amount of the borrowing.
If we are unable to complete the Merger and become unable to continue as a going concern, we may have to liquidate our assets, and might realize significantly less than the values at which they are carried on our consolidated financial statements, and stockholders may lose all or part of their investment in our common stock. Other than raising additional funds from investors or business partners, management cannot identify conditions or events to mitigate the substantial doubt that exists about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Cash Flows
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $21.4 million in 2020, compared to $22.2 million in 2019. Net cash used in the 2020 period resulted primarily from the net loss of $21.6 million and changes in operating assets and liabilities of $0.3 million, offset by net adjustments for non-cash items of $0.5 million. Net cash used in the 2019 period resulted primarily from the net loss of $23.3 million and changes in operating assets and liabilities of $0.7 million, offset by net adjustments for non-cash items of $1.8 million.
Investing activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $16.4 million in 2020, compared to net cash used by investing activities of $16.3 million in 2019. Net cash provided by investing activities in 2020 consisted of primarily $17.2 million proceeds from maturities of marketable securities and net purchases of $0.7 million marketable securities. Net cash used in investing activities in 2019 consists of $16.3 million net purchases of marketable securities.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $7.2 million in 2020, compared to $43.0 million in 2019. Net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 resulted primarily from $12.6 million net proceeds from issuance of common stock, offset by $5.5 million principal payment on the SVB Loan Agreement. Net cash provided in 2019 resulted primarily from $45.1 million net proceeds from issuance of common and preferred stock, and $5.5 million proceeds from the SVB Loan Agreement, offset by $7.5 million principal payment on the Loan Agreement and Amendments.
Operating Cash Requirements
We have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $20.4 million and cash used in operating activities of $21.4 million for 2020.
We expect to continue to incur substantial operating losses in the future. We will not receive any product revenue until a product candidate has been approved by the FDA, EMA, or similar regulatory agencies in other countries, and has been successfully commercialized, if ever. We will need to raise substantial additional funding to complete the development and potential commercialization of any of our development programs. Additionally, we may evaluate in-licensing and acquisition opportunities to gain access to new drugs or drug targets that would fit with our strategy. Any such transaction would likely increase our funding needs in the future.
Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including but not limited to:
•
our ability to complete the Merger;
•
the rate of progress and cost of our clinical trials;
•
the timing, economic and other terms of any licensing, collaboration or other similar arrangement into which we may enter;
•
the costs and timing of seeking and obtaining FDA, EMA, or other regulatory approvals;
•
the costs associated with building or accessing commercialization and additional manufacturing capabilities and supplies;
•
the costs of acquiring or investing in businesses, product candidates and technologies, if any;
•
the costs of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
•
the effect of competing technological and market developments; and
•
the costs of supporting our arrangements with Takeda.
Our failure to raise significant additional capital in the future would force us to delay or reduce the scope of our SNS-510, vecabrutinib and other development programs, potentially including any additional clinical trials or subsequent regulatory filings in the United States or Europe, and/or limit or cease our operations. Any one of the foregoing would have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
In addition, the recent COVID-19 pandemic has significantly disrupted world financial markets and negatively impacted US market conditions. This may reduce opportunities for us to find additional funding from partnering or selling equity. Though we raised additional funds in our July 2020 offering, we will require additional financing to fund working capital and continue clinical development of SNS-510. Further decline in the market price of our common stock could make it more difficult for us to sell equity or equity-related securities in the future at a time and price that we deem appropriate. If we fail to complete the Merger or raise sufficient additional financing, on terms and dates acceptable to us, we may not be able to continue our operations and the development of our product candidates, and we may be required to reduce staff, reduce or eliminate research and development, slow the development of our product candidates, outsource or eliminate several business functions or shut down operations.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets or liabilities may arise from differences between the tax basis of assets or liabilities and their basis for financial reporting. Deferred tax assets or liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts expected to be realized. Our policy is to recognize interest charges and penalties in other income (expense), net in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Since inception, we have incurred operating losses and, accordingly, have not recorded a provision for income taxes for any of the periods presented. As of December 31, 2020, we had net operating loss carry-forwards for federal and state income tax purposes of $475.8 million and $335.0 million, respectively. We also had federal and state research and development tax credit carry-forwards of $9.7 million and $8.9 million, respectively. If not utilized, the federal net operating loss and tax credit carry-forwards will begin to expire in 2021 and the state net operating loss carry-forwards expire beginning in 2028. The state research and development tax credit carry-forwards do not expire. Utilization of these net operating loss and tax credit carry-forwards may be subject to a substantial annual limitation due to ownership change rules under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”). The limitations are applicable if an “ownership change,” as defined in the Code, is deemed to have occurred or occurs in the future. The annual limitation may result in the expiration of net operating loss and credit carry-forwards before they can be utilized.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since our inception, we have not had any off-balance sheet arrangements or relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or variable interest entities, which are typically established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.