Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current plans, expectations, and beliefs that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements due to various factors, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and those other factors discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” and in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our fiscal year-end is December 31.
Overview
Vislink is a global technology business specializing in collecting, delivering, and managing high-quality, live video and associated data from the scene of the action to the viewing screen. Vislink provides solutions for the collection of live news, sports, and entertainment events for the broadcast markets. Vislink also furnishes the surveillance and defense markets with real-time video intelligence solutions using various tailored transmission products. The Vislink team also provides professional and technical services utilizing a staff of technology experts with decades of applied knowledge and real-world experience in terrestrial microwave, satellite, fiber optic, surveillance, and wireless communications systems delivering a broad spectrum of customer solutions.
LIVE BROADCAST:
Vislink delivers an extensive portfolio of solutions for live news, sports, and entertainment industries. These solutions encompass the video collection, transmission, management, and distribution of content, via microwave, satellite, cellular, IP, and MESH networks. With over 50 years in operation, Vislink has the expertise and technology portfolio to deliver fully integrated, seamless, end-to-end solutions.
Industry-wide contributors acknowledge Vislink’s live broadcast solutions. The transmission of a vast majority of all outside wireless broadcast video content uses our equipment, with over 200,000 systems installed worldwide. We work closely with the majority of the world’s broadcasters. Vislink wireless cameras and ultra-compact encoders help bring many of the world’s most prestigious sporting and entertainment events to life. Recent examples include globally watched international sporting contests, award shows, racing events, and annual music and cultural events.
MILITARY AND GOVERNMENT:
Building on our knowledge of live video delivery, Vislink has developed high-quality solutions to meet the operational and industry challenges of surveillance and defense markets. Vislink solutions are specifically designed with interagency cooperation in mind, utilizing a standard international protocol, I.P., platform, and a web interface for video delivery. Vislink provides comprehensive video, audio, and data communications solutions to the law enforcement and public safety community, including Airborne, Unmanned Systems, Maritime, and Tactical Mobile Command Posts. These solutions may include airborne downlinks, terrestrial point-to-point, tactical mobile command, maritime, UAV, and personal portable products that meet the demands of field operations, command centers, and central receiving sites. Short-range and long-range solutions are available in areas that include established infrastructure and exceptionally remote regions, making valuable video intelligence available regardless of location. Vislink public safety and surveillance solutions are deployed worldwide, including throughout the U.S., Europe, and the Middle East, at the local, regional, and federal levels of operation, a criminal investigation, crisis management, mobile command posts, and field operations.
SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS:
Over 30 years of technical expertise supports Vislink’s satellite solutions. These solutions aim to ensure robust, secure communications while delivering low transmission costs for any organization that needs high-quality, reliable satellite transmission. We offer turnkey solutions that begin with state-of-the-art coding, compression, engine modulation and end with our robust, lightweight antenna systems. Vislink Satellite solutions focus heavily on being the smallest, lightest, and most efficient in their categories, making transportation and ease of use a key driver in the customer experience. Vislink offers an extensive range of satellite designs that allow customers to optimize bit rate, size, weight, and total cost. Our satellite systems are used extensively globally, with over 2,000 systems deployed by governments, militaries, and broadcasters alike.
COVID-19 Update
In early March 2020, COVID-19, a disease caused by a novel strain of the coronavirus, was characterized as a pandemic by the World Health Organization. Since December 2019, COVID-19 has spread rapidly, reaching nearly all countries and territories worldwide with confirmed cases of COVID-19 in addition to a high concentration of cases in the United States and many other countries in which we and our customers, vendors, and partners operate. Also, in early 2021, new potentially more contagious variants of the virus have emerged. The rapid spread of the virus and the new variants has given rise to authorities worldwide periodically implementing and relaxing several measures to contain the virus, such as travel restrictions and bans, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, and mandated business closures. These containment actions have been in effect from time to time in various countries and territories. Prospects are that a substantial negative impact on businesses around the world and global, regional, and national economies will endure.
We are carefully monitoring the influence of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business. In conjunction with the ongoing impact of pre-pandemic vendor supply chain constraints and liquidity issues, we believe that the COVID-19 pandemic has an adverse effect on our business and operations, financial condition, and cash flow, which management has attempted to mitigate through its strategic initiative plan as described elsewhere in this Report. However, the progression of the pandemic is uncertain, rapidly changing, and hard to predict. For example, after the pandemic’s initial spread during the spring of 2020, many countries began loosening containment measures in the summer. Still, the rapid escalation of infection rates, as well as the discovery of new variants of the virus, in North America, Europe, South Africa, and other regions during the fall and winter of 2020 and early 2021, has led and is expected to continue to lead, to an increase in containment measures in certain of those countries and territories. As a result, the broader implications of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and operations and our financial results continue to be uncertain. The extent and sternness of the economic dip from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic may undesirably affect our business and operations, results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows.
To date, the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted our employees, our network, and our customers in several ways, and this impact could worsen if and to the extent the pandemic continues or becomes more severe.
● Our Employees. Our top priority during the COVID-19 pandemic is protecting our employees’ health and safety around the world. As the COVID-19 pandemic expanded globally during the spring of 2020, we activated our strategic initiative plan and transitioned a significant number of our employees to a fully remote working environment in nearly all of our locations worldwide and restricted almost all business travel. Throughout the pandemic, our goal has been to ensure that our employees feel safe and secure while having the flexibility and resources necessary to perform their jobs effectively. These efforts have included providing additional equipment to employees for working remotely and providing various benefits to promote our employees’ physical and mental well-being. We believe our employees have been able to remain productive during the COVID-19 pandemic and that our operations have not been materially impacted by our employees primarily working on a remote basis. Still, the continuation of the pandemic will place strains on our employees. As the pandemic’s progression continues, we will continue to monitor and follow guidance from authorities and health officials in the locations where we operate and modify our working environments around the world appropriately. Our financial condition and operating results could be materially and adversely affected, decrease productivity, harm our company cultures, or negatively affect our business, to the extent of current or future actions.
● Our Network. The change in everyday behavior caused by the COVID-19 pandemic during the year ended December 31, 2020, has resulted in an increased reliance on the Internet, increased Internet traffic, and a geographic migration of Internet traffic from office-focused areas (like city centers and business parks) to more residential areas (like suburbs and outlying towns). We believe that traffic on the Internet and on our network that we use to provide our products to our customers worldwide will remain elevated while the isolation mandates across the globe stay in place or where significantly greater numbers of workers continue remote work than was the case before the pandemic. The periodically lifting of isolation mandates impose an uncertainty about the impact on Internet traffic levels and work locations as more workers begin to return to working in office environments instead of remotely.
● Our Customers. The COVID-19 pandemic and the measures taken by governments worldwide to contain the spread of COVID-19 are materially and adversely impacting many of our current and potential customers. This impact has negatively impacted our business operations, results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows. Depending on the pandemic’s future progression, we may experience a future slowing in our collections of outstanding accounts receivables from some of our customers. We will work harmoniously with our existing customer base to ameliorate any negative impacts. The concentration of our sales efforts on industries that are more insulated from the fiscal impact is an option of our marketing strategy. However, there can be no assurance that these efforts will be successful.
For further discussion of the challenges and risks we confront related to the COVID-19 pandemic, and otherwise, please refer to Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth the items in the consolidated statements of operations of the financial statements included herewith for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 (in thousands).
Revenue
The revenues ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 were $22.9 million and $28.9 million, respectively, representing a $6.0 million or 21% decrease. The Company experienced a decline in revenue of approximately $3.9 million in North America, $2.2 million in Asia, and $0.3 million in South America. Revenue increased approximately $0.2 million for Europe and $0.2 million for the rest of the world market, respectively, offsetting these declines.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we witnessed a slide in sales due to our customer’s experiencing the consequences in the international marketplace because of the COVID-19 pandemic, such as “shelter-in-place” mandates, school closures, consumer behavior changes (like social distancing), and other government intervention. These conditions could have a sustaining undesirable influence on an entity’s financial condition and results.
Cost of Revenue and Operating Expenses
Cost of Components and Personnel
The cost of components and personnel for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 were $13.9 million and $15.7 million, respectively, representing a decrease of $1.8 million or 12%. The decline is in correlation with the reduction of revenue. Anticipated results in 2021, under the Company’s product rationalization program, should minimize volatility.
Inventory Valuation Adjustments
Inventory valuation adjustments are tools used to determine inventory measurement at lower-of-cost-or-market or lower-of-cost-and-net realizable value. For the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 inventory valuation adjustments amounted to $0.4 million and $4.7 million, representing a decrease of $4.3 million or 92%. The decline is attributable discontinuance of specific product lines under the Company’s strategic initiative plan.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses are costs incurred in operating the business daily and include salary and benefit expenses, including stock-based compensation and payroll taxes, as well as the costs of trade shows, marketing programs, promotional materials, professional services, facilities, general liability insurance, travel and expenses associated with being a public company.
For the years ended, general and administrative expenses ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 were $17.0 million and $20.1 million, respectively, representing a decrease of $3.1 million or 15%.
The reduction is primarily attributable to a decline of $1.8 million of salaries and benefits, $1.5 million of stock-based compensation, and $0.5 million each for rent and utilities, travel and management, and management fees. An increase of $0.6 million in miscellaneous expenses, $0.5 million in legal fees, and $0.5 million in costs in maintaining a publicly held company offset the reduction.
We executed a strategic initiative in early 2020 in mitigation of the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The program included proactive spending reductions to improve liquidity, including a partial workforce reduction, the furlough of employees, reduced discretionary spending, revealing notable savings in the Company’s general and administrative expenses illustrated above.
We remain uncertain of the extent of the COVID-19 pandemic’s future impact on our operations or whether it will result in business disruptions and the possible severity. It is indeterminable to assess the duration or lasting impact the pandemic will have on the economy. With vaccinations underway, new vaccines receive emergency approval from the FDA, emphasizing workforce safety and security, cost management, and enterprise agility will continue.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of salary and benefit expenses, including stock-based compensation and payroll taxes and prototypes, facilities, and travel costs.
For the years ended, research and development expenses ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 were $2.7 million and $3.2 million, respectively, representing a decrease of $0.5 million or 16%. The reduction is primarily attributable to a reduction of $0.7 million in salaries and benefits, offset by an increase of $0.2 of miscellaneous research costs.
We executed a strategic initiative in early 2020 in mitigation of the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The program included proactive spending reductions to improve liquidity, including a partial workforce reduction, the furlough of employees, reduced discretionary spending, revealing notable savings in the Company’s research and development expenses illustrated above.
We remain uncertain of the extent of the COVID-19 pandemic’s future impact on our operations or whether it will result in business disruptions and the possible severity. It is indeterminable to assess the duration or lasting impact the pandemic will have on the economy. With vaccinations underway, new vaccines receive emergency approval from the FDA, emphasizing workforce safety and security, cost management, and enterprise agility will continue.
Impairment
The Company recorded impairments related to inventory and right-of-use assets operating leases in the amounts of $3.8 million and $0.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, and none for inventory and right-of-use assets operating leases each for the year ended December 31, 2019, respectively. It included discontinuing product lines and evaluating existing leased facilities selecting to vacate and fuse specific sites.
Amortization and Depreciation
Amortization and depreciation expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 were $1.4 million and $2.4 million, respectively, representing a decrease of $1.0 million or 42%. The reduction is primarily due to Company assets being impaired or fully depreciated in current and prior years.
Loss on the abandonment of property and equipment
The loss on property and equipment abandonment for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 were $0.7 million and $-0-, respectively, representing an increase of $0.7 million or 100%. The increase is primarily due to management’s strategic initiative plan of vacating and consolidating specific facilities.
Other (Expense) Income
Significant Other (Expense) Income items for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively, were:
Changes in Fair Value of Derivative Liabilities
The measurement of the change in fair value of derivative liabilities for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 were $-0- million and $1.1 million, respectively, representing a decrease of $1.1 million or 100%. This fluctuation is mainly a lower quantity of outstanding warrants and the volatility of our stock price.
Interest expense
Interest expense for years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 were $0.1 million and $1.9 million, respectively, representing a decrease of $1.8 million or 95%. The decline is attributable to the payoff of approximately $6.3 million of convertible promissory notes in the fiscal year 2019.
Net Loss
Net losses for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 were $17.6 million and $18.0 million, respectively, representing a decrease of $0.4 million or 2%.
The reduction in the Company’s net loss has been due in part to the Company’s implementation of cost-saving strategic initiatives in response to uncertainties of the economic climate brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic. Even with vaccinations underway, new vaccine development, and approval, management is uncertain about the predictability of future events caused by the pandemic. The Company will continue to attempt to mitigate unexpected conditions brought by the future influence of the COVID-19 pandemic, domestically and worldwide.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company incurred a loss from operations of approximately $17.9 million and cash used in operating activities of $14.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company had $7.7 million in working capital, $270.1 million in accumulated deficits, and $5.2 million of cash on hand as of December 31, 2020. Additionally, as of April 14, 2021, our cash on hand is approximately $59.3 million.
The COVID-19 pandemic and interrelated economic uncertainties continue to create significant volatility. To mitigate any concern that the Company may not have the ability to continue as a going concern, the Company activated liquidity preservation arrangements intended to alleviate uncertainty about our potential to fund operations.
Strategic Initiatives
The Company activated liquidity preservation actions in late March and early April of the fiscal year 2020, including:
● Implementation of proactive spending reductions to improve liquidity, including a partial workforce reduction, the furlough of employees, reduced discretionary spending, resulting in a projected annual savings of approximately $5.0 million.
● Effective May 1, 2020, the Company entered into new lease arrangements at two recent locations in Hackettstown, NJ, on a 90-day cycle for each site, effectively lowering rental fees by approximately 81%.
Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) and Liquidity
Further, we benefited from the support afforded to us under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), which provided temporary relief related to maintaining payroll and some overhead expenses through the period of emergency. The stated goal is to keep workers paid and employed during the period of the crisis. The Company received approximately $1.2 million on April 10, 2020, under the PPP sponsorship, in the form of a promissory note, as discussed further in Note 10.
Capital-raising events
The Company has been able to raise funds as follows successfully:
● On February 14, 2020, the Company closed on an equity financing and received gross proceeds of approximately $5,998,000, less offering costs of $712,000 for net proceeds of $5,286,000. The Company issued 2,074,167 shares of common stock, 2,074,167 warrants to purchase 1,555,625 shares of Common Stock, 2,471,200 pre-funded warrants with each pre-funded warrant exercisable for one share of Common Stock, together with 2,471,200 Warrants to purchase 1,853,400 shares of Common Stock.
● On May 5, 2020, the Company filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) and declared effective on May 13, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s access to the shelf registration features effected the issuance of 6,508,860 shares of common stock, receiving gross proceeds of approximately $12,548,000, less offering costs of $488,000 for net proceeds of $12,060,000.
● As described in Note 20 (Subsequent Events), the Company raised approximately $12,663,000, less offering costs of 392,000 for net proceeds of $12,271,000 between January 1, 2021, and April 14, 2021 under the May 5, 2020 shelf registration. Furthermore, on February 8, 2021, the Company closed on an equity financing and received gross proceeds of approximately $50,000,000, less offering costs of $3,180,000 for net proceeds of $46,820,000. The Company issued 18,181,120 shares of common stock, supplemented by 9,090,910 five-year warrants with an exercise price of $3.25 per share exercisable for one share each of common stock.
Together, with the capital raises, the PPP loan, and the Company-wide protocols invoked as a result of the worldwide consequences encountered from the COVID-19 health emergency and based on forward-looking estimates of our business operations and outcome, we believe we will have sufficient funds to continue our operations for at least twelve months from the date of these financial statements. The ability to recognize revenue and cash receipts is contingent upon, but not limited to, acceptable performance of the delivered equipment and services. The extent to which COVID-19 continues to impact the Company’s operations, results of operations, liquidity, and financial condition will depend on future developments. The timing and efficacy of the vaccination programs in the jurisdictions in which the Company operates, and the actions implemented to contain the impact of COVID-19 by Federal and local governments, limit determining the foreseeable resulting economic effects with any level of predictability.
Our operations primarily have been funded through cash generated by debt and equity financing. Cash consists of cash on hand and demand deposits. Our cash balances were as follows (in thousands):
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the major components of our consolidated statements of cash flows data for the periods presented (in thousands).
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities of approximately $14.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, was principally attributable to our net loss of $17.6 million, a decrease of $2.7 million of accounts payable, a decrease of $1.9 million in deferred revenue and customer deposits, a decrease of $1.3 million of inventory, partially offset by an increase of $1.5 million of accounts receivable, and $1.4 million of depreciation and amortization.
Net cash used in operating activities of approximately $8.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily attributable to our net loss of $18.0 million, a change in the fair value of derivative liabilities of $1.1 million, a decrease of accounts receivable and operating lease liabilities of $0.9 million each, a decrease of accounts payable of $0.6 million, partially offset by stock-based compensation of $2.1 million, depreciation and amortization of $2.4 million, inventory valuation adjustments of $4.7 million, an increase in deferred revenue and customer deposits of $1.2 million, and an increase in inventory of $0.8 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities of $0.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to equipment purchases.
Net cash used in investing activities of $0.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to equipment purchases.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $18.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to the net proceeds received from an equity financing of $18.5 million, principally offset by principal payments made on convertible promissory notes of $0.5 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $8.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to the net proceeds received from an equity financing of $14.4 million, principally offset by principal payments made on convertible promissory notes of $6.0 million.
Nasdaq Compliance
On August 17, 2020, the Company received a letter from the staff of The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC (“Nasdaq”) stating that the Nasdaq staff determined that the Company regained compliance with the Nasdaq Capital Market minimum bid price requirement for continued listing outlined in Nasdaq Listing Rule 5550(a)(2).
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies, Estimates, and Judgments
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared under the United States generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”), which require us to make estimates and assumptions. Specific critical accounting policies affect the more significant accounts, particularly those that involve judgments, assessments, and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Our management has determined the development and selection of these critical accounting policies. We have reviewed our critical accounting policies and estimates with the audit committee of our board of directors. Due to the significant judgment involved in selecting certain of the assumptions used in these policies, other parties may choose different assumptions and reach different conclusions. We consider our policies relating to the following matters to be critical accounting policies.
Principles of Consolidation
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America or (“U.S. GAAP”) as found in the Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”), the Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) of the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) and the rules and regulations of the US Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”). The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, IMT and Vislink. We have eliminated all intercompany accounts and transactions upon the consolidation of our subsidiaries.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates, judgments, and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements. These estimates also affect the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Significant accounting estimates reflected in the Company’s consolidated financial statements include the useful lives of property, plant, and equipment, the useful lives of right-of-use assets, impairment of long-lived assets, allowance for accounts receivable doubtful accounts, allowance for inventory obsolescence reserve, allowance for deferred tax assets, valuation of warranty reserves, contingent consideration liabilities, and the accrual of potential liabilities. Actual results could differ from estimates, and any such differences may be material to our financial statements.
Risks and Uncertainties
The Company’s operations will be subject to significant risks and uncertainties, including financial, operational, regulatory, and other risks associated, including the potential risk of business failure. The COVID-19 pandemic and related economic repercussions have created significant uncertainty. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s business is highly uncertain and difficult to predict, as the response to the pandemic and information continues to evolve. Policymakers worldwide have responded with fiscal policy actions to support their industries and economies, but the magnitude and overall effectiveness of these interventions remain uncertain. Although capital markets and economies worldwide improved during the second and third quarters from the initial negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, there remains uncertainty around the strength and timing of global economic recoveries, which could cause a local or global economic recession. Such economic disruption could have a material adverse effect on our business.
The severity of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s business will depend on several factors. The duration and severity of the pandemic and identical concerns on the Company’s customers are a few factors. All of which is not all-inclusive or predictable. The delay in payments of outstanding receivable amounts beyond standard payment terms, uncertain demands, implementation of Company-wide initiatives or programs addressing financial and operational functions can unfavorably impact our customers, influencing the Company’s future operations and liquidity. Any economic disruption could have a disadvantageous material effect on our business and reduce our capital resources and access to capital, with possible ominous ramifications on our financial condition and operating results. As of the date of issuance of these Consolidated Financial Statements, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may materially impact the Company’s financial condition, liquidity, or operating results remains uncertain.
Segment Reporting
The Company identifies operating segments as components of an enterprise about which separate discrete financial information is available for evaluation by the operating decision-makers, or decision-making group, in making decisions on how to allocate resources and assess performance. The Company’s decision-making group is the senior executive management team. The Company and the decision-making group view the Company’s operations and manage its business as one operating segment with different product offerings. All long-lived assets of the Company reside in the U.S. and U.K.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
The Company extends credit to its customers in the ordinary course of business. Further, the Company regularly reviews outstanding receivables and provides for estimated losses through an allowance for doubtful accounts. In evaluating the level of established loss reserves, the Company makes judgments regarding its customer’s ability to make required payments, prevailing economic conditions, previous experience, and other factors. As these factors’ financial situation changes, circumstances develop, or additional information becomes available, adjustments to the allowance for doubtful accounts may be required. The Company maintains reserves for credit losses, and losses have been within its expectations.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are presented at cost at the date of acquisition less depreciation. Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method over estimated useful asset lives, ranging from 1 to 14 years. The costs of the day-to-day servicing of property and equipment and repairs and maintenance are recognized in expenses as incurred.
Intangible Assets
Patents and licenses:
Patents and licenses, measured initially at purchase cost, are included in intangible assets on the Company’s balance sheet and are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives of 18.5 to 20 years. Amortization totaled $671,000 and $669,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Other intangible assets:
The Company’s remaining intangible assets include the trade names, technology, and customer lists acquired in its acquisition of IMT and Vislink. A third-party appraiser determined the value of these acquired assets for these business combinations. Absent an indication of fair value from a potential buyer or similar specific transactions; we have determined using the methods employed provided a reasonable estimate in reporting the values assigned.
The Company amortizes intangible asset costs over their useful lives of 3 to 15 years with its net book value reported on the balance sheet. Amortization totaled 330,000 and $1,100,000 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue when we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring control of the promised goods or services to a customer in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those services. The Company determines revenue recognition through the five (5) steps identified in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock compensation with persons classified as employees for accounting purposes under ASC 718 “Compensation-Stock Compensation,” which recognizes awards at fair value on the date of grant and recognition of compensation over the service period for awards expected to vest. The fair value of stock options is determined using the Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model. The fair value of common stock issued for services is determined based on the Company’s stock price on the issuance date.
The expansion of Topic 718 fell under ASU 2018-07 to include share-based payment transactions for acquiring goods and services from nonemployees. The measurement date for equity-classified nonemployee share-based payment awards is no longer at the earlier date at which a commitment for performance by the counterparty is reached or the date at which the counterparty’s performance is complete. Instead, the grant date is now considered the measurement date. Under today’s guidance, the measurement of nonemployee share-based payment awards with performance conditions is at the lowest aggregate fair value, often resulting in a zero value. The new ASU aligns the accounting for nonemployee share-based payment awards with performance conditions with accounting for employee share-based payment awards under Topic 718 by requiring entities to consider the probability of satisfying performance conditions. Current guidance requires entities to use the contractual term for the measurement of the nonemployee share-based payment awards. The new ASU allows entities to make an award-by-award election to use either the expected duration (consistent with employee share-based payment awards) or the contractual term for nonemployee awards.
Impairment of inventory
Under the Company’s strategic initiative plan, management recognized certain items were not moving due to the diminishing consumer demand and lack of profitability. As part of our product rationalization program, a decision to eliminate specific product lines resulted in recognizing an impairment loss of approximately $3.8 million and $-0- for the years ending December 31, 2020, and 2019.
Impairment of long-lived assets
Management reviews long-lived assets, including property, plant, equipment, other intangible assets with definite lives, and right-of-use operating lease assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset’s carrying amount may not be recoverable. We conduct the Company’s long-lived asset impairment analyses under ASC 360-10-15, “Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets.” ASC 360-10-15 requires the Company to group assets and liabilities at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities and evaluate the asset group against the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows. The contemplation of measuring an impairment charge occurs if the undiscounted cash flows do not indicate the asset’s carrying amount is recoverable by which the asset group’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value based on discounted cash flow analysis appraisals. Under Topic 360, consideration is given to asset impairment, for intangible assets with definite lives continue to be amortized over their estimated useful lives and are subject to impairment testing as part of their asset group if and when events or changes in circumstances indicate. In the performance of the impairment tests, management utilizes a considerable amount of judgment and assumptions.
As part of the Company’s strategic initiative plan, including the consolidation and elimination of specific facilities, it was determined specific property and equipment were no longer useful, concluding they held no future economic benefit. We abandoned approximately $1.7 million of property and equipment. For the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, the Company recognized a loss on property and equipment abandonment of approximately $0.7 million and $-0-respectively.
Right-of-use operating lease abandonment
As part of the Company’s consolidating effort, management decided to vacate specific locations and scaled-down square footage usage on another. The economic environment of these locations precluded the action of sub-letting unused sites and determining them abandoned. Under ASC 360, leased space abandonment is an impairment indicator, and the Company assessed the lease ROU assets for impairment. The Company considered approximately $1.05 million of right-of-use operating assets impaired. For the years ending December 31, 2020, and 2019, we recognized a loss on impairment of right-of-use assets of approximately $0.9 million and $-0-.
Common Stock Purchase Warrants and Other Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company classifies common stock purchase warrants and other freestanding financial instruments as equity if the contracts (i) require physical settlement or net-share settlement in common stock or (ii) give the Company a choice of net-cash settlement or settlement in common stock (physical settlement or net-share settlement). The Company classifies the following contracts as either an asset or a liability: contracts that (i) require net-cash settlement (including a requirement to net cash settle the contract if an event occurs and if that event is outside the control of the Company), (ii) give the counterparty a choice of net-cash settlement or settlement in common stock (physical settlement or net-share settlement) or (iii) contain reset provisions. The Company assesses the classification of its freestanding derivatives at each reporting date to determine whether a change in classification between assets and liabilities is required.
Commitments and Contingencies
Except as otherwise disclosed in this Report, we have no material commitments or contingent liabilities.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recently announced accounting standards, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects, if any, on our consolidated financial statements, see “Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements” in Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included below in Item 8.