Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Forward-Looking Statements
This report contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. These statements relate to future events or our future financial performance. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology including, "could" "may", "will", "should", "expect", "plan", "anticipate", "believe", "estimate", "predict", "potential" and the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology. These statements are only predictions. Actual events or results may differ materially.
While these forward-looking statements, and any assumptions upon which they are based, are made in good faith and reflect our current judgment regarding the direction of our business, actual results will almost always vary, sometimes materially, from any estimates, predictions, projections, assumptions or other future performance suggested in this Annual Report.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes contained elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition to historical information, the following discussion contains forward looking statements based upon current expectations that are subject to risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ substantially from those referred to herein due to a number of factors, including, but not limited to, risks described in the section entitled “Risk Factors”.
Overview of Our Business
In the discussion below, when we use the terms “we”, “us” and “our”, we are referring to Viveve Medical, Inc. and our wholly-owned subsidiaries, Viveve, Inc. and Viveve BV.
We design, develop, manufacture and market a platform medical technology, which we refer to as Cryogen-cooled Monopolar Radiofrequency, or CMRF. Our proprietary CMRF technology is delivered through a radiofrequency generator, handpiece and treatment tip that, collectively, we refer to as the Viveve® System. The Viveve System is currently marketed and sold for a number of indications, depending on the relevant country-specific clearance or approval. Currently, the Viveve System is cleared for marketing in 51 countries throughout the world under the following indications for use:
Indication for Use:
No. of
Countries:
General surgical procedures for electrocoagulation and hemostasis
(including the U.S.)
General surgical procedures for electrocoagulation and hemostasis of vaginal tissue and the treatment of vaginal laxity
For treatment of vaginal laxity
For treatment of the vaginal introitus, after vaginal childbirth, to improve sexual function
General surgical procedures for electrocoagulation and hemostasis as well as for the treatment of vaginal laxity
For vaginal rejuvenation
For treatment of vaginal laxity and to improve mild urinary incontinence and sexual function
In the U.S., the Viveve System is indicated for use in general surgical procedures for electrocoagulation and hemostasis and we market and sell primarily through a direct sales force. Outside the U.S., we primarily market and sell through distribution partners. As of December 31, 2020, we have a global installed base of 857 Viveve Systems and we have sold approximately 50,100 single-use treatment tips worldwide.
Because the revenues we have earned to date have not been sufficient to support our operations, we have relied on sales of our securities, bank term loans and loans from related parties to fund our operations.
We are subject to risks, expenses and uncertainties frequently encountered by companies in the medical device industry. These risks include, but are not limited to, intense competition, whether we can be successful in obtaining the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and other governmental clearance or approval for the sale of our product for all desired indications and whether there will be a demand for the Viveve System, given that the cost of the procedure will likely not be reimbursed by the government or private health insurers. In addition, we will continue to require substantial funds to support our clinical trials and fund our efforts to expand regulatory clearance or approval for our products, including in the U.S. We cannot be certain that any additional required financing will be available when needed or on terms which are favorable to us. As noted above, our operations to date have been primarily funded through the sales of our securities, bank term loans and loans from related parties. Various factors, including our limited operating history with limited revenues to date and our limited ability to market and sell our products have resulted in limited working capital available to fund our operations. There are no assurances that we will be successful in securing additional financing in the future to fund our operations going forward. Failure to generate sufficient cash flows from operations, raise additional capital or reduce certain discretionary spending could have a material adverse effect on our ability to achieve our intended business objectives.
Recent Events
2021 Public Offering
On January 19, 2021, the Company closed an upsized underwritten public offering of units (the “January 2021 Offering”) for gross proceeds of approximately $27,600,000, which included the exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option to purchase additional shares and warrants, prior to deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by Viveve.
In connection with the closing of the public offering, on January 19, 2021, the Company filed a Certificate of Designation of Preferences, Rights and Limitations of Series C Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Series C Certificate of Designation”) with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware. The Series C Certificate of Designation provides for the issuance of shares of Series C convertible preferred stock. The shares of Series C convertible preferred stock rank on par with the shares of the common stock. With certain exceptions, as described in the Series C Certificate of Designation, the shares of Series C convertible preferred stock have no voting rights. Each share of Series C convertible preferred stock is convertible at any time at the holder’s option into one share of common stock.
The offering comprised of: (1) 4,607,940 Class A Units, priced at a public offering price of $3.40 per Class A Unit, with each unit consisting of one share of common stock and one warrant to purchase one share of common stock, at an exercise price of $3.40 per share that expires on the fifth anniversary of the date of issuance; and (2) 2,450,880 Class B Units, priced at a public offering price of $3.40 per Class B Unit, with each unit consisting of one share of Series C convertible preferred stock and one warrant to purchase one share of common stock, at an exercise price of $3.40 per share that expires on the fifth anniversary of the date of issuance. The underwriter exercised an over-allotment option to purchase an additional 1,058,820 shares of common stock and warrants to purchase 1,058,820 shares of common stock in the offering. The net proceeds to the Company, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by the Company, are expected to be approximately $25,223,000.
A total of 2,450,880 shares of Series C convertible preferred stock were issued in the January 2021 Offering. In January 2021, all Series C convertible preferred stock were converted into common stock and there are no remaining shares of Series C convertible preferred stock outstanding.
Elimination of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock
On December 16, 2020, the Company filed a Certificate of Elimination (the “Certificate of Elimination”) with the Delaware Secretary of State with respect to 547,345 authorized shares of Series A convertible preferred stock, par value $0.0001 per share. The Series A convertible preferred stock had been designated pursuant to the Certificate of Designation of Preferences, Rights and Limitations of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock filed with the Delaware Secretary of State on November 25, 2019. As of the date of the filing of the Certificate of Elimination, no shares of Series A convertible preferred stock were outstanding. Upon filing the Certificate of Elimination, the 547,345 authorized shares of Series A convertible preferred stock were returned to the status of authorized but unissued shares of preferred stock of the Company, without designation as to series or rights, preferences, privileges or limitations.
Reverse Stock Split
The Company effected a 1-for-10 reverse stock split of its common stock that became effective after market close on December 1, 2020. The reverse stock split uniformly affected all issued and outstanding shares of the Company’s common stock. The reverse stock split provided that every ten shares of the Company’s issued and outstanding common stock was automatically combined into one issued and outstanding share of common stock, without any change in par value per share. The number of authorized shares of common stock remained at 75,000,000 shares.
As a result of the reverse stock split, proportionate adjustments were made to the per share exercise price and/or the number of shares issuable upon the exercise or vesting of all then outstanding stock options, deferred restricted stock awards and warrants, which will result in a proportional decrease in the number of shares of the Company’s common stock reserved for issuance upon exercise or vesting of such stock options, deferred restricted stock awards and warrants, and, in the case of stock options and warrants, a proportional increase in the exercise price of all such stock options and warrants. In addition, the number of shares reserved for issuance under the Company’s equity compensation plans immediately prior to the effective date will be reduced proportionately.
No fractional shares were issued as a result of the reverse stock split. Stockholders of record who would otherwise have been entitled to receive a fractional share were rounded up to the nearest whole number.
All of the share numbers, share prices, and exercise prices have been adjusted, on a retroactive basis, to reflect this 1-for-10 reverse stock split.
Purchase Agreement with Lincoln Park Capital, LLC
On June 8, 2020, the Company entered into a purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“LPC”), pursuant to which the Company has the right to sell to LPC, and LPC has committed to purchase from us, from time to time, up to $10,000,000 of our common stock, subject to certain limitations, during the 30 months term of the Purchase Agreement.
On June 9, 2020, LPC purchased 52,500 shares of common stock at a price per share of $6.50 (the “Initial Purchase Shares”) under the Purchase Agreement. Thereafter, under the Purchase Agreement, on any business day selected by us, the Company may direct LPC to purchase up to 25,000 shares (and in certain circumstances up to 50,000 shares) of our common stock. (See Note 12 - Common Stock.) LPC has no right to require the Company to sell any shares of common stock to LPC, but LPC is obligated to make purchases as the Company directs, subject to certain conditions. The purchase price per share for each such Regular Purchase will be based off of prevailing market prices of our common stock immediately preceding the time of sale without any fixed discount.
Other than certain exceptions as described above and the Purchase Agreement, there are no trading volume requirements or restrictions under the Purchase Agreement, and the Company will control the timing and amount of any sales of our common stock to LPC.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
The Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) was established under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) and is administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration. On April 24, 2020, Viveve, Inc. (“Viveve”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, entered into a promissory note evidencing an unsecured loan in the aggregate amount of approximately $1,343,000 made to Viveve under the PPP (the “PPP Loan”). The PPP Loan to Viveve is being made through Western Alliance Bank. The interest rate on the PPP Loan is 1.00% and the term is two years. Beginning seven months from the date of the PPP Loan, Viveve is required to make monthly payments of principal and interest. The promissory note evidencing the PPP Loan contains customary events of default relating to, among other things, payment defaults or breaching the terms of the PPP Loan documents. The occurrence of an event of default may result in the repayment of all amounts outstanding, collection of all amounts owing from Viveve, or filing suit and obtaining judgment against Viveve. Under the terms of the CARES Act, PPP Loan recipients can apply for and be granted forgiveness for all or a portion of the loan granted under the PPP. Such forgiveness will be determined, subject to limitations, based on the use of loan proceeds for payment of payroll costs and any payments of mortgage interest, rent, and utilities. No assurance is provided that Viveve will obtain forgiveness of the PPP Loan in whole or in part.
In October 2020, the Company was notified that the terms of its PPP Loan with Western Alliance Bank have been modified. The amount of time that the Company has to spend the proceeds of the PPP Loan (the “covered period”) has been extended from 8 weeks to 24 weeks. The date to begin repaying unforgiven portions of the PPP Loan has also been extended from six months after the funding date to up to 10 months after the end of the covered period (approximately 16 months) depending on when the Company applies for forgiveness. The SBA will also cover interest on the forgiveness portion of the loan during this period. There has been no change to the maturity date of the loan. All PPP Loans much be repaid or forgiven within two years after the funding date. We submitted our PPP Loan forgiveness application to the SBA in October 2020. However, no assurance can be given that the PPP Loan will be forgiven.
Nasdaq Delisting Notice and Compliance Determination
On April 21, 2020, we received written notice from the Listing Qualifications Department of The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC, or Nasdaq, notifying us that we are not in compliance with the minimum bid price requirements set forth in Nasdaq Listing Rule 5550(a)(2) for continued listing on The Nasdaq Capital Market and granting us time until December 28, 2020 to regain compliance. On December 1, 2020, we effected a 1-for-10 reverse stock split of our issued and outstanding common stock. The reverse stock split became effective at 5:00 p.m. Eastern Time on December 1, 2020 and our common stock began trading on a split-adjusted basis on The Nasdaq Capital Market on December 2, 2020. Following our reverse stock split described above, on December 16, 2020, we were notified by Nasdaq that as of December 15, 2020, it had maintained a closing bid above $1.00 for a period of 10 consecutive trading days and therefore had regained compliance with the minimum bid price requirement.
On May 4, 2020, Karen Zaderej resigned from our board of directors. Ms. Zaderej was an independent director and a member of the audit committee of the board of directors, and as a result of her resignation, we no longer complied with Nasdaq’s majority independent board requirements because a majority of the board of directors was not comprised of independent directors, and Nasdaq’s audit committee requirements because our audit committee was not comprised of at least three independent directors. In accordance with Nasdaq Listing Rules, we notified Nasdaq of Ms. Zaderej's resignation and the resulting non-compliance. On May 6, 2020, we received a notice from Nasdaq acknowledging the fact that we do not meet the requirements of such rules and granting us time until November 2, 2020 to regain compliance. On October 28, 2020, our board of directors appointed Sharon Collins Presnell, Ph.D., to serve as a member of the board of directors and its audit committee. On October 29, 2020, the Company received a letter from Nasdaq noting that, as a result of the appointment of Dr. Presnell to our board of directors and its audit committee, we evidenced compliance with requirements for continued listing on Nasdaq.
2020 Warrant Offering
On April 15, 2020, the Company reduced the exercise price of the outstanding Series A warrants and Series B warrants from $15.50 per share to $6.10 per share. On April 16, 2020, the Company entered into inducement letter agreements with certain institutional and accredited holders of Series A warrants and Series B warrants pursuant to which such holders agreed to exercise Series A warrants to purchase 482,059 shares of common stock and Series B warrants to purchase 24,279 shares of common stock for aggregate exercise proceeds to the Company of approximately $3,089,000. In conjunction, the Company also agreed to issue new Series A-2 warrants to purchase up to 482,059 shares of common stock as an inducement for the exercise of Series A warrants, and new Series B-2 warrants to purchase up to 24,279 shares of common stock as an inducement for the exercise of Series B warrants, in each case at an exercise price of $6.371 per share and for a term of five years. The transaction closed on April 20, 2020. Transaction costs in connection with the 2020 Warrant Offering totaled approximately $334,000. As of December 31, 2020, there were Series A-2 warrants to purchase a total of 392,830 shares of common stock and Series B-2 warrants to purchase a total of 20,380 shares of common stock still remaining and outstanding.
510(k) Clearance from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
On November 18, 2020, we received clearance from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, under Section 510(k), to expand manufacturing capacity for consumable treatment tips used with our CMRF technology. The expansion of our manufacturing capabilities offers a significant reduction in tip manufacturing costs, strengthens our supply chain, reduces manufacturing risk, and positions us to support increases in treatment tip demand and utilization.
Clinical Advisory Board in Urinary Incontinence
In October 2020, the Company announced that it had formed a Clinical Advisory Board of six preeminent medical specialists in the field of urinary incontinence. Comprised of renowned researchers and clinicians in urology and urogynecology subspecialties, the group will advise the Company as it advances its stress urinary incontinence clinical develop program and the pivotal U.S. PURSUIT trial.
Issuance of SUI Methods Patent in the U.S.
In September 2020, the Company announced that the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) had issued U.S. Patent No. 10,779,874 covering Viveve’s unique method of treatment to address SUI in women. The newly granted, first SUI specific patent for Viveve, strengthens the Company’s already robust intellectual property portfolio as it advances the U.S. pivotal PURSUIT clinical trial for SUI in women.
PURSUIT - U.S. Pivotal SUI Trial
The Company received FDA approval of its investigational device exemption (IDE) application to conduct its U.S. pivotal, multicenter PURSUIT trial for improvement of Stress Urinary Incontinence (SUI) in women in July 2020, as well as FDA approval of requested amendments to the IDE protocol in December 2020. Initiation of the PURSUIT trial was announced by the Company on January 21, 2021 and subject enrollment is underway.
PURSUIT is a randomized, double-blinded, sham-controlled trial with an intended enrollment of approximately 390 subjects with moderate SUI (≥ 10ml - 50ml urine leakage on the 1-hour Pad Weight Test) at up to 30 study sites in the U.S. Randomized in a 2:1 ratio for active and sham treatments, subjects in the active treatment arm (260 subjects) will receive CMRF treatment (90J/cm2 RF and cryogen-cooling), while subjects in the control arm (130 subjects) will receive an inert sham treatment.
The primary efficacy endpoint of the PURSUIT trial is a comparison of the proportion of patients who experience greater than 50% reduction in urine leakage compared to baseline on the standardized 1-hour Pad Weight Test at 12 months post-treatment versus the new sham procedure. The study also includes several secondary endpoints, including: proportion of patients who experience greater than 50% reduction in urine leakage on the standardized 1-hour Pad Weight Test at three and six months post-treatment, percentage change from baseline in the 1-hour Pad Weight Test at three, six and 12 months, percent of subjects with no incontinence episodes at three, six and 12 months post treatment as assessed with the three-day bladder voiding diary, and change from baseline in the MESA Questionnaire (Medical, Epidemiologic and Social Aspects of Aging), Incontinence Quality of Life (I-QOL), Patient Global Impression of Improvement (PGI-1) Questionnaire, and International Consultation on Incontinence Modular Questionnaire-Urinary Incontinence Short Form (ICIQ-UI-SF). Subject safety will be monitored throughout the study.
Three-Arm SUI Feasibility Study
In December 2019, the Company received approval of an Investigational Testing Application (ITA) from the Canadian Ministry of Health and in January 2020 initiated a three-arm, three-month feasibility study to compare Viveve’s CMRF treatment and a cryogen-only sham to an inert sham treatment for the improvement of SUI in women. Completion of subject enrollment in the study was reported in March 2020. Study subjects were randomized in a 1:1:1 ratio to the three arms and were assessed using the 1-hour Pad Weight Test, 3-day Voiding Diary, the 24-hour Pad Weight Test and I-QOL at five months post treatment. Due to patient, provider and medical facility health and safety concerns caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the final subject follow-up visit was changed to 5 months versus 3 months.
Final results were reported in August 2020, indicating the primary efficacy endpoint (i.e., change from baseline in the standardized 1-hour Pad Weight Test at five months post treatment) was positively achieved. The median change from baseline in the active CMRF treatment group (N=13) and the cryogen-only sham treatment group (N=12) was -9.5 grams and -6.8 grams respectively, as compared to -4.4 grams in the inert sham treatment group (N=11). The study also assessed several secondary endpoints but showed no differentiation between groups. No device-related safety issues were reported. The meaningful separation demonstrated between the CMRF treatment arm and the inert sham arm in the feasibility study is believed to help provide confidence in the potential to achieve positive separation between the two treatment arms in the underway U.S. pivotal PURSUIT trial.
In-vivo Preclinical Study and Results for New Sham Treatment Tip
In response to the inconclusive results reported in July 2019 from the Company’s LIBERATE-International SUI trial conducted in Canada (aimed at supporting SUI indications in Canada, the European Union and several other international countries), Viveve conducted an in-vivo preclinical temperature and immunohistochemistry study to evaluate a new inert sham treatment tip. The Good Laboratory Practices study was initiated in June of this year following several months of engineering, validation, and development work. The study assessed both in-vivo tissue temperature changes during treatment, and histopathology at 30 days post-treatment compared to baseline, in three parous ewes using Viveve’s CMRF treatment tip (Active), cryogen-cooling only tip (“Old” sham treatment used in previous LIBERATE-International SUI study), and a new inert sham treatment tip. Histopathology of vaginal biopsies were performed and included use of α-smooth muscle actin, or α-SMA, staining for fibroblast activation and formation. All tissue samples were evaluated by an independent and blinded pathologist.
The positive preclinical findings demonstrated, as reported in August 2020, that both temperature and immunohistochemistry results support the validity of the new inert sham tip to provide a true inert or placebo treatment. Only minor tissue temperature change (less than 2 degrees centigrade) was generated by the new inert sham tip and no fibroblast activation was shown through elevated a-SMA staining. In contrast, both the Active and cryogen-cooling sham tips demonstrated meaningful tissue temperature changes during treatment and increased fibroblast activation 30 days post-treatment. We believe that the positive in-vivo preclinical study validates our new inert sham tip for use in the U.S. pivotal PURSUIT trial.
VIVEVE II - U.S. Sexual Function Trial
In 2020, we completed the VIVEVE II (VIveve treatment of the Vaginal Introitus to EValuate Effectiveness) clinical study, which was a multicenter, randomized, double-blinded, sham-controlled study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of the company’s cryogen-cooled monopolar radiofrequency (CMRF) technology for the improvement of sexual function in women following vaginal childbirth. Topline results indicated that the study did not meet its primary endpoint of demonstrating a statistically significant improvement in the mean change from baseline in the total Female Sexual Function Index (FSFI) at 12 months. Although there was substantial improvement in the total FSFI score from baseline to the final 12-month follow-up in the active group indicating a significant treatment effect, there was not sufficient separation from the sham treatment group to achieve statistical significance.
The study included 220 subjects that successfully completed 12-month follow-up. Subjects were randomized in a 1:1 ratio for the active (N=114) and the sham (N=106) treatments at 17 clinical sites in the United States. Adjusted mean change in the total FSFI score at 12 months for the active group was 9.8 and the adjusted mean change for the sham group was 9.0, a difference of 0.8 (p=0.3942). There were no serious device-related adverse events reported. The treatment groups were well balanced, and the number of subjects lost to follow-up was as expected.
The Company has completed its final study report in December 2020, and due to the trial’s outcome, we do not currently intend to pursue a sexual function or vaginal laxity label in the U.S. at this time.
Issuance of South Korean Patent
The Company announced in February 2021 that the Korean Intellectual Property Office (KIPO) recently issued Korean Patent No. 10-2197234 titled, Vaginal Remodeling Device and Method. The awarded patent further expands and strengthens Viveve's intellectual property portfolio in one of Asia's largest commercial markets.
U.S. Commercial Sales Transition to Recurring Revenue Rental Model
In June 2019, U.S. sales of the Viveve System transitioned from a capital equipment sales model to a recurring revenue rental model. The new U.S. commercial sales model is intended to lower up-front costs for customers and thus lower hurdles to adoption, increase placement rates, and improve profitability by significantly reducing selling time per unit. The new commercial sales model successfully increased physician adoption rates in the months following its implementation and continued to gain traction in the U.S. market well into the first quarter of 2020. In December 2019, Viveve Systems placed with new customers represented higher monthly productivity rates and lower costs per system placed per sales representative. Sale of Viveve products outside of the U.S. continue to be supported by the Company’s current distributors without significant change to the international business model. Late in the first quarter of 2020, the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on medical facilities and practitioners was in full effect in the United States. Federal, regional, and local government and public health agencies issued directives halting performance of non-essential medical treatments and elective procedures in an effort to combat the spread of the coronavirus and protect public health and safety. As a result, an estimated 70-80% of Viveve’s U.S. customers either temporarily closed their medical practices or dramatically reduced services and staff. The consequence has been both a public health and economic crisis that is continuing for existing and prospective Viveve customers. In a supportive partnership response, Viveve contacted all of its subscription customers and provided them with a three-month deferral of the rental payment. Although clinics in various regions have re-opened and provide limited services, we anticipate that until the COVID-19 pandemic abates, more practices re-open and elective patient’s safety concerns are reduced that we will continue to experience reduced revenue from existing subscription customers, as well as a greatly reduced number of new and prospective customers.
Under the recurring revenue rental model, customers may lease the Viveve System for a set initial term. After the initial term, the customer may purchase the Viveve System, continue to pay a monthly rental amount or terminate the contract.
The rental program is accounted for under the Financial Standards Board’s (‘FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) and meets the classification criteria for an operating lease. Revenue from the rental program is included in total revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, rental revenue recognized during the period was $1,337,000 and $530,000, respectively. The Viveve Systems that are being leased are included in property and equipment, net and depreciated over their expected useful lives of five years. When other products (“non-lease components”), such as single-use treatment tips or ancillary consumables, are included in the offering, the Company follows the relevant guidance in ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, to determine how to allocate contractual consideration between the lease and non-lease components.
Impact of the Novel Coronavirus
As of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the United States and many other countries continue to face outbreaks or resurgences of the novel highly transmissible pathogenic coronavirus and its variants, which has resulted in an increasingly widespread global health crisis, adversely affected general commercial activity and the economies and financial markets of many countries, and is likely to continue to adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. The extent to which the novel coronavirus impacts us will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the coronavirus and the actions to contain the coronavirus or treat its impact, among others.
Plan of Operation
We intend to increase our sales both internationally and in the U.S. market by seeking additional regulatory clearances or approvals for the sale and distribution of our products, identifying and training qualified distributors and expanding the scope of physicians who offer the Viveve System to include plastic surgeons, general surgeons, urologists, and urogynecologists.
In June 2019, we transitioned from a capital equipment sales model to a recurring revenue rental model in the U.S. market. The new U.S. commercial sales model is intended to lower up-front costs for customers and thus lower hurdles to adoption, increase placement rates, and improve profitability by significantly reducing selling time per unit. Sale of Viveve products outside of the U.S. will continue to be supported by our international distributors.
In addition, we intend to use the strategic relationships that we have developed with outside contractors and medical experts to improve our products by focusing our research and development efforts on various areas including, but not limited to:
●
designing new treatment tips optimized for both ease-of-use and to reduce procedure times for patients and physicians; and
●
developing new RF consoles.
The net proceeds received from sales of our securities and the term loans have been used to support commercialization of our product in existing and new markets, for our research and development efforts and for protection of our intellectual property, as well as for working capital and other general corporate purposes. We expect that our cash and the Company’s January 2021 Offering for net proceeds of approximately $25,223,000 as well as the committed equity financing commitment of $9,700,000 from LPC will be sufficient to fund our activities for at least the next 12 months; however, we may require additional capital from the sale of equity or debt securities to fully implement our plan of operation. Our operating costs include employee salaries and benefits, compensation paid to consultants, professional fees and expenses, costs associated with our clinical trials, capital costs for research and other equipment, costs associated with research and development activities including travel and administration, legal expenses, sales and marketing costs, general and administrative expenses, and other costs associated with an early stage public company subject to the reporting requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We also expect to incur expenses related to obtaining regulatory clearance and approvals in the U.S. and internationally as well as legal and related expenses to protect our intellectual property. We expect capital expenditures, for the foreseeable future, to be less than $1,000,000 annually.
We intend to continue to meet our operating cash flow requirements through the sales of our products and by raising additional capital from the sale of equity or debt securities. If we sell our equity securities, or securities convertible into equity, to raise capital, our current stockholders will likely be substantially diluted. We may also consider the sale of certain assets, or entering into a strategic transaction, such as a merger, with a business complimentary to ours, although we do not currently have plans for any such transaction. While we have been successful in raising capital to fund our operations since inception, other than as discussed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we do not have any committed sources of financing and there are no assurances that we will be able to secure additional funding, or if we do secure additional financing that it will be on terms that are favorable to us. If we cannot obtain financing, then we may be forced to curtail our operations or consider other strategic alternatives.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
We recorded revenue of $5,479,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to revenue of $6,567,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019 a decrease of $1,088,000, or approximately 17%. The decrease in revenue was primarily due to lower sales volume of Viveve Systems sold as the Company transitioned its U.S. commercial sales model to a recurring revenue rental model versus selling systems under a capital equipment sales model as well as the negative impact of the COVID-19 crisis on our sales activity in the period. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 included sales of 31 Viveve Systems and approximately 8,900 disposable treatment tips sold globally. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 included sales of 55 Viveve Systems and approximately 7,850 disposable treatment tips sold globally.
Under the subscription offering program, we placed 29 Viveve Systems in the U.S. market in 2020; however, these new placements were offset by the negative impact of the COVID-19 crisis on our sales activity in the period which resulted in the non-renewal of subscriptions for 42 Viveve Systems during the period. Under the subscription offering program, which was launched in June 2019, we placed 84 Viveve Systems in the U.S. market in 2019 while these new subscriptions were offset by the non-renewal of subscriptions for only two Viveve Systems during the period. Rental revenue on these leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, rental revenue recognized during the period was $1,337,000 and $530,000, respectively. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had deferred revenue in the amount of $345,000 and $662,000 related to its rental program.
Additionally, late in the first quarter of 2020 and through the end of the year 2020, the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic was in full effect in the United States and most other countries. Government and public health agencies issued directives halting performance of non-essential medical treatments and elective procedures in an effort to combat the spread of the coronavirus and protect public health and safety. As a result, Viveve’s customers either temporarily closed their medical practices or dramatically reduced services and staff. The consequence has been both a public health and economic crisis that continues for existing and prospective Viveve customers. In a supportive partnership response, Viveve contacted all of its subscription customers and provided them with a three-month deferral of the rental payment. Although clinics in various regions are beginning to re-open and provide limited services, we anticipate that until the COVID-19 pandemic abates, more practices begin to re-open and elective patient’s safety concerns are reduced that we will continue to experience reduced revenue from existing subscription customers, as well as a greatly reduced number of new and prospective customers.
Gross Profit
Gross profit was $296,000, or 5% of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to gross profit of $1,016,000, or 15% of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $720,000, or approximately 71%. The decrease in gross profit was primarily due to the lower sales volume of Viveve Systems sold as the Company transitioned its U.S. business model to a recurring revenue rental model versus selling systems under a capital equipment sales model that was launched in June of 2019 as well as the negative impact of the COVID-19 crisis on our sales activity in the period. Additionally, fixed manufacturing costs in the year ended December 31, 2020 were spread over a lower sales volume thus lowering gross margins.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses totaled $5,125,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to research and development expenses of $8,590,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $3,465,000, or approximately 40%. Spending on research and development decreased primarily due to reduced engineering and development work related to our products as a result of our overall strategic organizational realignment in 2019 and current economic conditions associated with COVID-19. Research and development expenses during 2020 also included lower clinical study costs primarily due to the completion and readout of our LIBERATE-International SUI clinical trial in July 2019 and VIVEVE II - U.S. Sexual Function Trial in April 2020.
Additionally, in response to the COVID-19 crisis, the Company implemented a series of significant cost-cutting actions, including the furlough of 31 full-time employees throughout the entire organization, designed to reduce expenses and reposition resources to support the Company’s current customers and its pivotal clinical development program for our CMRF technology in the treatment of SUI.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses totaled $13,666,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $22,363,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $8,697,000, or approximately 39%. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses was primarily due to reduced spending as a result of our overall strategic organizational realignment in 2019 and current economic conditions related to COVID-19.
Additionally, in response to the COVID-19 crisis, the Company implemented a series of significant cost-cutting actions, including the furlough of 31 full-time employees throughout the entire organization, designed to reduce expenses and reposition resources to support the Company’s current customers and its pivotal clinical development program for our CMRF technology in the treatment of SUI. These corporate actions included an approximate two-thirds reduction of the direct sales organization and remain in effect as a reduction in sales force due to the continuing health, market and economic challenges caused by the COVID-19 crisis.
Restructuring costs
In January 2019, the Company implemented the Strategic Organizational Realignment to reduce operating expenses. The restructuring included a reduction in headcount of approximately 40 full-time employees. The total restructuring costs recorded in 2019 were approximately $742,000.
Loss on debt restructuring
In connection with the November 2019 Offering, the Company’s secured lender, CRG, converted approximately $31.3 million of debt obligations into the newly authorized Series B convertible preferred stock and warrants to purchase common stock, which had a fair value in excess of the debt exchanged. As a result, the Company recorded a loss on debt restructuring of approximately $6,705,000 on the CRG debt conversion.
Modification of Series A and B Warrants
In April 2020, the Company reduced the exercise price of the outstanding Series A warrants and Series B warrants from $15.50 per share to $6.10 per share (as adjusted for the 1-for-10 reverse stock split on December 1, 2020). The Series A and B warrant exercise price adjustment to $6.10 per share from $15.50 per share resulted in the recognition of a modification expense of $1,838,000.
Interest expense
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had interest expense, net, of $910,000 compared to $4,354,000, for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $3,444,000. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to CRG’s conversion of approximately $28,981,000 in outstanding principal into Series B convertible preferred stock in connection with our November 2019 Offering.
Other expense, net
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had other expense, net, of $289,000 as compared to $161,000 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Loss from minority interest in limited liability company
The Company uses the equity method to account for its investment in InControl Medical, LLC (“ICM”). For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the allocated net loss from ICM’s operations was $383,000 and $627,000, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
At December 31, 2020, we had accumulated deficit of $219,826,000, $6,523,000 in cash and cash equivalents and working capital of $8,628,000. The Company's financing activities provided cash of $9,230,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily due to the exercise of common warrants. However, we used $15,234,000 in cash for operations during the year ended December 31, 2020. As of the date our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020 are issued, we did not have sufficient cash to fund our operation through March 31, 2022, without additional financing and, therefore, we concluded there was substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date the financial statements are issued. However, due to the Company’s January 2021 Offering for net proceeds of approximately $25,223,000 and the remaining equity financing commitment of $9,700,000 from LPC, management believes that this substantial doubt has been alleviated as of the date of this filing.
Management currently believes that it will be necessary for us to raise additional funding. We may obtain additional funding in the future through the issuance of our common stock, or through other equity or debt financing. The failure to raise additional funding when needed could have a material adverse effect on our business and financial condition. We may not be able to obtain additional financing as needed on acceptable terms, or at all, which may require us to reduce our operating costs and other expenditures, including reductions of personnel, salaries and capital expenditures. Alternatively, or in addition to such potential measures, we may elect to implement additional cost reduction actions as we may determine are necessary and in our best interests. Any such actions undertaken might limit the Company’s ability to achieve its strategic objectives.
The following table summarizes the primary sources and uses of cash for the periods presented below (in thousands):
Operating Activities
We have incurred, and expect to continue to incur, significant expenses in the areas of research and development, regulatory and clinical study costs associated with the Viveve System.
Operating activities used $15,234,000 of cash for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $31,236,000 used for the year ended December 31, 2019. The primary use of our cash was to fund selling, general and administrative expenses and research and development expenses associated with the Viveve System. Net cash used during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of a net loss of $21,915,000 adjusted for noncash expenses including provision for doubtful accounts and the write-off of accounts receivable of $454,000, depreciation and amortization of $1,295,000, stock-based compensation of $2,651,000, non-cash interest expense of $535,000, amortization of operating lease right-of-use assets and accretion of operating lease liabilities of $2,000, a loss from minority interest in limited liability company of $383,000, a loss on disposal of property and equipment of $20,000, a noncash charge for the modification of Series A and B warrants of $1,838,000, and cash outflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities of $1,233,000. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in accounts receivable of $349,000, a decrease in inventory of $1,360,000, a decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $151,000, a decrease in other noncurrent assets of $461,000, a decrease in accounts payable $727,000, a decrease in accrued and other liabilities of $2,422,000, and an increase of other noncurrent liabilities of $331,000.
Net cash used during the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of a net loss of $42,526,000 adjusted for non-cash expenses including provision for doubtful accounts and the write-off of distributor accounts receivable of $1,028,000, depreciation and amortization of $1,177,000, stock-based compensation of $2,400,000, non-cash interest expense of $1,577,000, loss on debt restructuring of $6,705,000, loss from minority interest in limited liability company of $627,000, loss on disposal of property and equipment of $108,000, and cash outflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities of $2,337,000.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $781,000 and $1,087,000, respectively. Net cash used in investing activities during 2020 and 2019 was used for the purchase of property and equipment. The purchase of property and equipment primarily consisted of rental equipment in connection with the new subscription offering program, which was launched in June 2019. We expect to continue to purchase property and equipment in the normal course of our business. The amount and timing of these purchases and the related cash outflows in future periods is difficult to predict and is dependent on a number of factors including, but not limited to, any increase in the number of our employees and any changes to the capital equipment requirements related to our development programs and clinical trials.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during year ended December 31, 2020 was $9,230,000, which was the result of net proceeds of $8,407,000 from exercises of common warrants, proceeds of $1,343,000 from the PPP Loan and proceeds of $341,000 from the initial purchase of common shares under the Purchase agreement from LPC, partially offset by transaction costs of $334,000 in connection with the 2020 Warrant Offering, transaction costs of $494,000 in connection with the Purchase Agreement with LPC, and additional transaction costs of $33,000 in connection with our November 2019 Offering.
Net cash provided by financing activities during year ended December 31, 2019 was $16,108,000, which was the result of gross proceeds of $11,500,000 from our November 2019 Offering (partially offset by transaction costs of $1,548,000), gross proceeds of $6,760,000 from our August 2019 ATM Facility (partially offset by transaction costs of $438,000), and proceeds from shares purchased under the Company’s employee stock purchase plan of $56,000, partially offset by transaction costs of $216,000 in connection with our note payable.
Contractual Payment Obligations
We have obligations under a non-cancelable operating lease and a bank term loan. As of December 31, 2020, our contractual obligations are as follows (in thousands):
In February 2017, we entered into a Sublease for approximately 12,400 square feet of building space for the relocation of the Company’s corporate headquarters to Englewood, Colorado (the “Sublease Premises”). The lease term is 36 months and the monthly base rent for the first, second and third years is $20.50, $21.12 and $21.75 per rentable square foot, respectively. In connection with the execution of the Sublease, the Company paid a security deposit of approximately $22,000. The Company was also provided an allowance of approximately $88,000 for certain tenant improvements relating to the engineering, design and construction of the Sublease Premises. The lease term commenced on June 1, 2017 and will terminate in May 2021.
In March 2021, the Company amended the sublease for its office building space. The lease term was extended for a period of 34 months and will terminate on March 31, 2024. The monthly gross rent for the first, second and third years of the lease extension is $21,028, $21,643 and $22,258 per month, respectively. The Company was also provided a rent abatement for the month of June 2021. Additionally, the sublandlord has agreed to perform certain construction, repair, maintenance or other tenant improvements to the Subleased Premises with estimated costs of approximately $19,000.
In May 2017, the Company entered into the 2017 Loan Agreement with affiliates of CRG LP (“CRG”). The credit facility consists of $20,000,000 that was drawn at closing and the ability to access additional funding of up to an aggregate of $10,000,000 for a total of $30,000,000 under the credit facility. In December 2017, the Company accessed the remaining $10,000,000 available under the CRG credit facility. The term of the loan is six years with the first four years being interest only. In November 2019, the Company and CRG amended the 2017 Loan Agreement concurrent with the conversion of approximately $29,000,000 of the principal amount under the term loan with CRG (plus accrued interest, the prepayment premium and the back-end fee applicable thereto), for an aggregate amount of converted debt obligations of approximately $31,300,000. The amounts converted into 31,300 shares of the newly authorized Series B convertible preferred stock and warrants to purchase up to 989,378 shares of common stock were also issued. The outstanding principal balance under the 2017 Loan Agreement is $4,527,000 as of December 31, 2020.
In September 2018, the Company entered into a 36-month noncancelable operating lease agreement for office equipment. The lease commenced on September 20, 2018. The monthly payment is approximately $2,600.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Certain accounting policies and estimates are particularly important to the understanding of our financial position and results of operations and require the application of significant judgment by our management or can be materially affected by changes from period to period in economic factors or conditions that are outside of our control. As a result, they are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. In applying these policies, management uses their judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of certain estimates. Those estimates are based on our historical operations, our future business plans and projected financial results, the terms of existing contracts, observance of trends in the industry, information provided by our customers and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. Please see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for a more complete description of our significant accounting policies.
Inventory
Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined on an actual cost basis on a first-in, first-out method. Inventory as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 is mainly finished goods but also includes a small quantity of raw materials. Lower of cost or net realizable value is evaluated by considering obsolescence, excessive levels of inventory, deterioration and other factors. Adjustments to reduce the cost of inventory to its net realizable value, if required, are made for estimated excess, obsolescence or impaired inventory. Excess and obsolete inventory is charged to cost of revenue and a new lower-cost basis for that inventory is established and subsequent changes in facts and circumstances do not result in the restoration or increase in that newly established cost basis.
As part of the Company’s recurring revenue rental model, the Company utilizes Viveve Systems transferred from finished goods inventory. The Company is amortizing these units over an estimated useful life of five years. The amortization of these Viveve Systems is charged to cost of sales and these units are included in the property and equipment, net balance on the consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
As part of the Company’s normal business, the Company generally utilizes various finished goods inventory as sales demos to facilitate the sale of its products to prospective customers. The Company is amortizing these demos over an estimated useful life of five years. The amortization of the demos is charged to selling, general and administrative expense and the demos are included in the medical equipment line within the property and equipment, net balance on the consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
The Company reviews long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset might not be recoverable. When such an event occurs, management determines whether there has been an impairment by comparing the anticipated undiscounted future net cash flows to the related asset’s carrying value. If an asset is considered impaired, the asset is written down to fair value, which is determined based either on discounted cash flows or appraised value, depending on the nature of the asset. The Company has not identified any such impairment losses to date.
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
Revenue consists primarily of the sale of the Viveve System, single-use treatment tips and ancillary consumables. The Company applies the following five steps: (1) identify the contract with a customer, (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (5) recognize revenue when a performance obligation is satisfied. The Company considers customer purchase orders to be the contracts with a customer. Revenues, net of expected discounts, are recognized when the performance obligations of the contract with the customer are satisfied and when control of the promised goods are transferred to the customer, typically when products, which have been determined to be the only distinct performance obligations, are shipped to the customer. Expected costs of assurance warranties and claims are recognized as expense. Revenue is recognized net of any sales taxes from the sale of the products.
Rental revenue is generated through the lease of the Viveve System. The Company’s operating leases for the Viveve System have a rental period of six to nine months and can be extended or terminated by the customer after that time or the Viveve System can be purchased by the customer. Rental revenue on those operating leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the terms of the underlying leases. The Company began this rental program in the quarter ended June 30, 2019. The Company began this rental program in the quarter ended June 30, 2019. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, rental revenue recognized was $1,337,000 and $530,000. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had deferred revenue in the amount of $345,000 and $662,000 related to its rental program.
In connection with the lease of the Viveve System, the Company offers single-use treatment tips and ancillary consumables that are considered non-lease components. In the contracts with lease and non-lease components, the Company follows the relevant guidance in ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, to determine how to allocate contractual consideration between the lease and non-lease components.
Sales of our products are subject to regulatory requirements that vary from country to country. The Company has regulatory clearance for differing indications, or can sell its products without a clearance, in many countries throughout the world, including countries within the following regions: North America, Latin America, Europe, the Middle East and Asia Pacific. In North America, we market and sell primarily through a direct sales force. Outside of North America, we market and sell primarily through distribution partners.
The Company does not provide its customers with a right of return.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We make ongoing assumptions relating to the collectability of our accounts receivable in our calculation of the allowance for doubtful accounts. In determining the amount of the allowance, we make judgements about the creditworthiness of customers based on ongoing credit evaluations and assess current economic trends affecting our customers that might impact the level of credit losses in the future and result in different rates of bad debts than previously seen. We also consider our historical level of credit losses. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, the allowance for doubtful accounts was $124,000 and $407,000, respectively.
Product Warranty
The Company’s products are generally subject to a one-year warranty, which provides for the repair, rework or replacement of products (at the Company’s option) that fail to perform within stated specification. The Company has assessed the historical claims and, to date, product warranty claims have not been significant.
Research and Development
Research and development costs are charged to operations as incurred. Research and development costs include, but are not limited to, payroll and personnel expenses, prototype materials, laboratory supplies, consulting costs, and allocated overhead, including rent, equipment depreciation, and utilities.
Income Taxes
Accounting for income taxes requires that deferred tax assets and liabilities be recognized using enacted tax rates for the effect of temporary differences between the book and tax bases of recorded assets and liabilities. The liability method is used in accounting for income taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between financial reporting and the tax basis of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. Deferred tax assets may be reduced by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. We evaluate annually the realizability of our deferred tax assets by assessing our valuation allowance and by adjusting the amount of such allowance, if necessary. The factors used to assess the likelihood of realization include our forecast of future taxable income and available tax planning strategies that could be implemented to realize the net deferred tax assets. As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, the Company has recorded a full valuation allowance for our deferred tax assets based on our historical losses and the uncertainty regarding our ability to project future taxable income. In future periods if we are able to generate income, we may reduce or eliminate the valuation allowance.
Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes
We consider many factors when evaluating and estimating our tax positions and tax benefits, which may require periodic adjustments, and which may not accurately anticipate actual outcomes. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Whether the more-likely-than-not recognition threshold is met for a tax position is a matter of judgment based on the individual facts and circumstances of that position evaluated in light of all available evidence.
Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation cost is measured at grant date, based on the fair value of the award, and is recognized as expense over the employee’s service period. The Company recognizes compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award.
We determined that the Black-Scholes option pricing model is the most appropriate method for determining the estimated fair value for stock options and purchase rights under the Company’s employee stock purchase plan. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the use of highly subjective and complex assumptions which determine the fair value of share-based awards, including the option’s expected term and the price volatility of the underlying stock.
Equity instruments issued to nonemployees are recorded in the same manner as similar instruments issued to employees.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The Company adopted FASB’s ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), as of January 1, 2019, using the modified retrospective approach. The modified retrospective approach provides a method for recording existing leases at the beginning of the period of adoption. In addition, the Company elected the package of practical expedients permitted under the transition guidance within the new standard, which among other things, allowed us to carry forward the historical lease classification and we elected the hindsight practical expedient to determine the lease term for existing leases. We determined that the renewal options for the facilities lease would be reasonably certain to be renewed and as such, included that renewal period in determining the expected lease term of that lease. Adoption of the new standard resulted in the recording of operating lease right-of-use assets of $629,000 and operating lease liabilities of $629,000, as of January 1, 2019. The standard did not have an impact on our consolidated results of operations, cash flows or stockholders’ equity previously reported. The comparative information has not been restated and continues to be reported under the accounting standards in effect for those periods.
In November 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-08, “Stock Compensation (Topic 718) and Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606). The amendments in this Update require measurement and classification of share-based payment awards granted to a customer by applying the guidance in Topic 718. This guidance is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within that reporting period, with early adoption permitted. We adopted this guidance as of January 1, 2020 and the adoption of the guidance did not have a significant impact on the consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, “Income Taxes (Topic 740). The amendments in this Update provide further simplification of accounting standards for the accounting for income taxes. Certain exceptions for are removed and requirements regarding the accounting for franchise taxes, tax basis of goodwill, and tax law rate changes are made. This guidance is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within that reporting period, with early adoption permitted. We will adopt this guidance as of January 1, 2021 and the adoption of the guidance is not expected to have a significant impact on the consolidated financial statements.
We have reviewed other recent accounting pronouncements and concluded they are either not applicable to the business, or no material effect is expected on the consolidated financial statements as a result of future adoption.
Off-Balance Sheet Transactions
We do not have any off-balance sheet transactions.
Trends, Events and Uncertainties
Research, development and commercialization of new technologies and products is, by its nature, unpredictable. Although we will undertake development efforts, including efforts, with commercially reasonable diligence, there can be no assurance that we will have adequate capital to develop or commercialize our technology to the extent needed to create future sales to sustain our operations.
We cannot assure you that our technology will be adopted, that we will ever earn revenues sufficient to support our operations, or that we will ever be profitable. Furthermore, since we have no committed source of financing, we cannot assure you that we will be able to raise money as and when we need it to continue our operations. If we cannot raise funds as and when we need them, we may be required to severely curtail, or even to cease, our operations.
Other than as discussed above and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we are not aware of any trends, events or uncertainties that are likely to have a material effect on our financial condition.