Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with Part II, “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” included below in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Operating results are not necessarily indicative of results that may occur in future periods.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations contains forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Actual events or results may differ materially from our expectations. Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those stated or implied by our forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, those set forth in Part I, “Item 1A. Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. All forward-looking statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are based on information available to us as of the time we file this Annual Report on Form 10-K and, except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update publicly or revise any forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the development of novel, first-in-class or best-in-class therapies for metabolic and endocrine disorders.
Our lead clinical program’s drug candidate, VK2809, is an orally available, tissue and receptor-subtype selective agonist of the thyroid hormone receptor beta, or TRß. In November 2019, we initiated the VOYAGE study, a Phase 2b clinical trial of VK2809 in patients with biopsy-confirmed non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, or NASH.
The VOYAGE study is a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial designed to assess the efficacy, safety and tolerability of VK2809 in patients with biopsy-confirmed NASH and fibrosis ranging from stages to. The study is targeting enrollment of approximately 340 patients across five treatment arms. The primary endpoint of the study will evaluate the relative change in liver fat content, as assessed by magnetic resonance imaging, proton density fat fraction (MRI-PDFF), from baseline to week 12 in subjects treated with VK2809 as compared to placebo. Secondary objectives include evaluation of histologic changes assessed by hepatic biopsy after 52 weeks of dosing.
VK2809 has been evaluated in seven completed clinical studies, which enrolled more than 300 subjects. No serious adverse events, or SAEs, have been observed in subjects receiving VK2809 in these completed studies, and overall tolerability remains encouraging. In addition, the compound has been evaluated in chronic toxicity studies of up to 12 months in duration.
We are also developing VK0214, which is also an orally available, tissue and receptor-subtype selective agonist of TRß for X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, or X-ALD, a rare X-linked, inherited neurological disorder characterized by a breakdown in the protective barriers surrounding brain and nerve cells. The disease, for which there is no approved treatment, is caused by mutations in a peroxisomal transporter of very long chain fatty acids, or VLCFA, known as ABCD1. As a result, transporter function is impaired and patients are unable to efficiently metabolize VLCFA. The TRß receptor is known to regulate expression of an alternative VLCFA transporter, known as ABCD2. Various preclinical models have demonstrated that increased expression of ABCD2 can lead to normalization of VLCFA metabolism. Preliminary data suggest that VK0214 stimulates ABCD2 expression in an in vitro model and reduces VLCFA levels in an in vivo model of X-ALD. In September of 2020, we initiated a randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled Phase 1 single ascending dose, or SAD, and multiple ascending dose, or MAD, clinical trial of VK0214 in healthy patients. The primary objectives of the study include evaluation of the safety and tolerability of single and multiple oral doses of VK0214, as well as identification of VK0214 doses for further clinical development in the setting of X-ALD.
Other clinical programs include VK5211, an orally available, non-steroidal selective androgen receptor modulator, or SARM. In November 2017, we announced positive top-line results from a Phase 2 proof-of-concept clinical trial in 108 patients recovering from non-elective hip fracture surgery. Top-line data showed that the trial achieved its primary endpoint, demonstrating statistically significant, dose dependent increases in lean body mass, less head, following treatment with VK5211 as compared to placebo. The study also achieved certain secondary endpoints, demonstrating statistically significant increases in appendicular lean body mass and total lean body mass for all doses of VK5211, compared to placebo. VK5211 demonstrated encouraging safety and tolerability in this study, with no drug-related SAEs reported. Our intent is to continue to pursue partnering or licensing opportunities prior to conducting additional clinical studies.
We were incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware on September 24, 2012. Since our incorporation, we have devoted most of our efforts towards conducting certain clinical trials and preclinical studies related to our VK2809, VK0214 and VK5211 programs, as well as efforts towards raising capital and building infrastructure. We obtained exclusive worldwide rights to our VK2809, VK0214 and VK5211 programs and certain other assets pursuant to an exclusive license agreement with Ligand Pharmaceuticals Incorporated, or Ligand. The terms of this license agreement are detailed in the Master License Agreement with Ligand, which we entered into on
May 21, 2014, as amended, or the Master License Agreement. A summary of the Master License Agreement can be found under the heading “Agreements with Ligand-Master License Agreement” under Part I, “Item 1. Business” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We are subject to risks and uncertainties as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business is highly uncertain and difficult to predict, as the responses that we, other businesses and governments are taking continue to evolve. Furthermore, capital markets and economies worldwide have also been negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and it is possible that it could cause a local and/or global economic slowdown or recession. Policymakers around the globe have responded with fiscal policy actions to support the healthcare industry and economy as a whole. The magnitude and overall effectiveness of these actions remain uncertain.
In addition, our clinical trials have been affected by and may continue to be affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Clinical site initiation and patient enrollment have been, and may continue to be delayed due to prioritization of hospital resources toward the COVID-19 pandemic. Some patients have not been able and others may not be able to comply with clinical trial protocols if quarantines impede patient movement or interrupt healthcare services. Similarly, any inability to recruit and retain patients and principal investigators and site staff who, as healthcare providers, may have heightened exposure to COVID-19, may adversely impact our clinical trial operations.
The severity of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business will depend on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the duration and severity of the pandemic and the extent and severity of the impact on our service providers, suppliers, contract research organizations, or CROs, and our clinical trials, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted, as well as the timing and potential rollout of any vaccines and the willingness of the general population to be vaccinated. As of the date of issuance of our financial statements, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may materially impact our financial condition, liquidity or results of operations is still uncertain.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenues
To date, we have not generated any revenue. We do not expect to receive any revenue from any drug candidates that we develop unless and until we obtain regulatory approval for, and commercialize, our drug candidates or enter into collaborative agreements with third parties.
Research and Development Expenses
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we charged $31.9 million to research and development expense primarily related to our efforts in continuing to conduct the VK2809 Phase 2b VOYAGE clinical trial as well as preparing for and initiating the VK0214 Phase 1 SAD and MAD study in healthy patients. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we charged $23.6 million to research and development expense primarily related to our efforts to prepare for the initiation of the VK2809 Phase 2b VOYAGE clinical trial as well as certain toxicology studies for VK2809 and in vivo studies for VK0214. We expect that our ongoing research and development expenses will consist of costs incurred for the development of our drug candidates, including, but not limited to:
•
employee and consultant-related expenses, which will include salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation, and certain consultant fees and travel expenses;
•
expenses incurred under agreements with investigative sites and contract research organizations, or CROs, which will conduct a substantial portion of our research and development activities, including studies in NASH, on our behalf;
•
payments to third-party manufacturers, which will produce our active pharmaceutical ingredients and finished products;
•
license fees paid to third parties for use of their intellectual property; and
•
facilities, depreciation and other allocated expenses, which will include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and equipment, depreciation of leasehold improvements, equipment and laboratory and other supplies.
We expense all research and development costs as incurred.
The process of conducting the necessary clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming and the successful development of our drug candidates is highly uncertain. Our future research and development expenses will depend on the clinical success of each of our drug candidates, as well as ongoing assessments of the commercial potential of such drug candidates. In addition, we cannot forecast with any degree of certainty which drug candidates may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements. We expect to incur increased research and development expenses in the future as we continue our efforts towards advancing our VK2809 and VK0214 programs and seek to advance our additional programs.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses have generally increased year-over-year as we have hired additional employees, issued additional equity awards, which has resulted in increased stock-based compensation expense, implemented certain systems to increase efficiency, and incurred additional costs for insurance, legal and accounting related to operating as a public company. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will continue to increase in the future in order to support our expected increase in research and development activities, including increased salaries and other related costs, stock-based compensation and consulting fees for executive, finance, accounting and business development functions. We also expect general and administrative expenses to increase as a result of additional costs associated with being a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities and other administration and professional services. Other significant costs are expected to include legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters, facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, and fees for accounting and other consulting services.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) includes interest income earned from our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments.
Smaller Reporting Company and Non-Accelerated Filer
Until December 31, 2020, we were deemed an “emerging growth company” within the meaning of the rules under the Securities Act, and we utilized certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that were applicable to public companies that were not emerging growth companies. For example, as an emerging growth company, we were not required to provide an auditor’s attestation report on our internal control over financial reporting in our annual reports on Form 10-K as otherwise required by Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, as amended. Effective December 31, 2020, we are no longer an emerging growth company as December 31, 2020 was the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the completion of our initial public offering. In March 2020, the SEC released final rules amending the definitions for accelerated and large accelerated filers. In addition, these final rules also exclude from these definitions of accelerated and large accelerated filers an issuer that is eligible to be a smaller reporting company and non-accelerated filer. As our public float on June 30, 2020 was less than $700 million and our annual revenues are less than $100 million, we are now deemed a smaller reporting company and a non-accelerated filer. As a non-accelerated filer and in accordance with these new rules, we will continue to not be required to provide an auditor’s attestation report on our internal control over financial reporting in this and potentially future annual reports on Form 10-K as otherwise required by Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, as amended. In addition, as a smaller reporting company, we have the ability to take advantage of several “scaled disclosure” accommodations in accordance with the smaller reporting company rules.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments related to our preclinical, nonclinical and clinical development costs and drug manufacturing costs. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies will be critical to understanding our historical and
future performance, as these policies relate to the significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We have not recorded any revenues since our inception. However, in the future, we may enter into collaborative research and licensing agreements, under which we could be eligible for payments made in the form of upfront license fees, research funding, cost reimbursement, contingent event-based payments and/or royalties.
On January 1, 2018, we adopted Accounting Standards Update, or ASU, No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers and all related amendments, or ASC 606 or the new revenue standard. ASC 606 is a single comprehensive model for entities to use in accounting for revenue arising from contracts with customers and supersedes most current revenue recognition guidance, including industry-specific guidance. The revenue standard is based on the principle that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. To achieve this core principle, ASC 606 provides that an entity should apply the following steps: (1) identify the contract(s) with a customer, (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. The new revenue standard also requires additional disclosure about the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from customer contracts, and costs to obtain or fulfill contracts. We will apply ASC 606 prospectively to all contracts.
Research and Development
All costs of research and development are expensed in the period incurred. Research and development costs primarily consist of fees paid to contract research organizations, or CROs, and clinical trial sites, employee and consultant related expenses, which include salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation for research and development personnel, external research and development expenses incurred pursuant to agreements with third-party manufacturing organizations, facilities costs, travel costs, dues and subscriptions, depreciation and materials used in preclinical studies, clinical trials and research and development.
We estimate our preclinical study and clinical trial expenses based on the services we received pursuant to contracts with research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf. Clinical trial-related contracts vary significantly in length, and may be for a fixed amount, based on milestones or deliverables, a variable amount based on actual costs incurred, capped at a certain limit, or for a combination of these elements. We accrue service fees based on work performed, which relies on estimates of total costs incurred based on milestones achieved, patient enrollment and other events. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears, and to the extent that amounts invoiced differ from our estimates of expenses incurred, we accrue for additional costs. The financial terms of these agreements vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven expenses and payment flows. Preclinical study and clinical trial expenses include:
•
fees paid to CROs, consultants and laboratories in connection with preclinical studies;
•
fees paid to CROs, clinical trial sites, investigators and consultants in connection with clinical trials; and
•
fees paid to contract manufacturers and service providers in connection with the production, testing and packaging of active pharmaceutical ingredients and drug materials for preclinical studies and clinical trials.
Payments under some of these agreements depend on factors such as the milestones accomplished, including enrollment of certain numbers of patients, site initiation and the completion of clinical trial milestones. To date, we have not experienced any events requiring us to make material adjustments to our accruals for service fees. If we do not identify costs that we have begun to incur or if we underestimate or overestimate the level of services performed or the costs of these services, our actual expenses could differ from our estimates, which could materially affect our results of operations. Adjustments to our accruals are recorded as changes in estimates become evident. Furthermore, based on amounts invoiced to us by our service providers, we may also record payments made to those providers as prepaid expenses that will be recognized as expense in future periods as services are rendered.
In May 2014, we entered into the Master License Agreement, pursuant to which we acquired certain rights to a number of research and development programs from Ligand. In doing so, we updated our policy on research and development to include the purchase of rights to intangible assets. In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Topic 730, Research and Development, intangible assets that are acquired and have an alternative future use, as defined, should be capitalized and reported as an intangible asset; however, the cost of acquired intangible assets that do not have alternative future uses should be reported as research and development expense as incurred. We note that intangible assets acquired that are in the preclinical or clinical stages of development when acquired, and not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, are deemed to have not satisfied the definition of having
an alternative future use, as defined. Accordingly, assets acquired in the preclinical and clinical stages of development are expensed as incurred in our statement of operations.
Patent Costs
Costs related to filing and pursuing patent applications are expensed as incurred to general and administrative expense, as recoverability of such expenditures is uncertain.
Stock-Based Compensation
We generally use the straight-line method to allocate compensation cost to reporting periods over each optionee’s requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period, and estimate the fair value of stock-based awards or restricted stock units to employees and directors using the Black-Scholes option-valuation model. The Black-Scholes model requires the input of subjective assumptions, including volatility, the expected term and the fair value of the underlying common stock on the date of grant, among other inputs. For restricted stock and restricted stock unit awards, we generally use the straight-line method to allocate compensation cost to reporting periods over the holder’s requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period, and use the fair value at grant date to value the awards. For restricted stock that vests upon the satisfaction of certain performance conditions, we recognize stock-based compensation expense when it becomes probable that the performance conditions will be met. At the grant date, we determine the grant date fair value, as a publicly traded company, using the intrinsic value, or the closing price of our stock on the date of grant. At the point where the criteria are deemed probable of being met, we record stock-based compensation with a cumulative catch-up expense in the period first recognized and then on a straight-line basis over the remaining period for which the performance criteria are expected to be completed.
For our Employee Stock Purchase Plan, or ESPP, we generally recognize compensation expense for the fair value of the purchase options, as measured on the grant date, and use the graded vesting method to allocate this compensation cost to each purchase period within the related two-year offering period. As our ESPP also allows for up to one increase in contributions during each purchase period, then as an employee elects to increase their contributions, we treat this as an accounting modification. The pre- and post-modification values are calculated on the date of the modification, and the incremental expense is then amortized over the remaining purchase periods.
Income Taxes
We account for our income taxes using the liability method whereby deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on temporary differences between the basis used for financial reporting and income tax reporting purposes. Deferred income taxes are provided based on the enacted tax rates in effect at the time such temporary differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance is provided for deferred tax assets if it is more likely than not that we will not realize those tax assets through future operations.
ASC Topic 740-10, Income Taxes, clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in our financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, or GAAP. Income tax positions must meet a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold to be recognized. Income tax positions that previously failed to meet the more-likely-than-not threshold are recognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which that threshold is met. Previously recognized tax positions that no longer meet the more-likely-than-not threshold are derecognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which that threshold is no longer met.
Our policy is to recognize interest and penalties accrued on any unrecognized tax benefits as a component of income tax expense.
Net Loss per Common Share
Basic net loss per share is calculated by dividing the net loss attributable to common stockholders by the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding for the period, without consideration for common stock equivalents. Diluted net loss per share is computed by dividing the net loss attributable to common stockholders by the weighted-average number of common share equivalents outstanding for the period determined using the treasury-stock method. For purposes of this calculation, we currently do not have any deemed common share equivalents; therefore, our basic and diluted net loss per share calculations are the same.
Segments
We operate in only one segment. Management uses cash flows as the primary measure to manage our business and does not segment our business for internal reporting or decision making purposes.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands, except % change).
The increase in research and development expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to increased expenses related to our clinical study efforts of $9.5 million, salaries and benefits of $668,000, stock-based compensation of $405,000 and the manufacturing of our drug candidates of $278,000 partially offset by decreased expenses related to services provided by certain third-party consultants of $1.5 million, pre-clinical study efforts of $908,000 and travel of $40,000.
General and Administrative Expenses
The following table summarizes our general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands, except % change).
The increase in general and administrative expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to increased expenses related to stock-based compensation of $1.7 million, salaries and wages of $295,000 and insurance expense of $173,000 partially offset by decreased expenses related to services provided by certain third-party consultants of $201,000, professional fees of $116,000, legal and patent expenses of $83,000 and travel of $71,000.
Other Income (Expense)
The following table summarizes our other income (expense) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands, except % change).
Other income (expense) recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of interest income of $3.3 million, offset by expense relating to the amortization of certain financing costs of $106,000.
Other income (expense) recognized during the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of interest income of $7.1 million, offset by expense relating to the amortization of certain financing costs of $146,000.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred losses and negative cash flows from operations and have not generated any revenues since our inception. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $248.4 million. As such, we believe our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments will be sufficient to fund our operations through at least the first quarter of 2022, which is more than one year after the date our December 31, 2020 financial statements were issued.
Our primary use of cash is to fund operating expenses, which to date have consisted of the cost to obtain the license of intellectual property from Ligand, certain research and development expenses related to furthering the development of VK2809, VK0214 and VK5211 efforts and general and administrative expenses. Since we have not generated any revenues to date, we have incurred operating losses since our inception. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of payment of these expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses.
On July 11, 2018, we filed with the SEC a universal Shelf Registration Statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-226133), or the Shelf Registration Statement. The Shelf Registration Statement initially provided us with the ability to offer up to $450.0 million of securities, including equity, debt and other securities as described in the Shelf Registration Statement. The Shelf Registration Statement was declared effective by the SEC on July 19, 2018.
Pursuant to the Shelf Registration Statement, we may offer additional securities from time to time and through one or more methods of distribution, subject to market conditions and our capital needs. Specific terms and prices will be determined at the time of each offering under a separate prospectus supplement, which will be filed with the SEC at the time of any offering.
On August 1, 2019, we entered into an At-The-Market Equity Offering Sales Agreement, or the ATM Agreement, with Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, Incorporated and Oppenheimer & Co. Inc., or each, an Agent and, together, the Agents, pursuant to which we may offer and sell, from time to time, through or to the Agents, as sales agent or principal, or the ATM Offering, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $75.0 million, or the Shares. Any Shares offered and sold in the ATM Offering will be issued pursuant to the Shelf Registration Statement and the 424(b) prospectus supplement relating to the ATM Offering dated August 1, 2019. No shares of our common stock were sold under the ATM Agreement from its inception through December 31, 2020.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated below (in thousands):
Cash Used in Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities of $21.8 million primarily reflected our net losses for the period, adjusted by non-cash charges such as stock-based compensation, amortization of investment premiums, amortization of financing costs and amortization of right of use asset as well as changes in our working capital accounts, primarily consisting of an increase in accrued interest, net of interest received on maturity of investments, accounts payable and accrued expenses and a decrease in prepaid expenses and lease liability.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities of $24.8 million primarily reflected our net losses for the period, adjusted by non-cash charges such as amortization of investment premiums, amortization of financing costs, amortization of non-cash clinical trial costs, and stock-based compensation as well as changes in our working capital accounts, primarily consisting of an increase in prepaid expenses, accrued interest, net of interest received on maturity of investments, accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Cash Provided by Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by investing activities of $41.6 million resulted primarily from the proceeds of sales and maturities of investments of $322.2 million, partially offset by the purchase of investments of $280.6 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by investing activities of $7.5 million resulted primarily from the proceeds of sales and maturities of investments of $369.9 million, partially offset by the purchase of investments of $362.4 million.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $950,000, which consisted primarily of proceeds from certain warrant exercises of $854,000 and proceeds from certain stock option exercises and employee stock purchase plan purchases of $418,000, partially offset by the value of shares withheld to cover taxes of $296,000 and payments of certain financing costs of $26,000.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by financing activities was $887,000, which consisted primarily of proceeds from certain warrant exercises of $783,000 and proceeds from certain stock option exercises and employee stock purchase plan purchases of $328,000, partially offset by the value of shares withheld to cover taxes of $151,000 and payments of certain financing costs of $73,000.
Future Funding Requirements
As of December 31, 2020, and based upon our current operating plan, we believe that we will have sufficient cash to meet our projected operating requirements for at least the next 12 months following the issuance of the financial statements. We anticipate, however, that we will continue to generate losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect the losses to increase materially as we continue the development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, our drug candidates, and seek to commercialize any drugs for which we receive regulatory approval. We will need to raise additional capital to fund our operations and complete our ongoing and planned clinical trials. Although we expect to finance future cash needs through public or private equity or debt offerings, funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital in sufficient amounts or on terms acceptable to us, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our drug development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market drug candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•
the scope, rate of progress, results and costs of our clinical trials, preclinical studies and other related activities;
•
our ability to establish and maintain strategic collaborations, licensing or other arrangements and the financial terms of such agreements;
•
the timing of, and the costs involved in, obtaining regulatory approvals for any of our current or future drug candidates;
•
the number and characteristics of the drug candidates we seek to develop or commercialize;
•
the cost of manufacturing clinical supplies, and establishing commercial supplies, of our drug candidates;
•
the cost of commercialization activities if any of our current or future drug candidates are approved for sale, including marketing, sales and distribution costs;
•
the expenses needed to attract and retain skilled personnel;
•
the costs associated with being a public company;
•
the amount of revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our drug candidates, should any of our drug candidates receive marketing approval; and
•
the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing possible patent claims, including litigation costs and the outcome of any such litigation.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We are a smaller reporting company, as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and are not required to provide the information required under this item.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K promulgated by the SEC.