Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of Velodyne’s results of operations and financial condition should be read in conjunction with the information set forth in Velodyne’s financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon our current expectations, estimates and projections that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements due to, among other considerations, the matters discussed under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Item 1A: “Risk Factors.”
Overview
Velodyne, the first pure-play lidar company, is a global leader in lidar technology providing real-time 3D vision for autonomous systems. Our lidar solutions are advancing the development of safe automated systems throughout the world, thereby empowering the autonomous revolution by allowing machines to see their surroundings. Our lidar-based smart vision solutions are also deployed in many non-automotive applications, including autonomous mobile robots, UAV/drones, last-mile delivery, precision agriculture, advanced security systems, and smart city initiatives.
We also license our technology and provide development services to customers and business partners. Of the more than 300 customers that purchased smart vision solutions from us and our distributors in the last two fiscal years, approximately 200 are using our smart vision solutions for the non-automotive applications. In 2020, we generated approximately 40% of our revenue from sales to customers deploying our smart vision solutions in non-automotive applications. In addition, we are transitioning from field programmable gate arrays to ASICs in order to further improve performance of our products, lower costs and reduce reliance on any key suppliers.
Impact of COVID-19
The extensive impact of the pandemic caused by the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) has resulted and will likely continue to result in significant disruptions to the global economy, as well as businesses and capital markets around the world. In an effort to halt the outbreak of COVID-19, a number of countries, states, counties and other jurisdictions have imposed, and may impose in the future, various measures, including but not limited to, voluntary and mandatory quarantines, stay-at-home orders, travel restrictions, limitations on gatherings of people, reduced operations and extended closures of businesses.
The timing of customer orders and our ability to fulfill orders we received was impacted by various COVID-19 related government mandates across our worldwide operations. We believe that this reduction in units sold was exacerbated by COVID-19.We have also witnessed certain current and prospective customers delaying purchases based on budget constraints or project delays related to COVID-19. While the broader and long-term implications of the COVID-19 pandemic on our workforce, operations and supply chain, customer demand, results of operations and overall financial performance remain uncertain, we continued to experience disruptions to our business due to the COVID-19 pandemic during the fourth quarter of 2020.
The impact of COVID-19 and measures to prevent its spread have been impactful and continue to affect our business in several ways.
•Our workforce. Employee health and safety is our priority. In response to COVID-19, we established new protocols to help protect the health and safety of our workforce. The actions include a no-touch temperature scan upon entering our premises and a policy requiring the use of face masks in our facilities. On the production floor of our San Jose, California manufacturing facility, we installed station barriers made of acrylic to separate and protect our workforce. We implemented global travel restrictions and work-from-home policies for employees who can accomplish their work remotely, such as those in the Finance, Marketing, and Communications teams. We continue to stay up-to-date and follow the county and CDC guideline regarding requirements for a healthy work environment.
•Operations and supply chain. As a result of COVID-19, we experienced some production delays in the second quarter and early in the third quarter of 2020 due to travel restrictions to Thailand, the location of one of our key manufacturing partners. The factory in San Jose was closed briefly in March 2020, then re-opened with strict health precautions in place. The San Jose factory continued to produce the major lidar products required for the operation
of our business and our manufacturing partners continue to produce lidar sensors on our behalf. In March 2020, we engaged a third party logistics partner that has allowed us to continue to ship finished goods from our San Jose factory. In the fourth quarter of 2020, the San Jose factory confirmed its first case of COVID-19, and further cases have been reported. This reduced production capabilities at our manufacturing sites later in the quarter and impaired our ability to fulfill certain customer orders in December 2020. A substantial portion of these deliveries are expected to be fulfilled in the first quarter of 2021 and we are implementing measures to meet anticipated customer demand in 2021. As part of our COVID-19 mitigation efforts, we performed continuous audits of our supply chain. Early in the pandemic, we learned that certain key suppliers were operating with limited staffing. Although we believe these key suppliers are now back to full staffing and capacity, we identified alternative sources of key suppliers and we are now able to purchase key materials from these alternative sources. Supply chain disruption due to COVID-19 continues to be minimal and we had no resultant parts shortages in the fourth quarter of 2020.
•Demand for our products. Demand for our products in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 was less than that in the corresponding period of 2019. We believe that this decline in customer demand was, in part, the result of customers impacted by COVID-19 and delayed purchasing decisions. While we continue to engage with current and potential customers, we believe some customers may delay purchases from us because their development programs may also be delayed as a result of COVID-19. We believe that demand for our products remains strong, but COVID-19 resulted in some transactions we expected to occur earlier in 2020 being delayed until 2021.
•Positive customer trend in the pandemic. The global pandemic accelerated a few key robotic programs, which we believe will offset the impact of some of our customers’ delayed purchasing decisions. The accelerated programs include robots which disinfect the air and surfaces, providing more sanitized environments, and touchless delivery robots for food and medical supplies.
•Liquidity, working capital, and the CARES Act. On March 27, 2020, the U.S. government enacted the CARES Act. On April 8, 2020, we received loan proceeds of $10.0 million under the CARES Act’s Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) to help us offset delays in production and customer purchases. The principal and accrued interest are forgivable after 24 weeks as long as the borrower uses the loan proceeds for eligible purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities, and maintains its payroll levels and that approval is received from the relevant government entity. The unforgiven portion of the PPP loan is payable over two years at an interest rate of 1% per annum, with a deferral of interest payments for ten months after the expiration of the 24-week covered period.
See Item 1A: “Risk Factors” for further discussion of the possible impact of COVID-19 on our business.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
Design wins. We are developing our smart vision solutions as a key enabling technology for OEMs in automotive and other applications. Because our solutions must be integrated into a broader platform by the OEM, it is critical that we achieve design wins with these customers. The time necessary to achieve design wins varies based on the market and application. The design cycle in the automotive market tends to be substantially longer and more onerous than in other markets. Even within the automotive market, achieving a design win with an automotive OEM takes considerably longer than a design cycle for an aftermarket application. We consider design wins to be critical to our future success, although the revenue generated by each design win and the time necessary to achieve such a win can vary significantly making it difficult to predict our financial performance.
Pricing, product cost and margins. Our pricing and margins will depend on the volumes and the features of the solutions we provide to our customers. To date, most of our revenue has been generated by selling our smart vision solutions into pre-commercial development phase projects. In general, solutions incorporated into development-phase products require more complex configurations, have higher prices and higher gross margins. As our markets reach maturity and commercialization, we expect prices and margins will generally decrease. Our commercial-stage customers will require that our smart vision solutions be manufactured and sold at per-unit prices that enable mass market adoption. To meet the technological and pricing needs of customers reaching commercial scale, we are making significant investments in new solutions for both cost improvements and new features. Our ability to compete in key markets will depend on the success of these investments and our efforts to efficiently and reliably produce cost-effective smart vision solutions for our commercial-stage customers. We have customers with technologies in various stages of development. We anticipate that our prices will vary by market and application due to market-specific supply and demand dynamics and product lifecycles.
Commercialization of lidar-based applications. Our revenue has been subject to significant fluctuations. Our customers in pre-commercial development phase may have purchased their requirements of our products in earlier periods and are not expected to begin purchasing again in volume unless and until they reach commercial deployments. As a number of our target markets reach commercialization, we expect there to be a shift towards higher unit volume at lower per-unit prices, with more predictable customer demand. We expect that our results of operations, including revenue and gross margins, will continue to fluctuate on a quarterly basis for the foreseeable future as our customers continue research and development projects and begin to commercialize autonomous solutions that rely on lidar technology. As more customers reach the commercialization phase and as the market for lidar solutions matures, these fluctuations in our operating results may become less pronounced. However, in the near term, our revenue may not grow as we expect until more customers commercialize their products.
End market concentration. Historically, our revenue has been from a small number of end markets. For example, in fiscal 2020 and 2019, approximately 57% and 45%, respectively, of our revenue came from the automotive market, although we had more than half of our customers from non-automotive markets. We believe our entry into new markets will continue to facilitate revenue growth and customer diversification. While we will continue to expand the end markets we serve, we anticipate that sales to a limited number of end markets will continue to account for a significant portion of our total revenue for the foreseeable future. Our end market concentration may cause our financial performance to fluctuate significantly from period to period based on the success or failure of the markets in which we compete. Success in an end market, or commercialization, is uncertain and may develop differently in each case, with unique pricing, volume and cost dynamics. Additionally, as production scales in order to meet the demands of commercialization, pricing pressure increases and the amount of that pressure is expected to vary by market.
Sales volume. A typical design win can generate a wide range of sales volumes for our solutions, depending on the end market demand for our customers’ products. This can depend on several factors, including the reputation of the end customer, market penetration, product capabilities, size of the end market that the product addresses and our end customers’ ability to sell their products. In addition to end market demand, sales volumes also depend on whether our customer is in the development, commercialization or production phase. In certain cases, we may provide volume discounts on sales of our solutions, which may or may not be offset by lower manufacturing costs related to higher volumes.
Continued investment and innovation. We believe that we are the industry-leading lidar provider with proven designs, extensive product offerings and advanced manufacturing capabilities. Our financial performance is significantly dependent on our ability to maintain this leading position. This is further dependent on the investments we make in research and development. It is essential that we continually identify and respond to rapidly evolving customer requirements, develop and introduce innovative new products, enhance and service existing products and generate active market demand for our products. If we fail to do this, our leading market position and revenue may be adversely affected, and our investments in that area will not be recovered.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
The majority of our revenue comes from the sale of our lidar sensors directly to end users and through our network of U.S. and international distributors. Product revenue is recognized when control of the products is transferred to the customer, which is generally upon shipment. For custom products that require engineering and development based on customer requirements, revenue is recognized over time using an output method based on units of product shipped to date relative to total production units under the contract. We also generate a portion of our revenue from intellectual property licensing, royalties and the sale of services related to product development, validation, extended warranty and product repair services. License revenue is recognized upon delivery of the intellectual property if there are no substantive future obligations to perform under the arrangement. Royalties are recognized at the later of the period the sales occur or the satisfaction of the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalties have been allocated. As our manufacturing partners to whom we have licensed our technology start selling to customers we expect royalty revenue to increase as a percentage of total revenue. Service revenue is recognized as the services are performed.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue includes the manufacturing cost of our lidar sensors, which primarily consists of personnel-related costs directly associated with our manufacturing organization, and amounts paid to our third-party contract manufacturers and
vendors. Our cost of revenue also includes depreciation and amortization, cost of component inventory, product testing costs, costs of providing services, an allocated portion of overhead, facility and IT costs, warranty costs, excess and obsolete inventory and shipping costs. We expect cost of revenue to increase in absolute dollars in future periods.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Our gross profit in future periods will depend on a variety of factors, including: market conditions that may impact our pricing; product mix changes between established products and new products and licenses; excess and obsolete inventories; our cost structure for manufacturing operations, including third-party manufacturers, relative to volume; and product support obligations. Additionally, we believe our transition to an outsourced manufacturing model will favorably impact our gross profit over time. Our gross margin varies by product. In addition, our license revenue has lower cost, and therefore it contributes to higher gross margin. We expect our gross margins to fluctuate over time, depending on the factors described above.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs directly associated with our research and development organization, with the remainder being prototype expenses, third-party engineering and contractor costs, an allocated portion of facility and IT costs and depreciation. Our research and development efforts are focused on enhancing and developing additional functionality for our existing products and on new product development, including new releases and upgrades to our lidar sensors. We expense research and development costs as incurred. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we increase our investment in software development to broaden the capabilities of our solutions and introduce new products and features.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Our sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs directly associated with our sales and marketing activities. These include the cost of sales commissions, marketing programs, trade shows, consulting services, promotional materials, demonstration equipment, an allocated portion of facility and IT costs and depreciation. We expect that our sales and marketing expenses will increase in absolute dollars over time as we hire additional sales and marketing personnel, increase our marketing activities, grow our domestic and international operations, and build brand awareness.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of personnel-related expenses associated with our general and administrative organization, professional fees for legal, accounting, and other consulting services, an allocated portion of facility and IT costs and depreciation. We expect to incur additional general and administrative expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and stock exchange listing standards, additional insurance expenses (including directors’ and officers’ insurance), investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services. We also expect to increase the size of our general and administrative function to support the growth of our business.
Restructuring Expenses
Restructuring expenses primarily consist of costs of employee termination benefits incurred in connection with our restructuring plan to downsize the manufacturing function and related engineering and administrative functions in our California locations in March 2020. The purposes of this plan are to align resource requirements with our initiatives to lower our cost structure and to increase our production capacity by outsourcing a majority of manufacturing activities. The plan included a reduction of workforce and has been completed as of December 31, 2020.
Stock-Based Compensation
Prior to the Business Combination, our stock-based compensation expense primarily related to our stock options. Compensation expense related to RSAs and RSUs granted under the pre-combination Velodyne’s stock incentive plans remained unrecognized because the liquidity event vesting condition, which is (i) an initial public offering, or (ii) a Company
sale event, was not probable of being satisfied. The liquidity-event vesting condition was not satisfied upon the completion of the Business Combination. However, on October 30, 2020, the Board waived such condition applicable to the pre-combination Velodyne RSUs in order to provide the holders of such awards with the treatment that they would have received if the pre-combination Velodyne had completed an initial public offering. As a result of this determination, the Company’s outstanding RSUs vested to the extent the applicable service condition was satisfied as of such date. The vesting of these outstanding RSUs on October 30, 2020 resulted in approximately $77.5 million of incremental stock-based compensation expense in the fourth quarter of 2020. It is anticipated that the Board will waive the liquidity event condition applicable to the RSAs in 2021. If such determination were to occur with respect to the outstanding RSAs before the end of 2021, it is expected that the vesting of such outstanding RSAs would result in approximately $53.0 million of incremental stock-based compensation expense in the quarter when the determination is made based on the closing price of our common stock on March 10, 2021.
Interest Income and Expense
Interest income consists primarily of income earned on our cash equivalents and investments in marketable securities. These amounts will vary based on our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investment balances, and also with market rates. Interest expense consists primarily of interest on our equipment capital leases and credit facility.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of foreign currency transaction gains and losses related to the impact of transactions denominated in a foreign currency other than the U.S. Dollar. As we have expanded our international operations, our exposure to fluctuations in foreign currencies has increased, and we expect this to continue.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our provision for income taxes consists of federal, state and foreign current and deferred income taxes. As we expand the scale and scope of our international business activities, any changes in the United States and foreign taxation of such activities may increase our overall provision for income taxes in the future.
We have a full valuation allowance for our net deferred tax assets, including federal and state net operating loss carryforwards and research and development credit carryforwards. We expect to maintain this valuation allowance until it becomes more likely than not that the benefit of our federal and state deferred tax assets will be realized by way of expected future taxable income.
We believe that we have adequately reserved for our uncertain tax positions, although we can provide no assurance that the final outcome of these matters will not be materially different. To the extent that the final outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will affect the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made and could have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that can significantly impact the amounts we report as assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and the related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance as these policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity.
Revenue Recognition
We adopted the requirements of the new revenue recognition standard, known as ASC 606, effective January 1, 2018 utilizing the modified retrospective method of transition. Revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of promised products and to a small extent services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those products and services.
We enter into contracts that can include various combinations of products and services, which are generally capable of being distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations; however, determining whether products or services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may sometimes require significant judgment.
Transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price (SSP) basis. Judgment is required to determine SSP for each distinct performance obligation. We use a range of amounts to estimate SSP when products and services are sold separately. In instances where SSP is not directly observable, we determine SSP using information that may include other observable inputs available to us.
Accounting for contracts recognized over time under ASC 606 involves the use of various techniques to estimate total contract revenue and costs. Due to uncertainties inherent in the estimation process, it is possible that estimates of costs to complete a performance obligation will be revised in the near-term. We review and update our contract-related estimates regularly, and record adjustments as needed. For those performance obligations for which revenue is recognized using a cost-to-cost input method, changes in total estimated costs, and related progress towards complete satisfaction of the performance obligation, are recognized in the period in which the revisions to the estimates are made.
Changes in judgments with respect to these assumptions and estimates could impact the timing or amount of revenue recognition.
Inventory Valuation
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or estimated net realizable value. Costs are computed under the standard cost method, which approximates actual costs determined on the first in, first out basis. We record write-downs of inventories which are obsolete or in excess of anticipated demand. Significant judgment is used in establishing our forecasts of future demand and obsolete material exposures. We consider marketability and product life cycle stage, product development plans, component cost trends, demand forecasts, historical revenue, and assumptions about future demand and market conditions in establishing our estimates. If the actual component usage and product demand are significantly lower than forecast, which may be caused by factors within and outside of our control, or if there were a higher incidence of inventory obsolescence because of rapidly changing technology and our customer requirements, we may be required to increase our inventory writedowns. A change in our estimates could have a significant impact on the value of our inventory and our results of operations.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation consists of expense for stock options, RSAs and RSUs granted to employees and nonemployees. We estimate the fair value of stock options granted to employees and directors using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. We estimate the fair value of RSAs and RSUs based on the fair market value of our common stock on the date of grant. For market-based performance RSUs (PRSUs), we use the Monte Carlo simulation model (a binomial lattice-based valuation model) to determine the fair value of the PRSUs. The Monte Carlo simulation model uses multiple input variables to determine the probability of satisfying the market condition requirements. The fair value of the PRSUs is not subject to change based on future market conditions. The fair value of stock options and service-condition awards that are expected to vest is recognized as compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. We recognize forfeitures as they occur.
Under the pre-combination Velodyne equity incentive plans, we granted RSAs and RSUs which vest upon the satisfaction of both a time-based condition and a liquidity event condition. Upon satisfaction of the liquidity event vesting condition, which is the earlier of (i) an IPO, or (ii) a Company sale event, RSAs and RSUs for which the service-based condition has been satisfied will vest immediately, and any remaining unvested RSAs and RSUs will vest over the remaining service period. Prior to the business combination, no compensation expense had been recognized for the RSAs and RSUs because the liquidity vesting condition was not probable of being satisfied. As a result of the Business Combination, on October 30, 2020, the Board of Directors of Velodyne (the “Board”) waived the liquidity event vesting condition applicable to the pre-combination Velodyne's RSUs. Therefore, our outstanding RSUs vested to the extent the applicable service condition was satisfied as of such date. The fair value of the RSUs were re-measured based on the closing price of our common stock on October 30, 2020. Stock-based compensation expense for the vested RSUs as of October 30, 2020 was recognized immediately and compensation expense for the unvested RSUs are recognized over the remaining service period. If the Board waives the liquidity event condition applicable to the RSAs, stock-based compensation for the outstanding RSAs
would be recognized in the period when such determination is made based on the fair value of our common stock as of such date.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2016, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), which supersedes FASB Accounting Standards Codification Topic 840, Leases (Topic 840), and provides principles for the recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure of leases for both lessees and lessors. Among its provisions, this standard requires lessees to recognize right-of-use assets and lease liabilities on the balance sheets for operating leases, and also requires additional qualitative and quantitative disclosures about lease arrangements. Topic 842 is effective for emerging growth companies for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, and interim periods within fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021. We expect to adopt the new standard in the first quarter of 2021 using the modified retrospective method, under which we will apply Topic 842 to existing and new leases as of January 1, 2021, but prior periods will not be restated and will continue to be reported under Topic 840 guidance in effect during those periods. We are currently evaluating the impact the adoption of these ASUs will have on our financial statements and related disclosures. We expect to recognize a right-of-use asset and corresponding lease liability for the lease portfolio to be recorded on our consolidated balance sheet upon adoption. No material impact is expected with respect to our consolidated statements of operations or cash flows.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which has subsequently been amended by ASU No. 2018-19, ASU No. 2019-04, ASU No. 2019-05, and ASU No. 2019-11. The objective of the guidance in ASU 2016-13 is to allow entities to recognize estimated credit losses in the period that the change in valuation occurs. ASU 2016-13 requires an entity to present financial assets measured on an amortized cost basis on the balance sheet net of an allowance for credit losses. Available for sale and held to maturity debt securities are also required to be held net of an allowance for credit losses. For emerging growth companies, the standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted. We expect to adopt the new standard in the first quarter of 2023 and are currently evaluating the impact this standard will have on our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. This standard simplifies the accounting for income taxes by, among other things, eliminating certain exceptions related to the approach for intra-period tax allocation, the methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period and the recognition of deferred tax liabilities for outside basis differences. ASU 2019-12 is effective for public business entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. Upon adoption, the Company must apply certain aspects of this standard retrospectively for all periods presented while other aspects are applied on a modified retrospective basis through a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the beginning of the fiscal year of adoption. The Company expects to adopt the new standard in 2021. The adoption of this new standard is not expected to have a significant effect on our consolidated financial statements.
In October 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-10, Codification Improvements, which updates various codification topics by clarifying or improving disclosure requirements to align with the SEC’s regulations. ASU 2020-10 is effective for public companies, other than smaller reporting companies, for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. For all other entities, ASU 2020-10 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, and interim periods beginning after December 15, 2022. We are currently evaluating the impact of adoption of ASU 2020-10 on our consolidated financial statements and related footnote disclosures.
Results of Operations
The results of operations presented below should be reviewed in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes included elsewhere in this prospectus. The following table sets forth our consolidated results of operations data and as a percentage of revenue for the periods presented:
(1) Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
Prior to the Business Combination, compensation expense related to RSAs and RSUs granted under the pre-combination Velodyne’s stock incentive plans remained unrecognized because the performance vesting condition, which is (i) an initial public offering, or (ii) a Company sale event, was not probable of being met. As a result of the Business Combination, on October 30, 2020, the Board waived the liquidity event vesting condition applicable to the pre-combination Velodyne's RSUs. Therefore, our outstanding RSUs vested to the extent the applicable service condition
was satisfied as of such date. The vesting of these outstanding RSUs on October 30, 2020 resulted in approximately $77.5 million of incremental stock-based compensation expense in the fourth quarter of 2020. It is anticipated that the Board will waive the liquidity event condition applicable to the RSAs in 2021. If such determination were to occur with respect to the outstanding RSAs, it is expected that the vesting of such outstanding RSAs would result in significant incremental stock-based compensation expense in the quarter when the determination is made based on the closing price of our common stock as of such date.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Total revenue decreased by $6.0 million, or 6%, to $95.4 million for 2020 from $101.4 million for 2019. The $13.1 million decrease in product revenue reflected a decrease of $36.0 million related to reduction in average selling price for lidar sensors and a decrease of approximately $3.9 million related to reduction in total units sold as a result of the timing of customer demand related to their programs, partially offset by $8.9 million increase due to the mix of sensors sold, an increase of $11.1 million related to a one-time stocking fee, a $4.1 million one-time refund to a related party customer in September 2019, and an increase of $2.3 million attributable to higher sales of refurbished units and parts. The timing of customer orders and our ability to fulfill orders we received was impacted by various COVID-19 related government mandates across our worldwide operations. The reduction in average selling price reflected our continued objective to drive additional adoption of our smart vision solutions in multiple end markets. Our revenue has been subject to significant fluctuations. Our customers in pre-commercial development phase may have purchased their requirements of our products in earlier periods and are not expected to begin purchasing again in volume unless and until they reach commercial deployments. As a number of our target markets reach commercialization, we expect there to be a shift towards higher unit volume at lower per-unit prices, with more predictable customer demand. The $7.0 million increase in license and service revenue primarily reflected a $12.0 million increase in license revenue driven by the recent cross-license agreements. The increase in license revenue was partially offset by a $5.0 million decrease in product development and repair services revenue.
The $8.4 million decrease in North America revenue for 2020 was due to a $9.0 million reduction in license revenues, plus a decrease of $6.7 million related to volume decreases due to the timing of customer programs, a decrease of $12.6 million due to reduction of average selling price of units sold and a decrease of $1.6 million for repair services, partially offset by an increase of $5.1 million as a result of the mix of units sold, a $2.3 million increase in refurbished units sold, an
increase of $3.7 million for engineering services and an increase of $11.1 million related to a one-time stocking fee. The $10.5 million increase in Asia-Pacific revenue was primarily due to a $21.4 million increase in license revenue from our recent patent cross license agreements, a $4.1 million one-time refund to a related party customer in September 2019, and an increase of approximately $2.0 million related to volume, partially offset by a decrease of approximately $10.1 million due to reduction of average selling price of units sold and a $5.0 million one-time non-recurring engineering fee in June 2019. The $8.1 million decrease in Europe, Middle East and Africa revenue was due to a decrease of $13.3 million due to reduction of average selling price, partially offset by an increase of $0.8 million related to volume and a $4.5 million increase related to the mix of sensors sold.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue decreased by $1.4 million, or 2%, to $70.2 million for 2020 from $71.6 million for 2019. The $0.8 million product cost reduction was primarily driven by decreases of $11.9 million in factory overhead and direct cost of manufacturing, $4.0 million reduction in warranty expense and $1.2 million from lower sales volume, partially offset by increases of $7.4 million in stock-based compensation, $3.9 million in excess and obsolete inventory and scrap expenses and $4.6 million related to product mix. License and services cost of revenue decreased due to a decrease in repair services cost.
Gross margin decreased from 29% for 2019 to 26% for 2020. The decrease in gross margin was primarily due to $7.4 million stock-based compensation expense. We expect to decrease manufacturing labor and overhead costs as we outsource production to our contract manufacturing partners, with the objective of reducing the per unit cost of revenue.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
R&D expenses increased by $31.2 million, or 55%, to $88.1 million for 2020 from $56.9 million for 2019. The increase was primarily due to increases of $36.9 million in stock-based compensation expense, $2.3 million in allocated facility and IT expenses, and $0.6 million in depreciation expense, partially offset by decreases of $6.8 million in prototype product development costs, $0.4 million in travel expenses, and $0.8 million in personnel related costs, mainly driven by manufacturing related restructuring activities.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $9.9 million, or 45%, to $31.8 million for 2020 from $21.9 million for 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to $14.8 million stock-based compensation expense, and $0.2 million increase in commission expense, partially offset by a decrease of $2.3 million in travel and trade show expenses, a decrease of $1.1 million in allocated facility and IT expenses, a decrease of $0.7 million in depreciation expense and a decrease of $0.7 million in demonstration product expense.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $45.7 million, or 228%, to $65.7 million for 2020 from $20.1 million for 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to increases of $32.2 million in stock-based compensation expense, $7.2 million in legal and professional services, $1.4 million in personnel-related costs, and a $3.5 million write-off of our deferred initial public offering costs.
Gain on Sale of Assets Held-for-Sale
In March 2020, we reclassified the then carrying value of $4.7 million related to our Morgan Hill properties previously reported as property, plant and equipment to assets held for sale and included as other current assets in our consolidated balance sheets. On July 2, 2020, we sold the properties to a third-party buyer for $12.3 million and recorded a gain of $7.5 million in 2020.
Restructuring
In March 2020, we initiated a restructuring plan to downsize the manufacturing function and related engineering and administrative functions in our California locations. The plan included a reduction in our workforce and has been completed as of December 31, 2020. As a result of the restructuring program, we incurred restructuring charges totaling $1.0 million for 2020, primarily related to employee severance related costs.
Interest Income, Interest Expense and Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest income was $0.2 million in 2020 compared to $1.1 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily related to a decrease in our average cash, cash equivalent and short-term investment balances in 2020.
Interest expense was primarily related to our capital leases and was insignificant for all periods presented.
Other income (expense), net was insignificant for all periods presented. The changes were primarily related to foreign exchange gain or loss resulting from foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations during 2020 and 2019.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States, China and Germany. Our effective tax rate changed from 1.0% in 2019 to 2.7% in 2020. This change was primarily due to the $6.7 million tax benefit related to the release of a valuation allowance associated with carrying back a portion of our 2019 net operating losses to 2017 that is allowed by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act, partially offset by a $2.5 million tax expense related to a Chinese foreign income withholding tax.
Enacted on March 27, 2020, the CARES Act provides emergency assistance and health care response for businesses affected by the 2020 coronavirus pandemic. The CARES Act, among other things, permits net operating loss carryovers and carrybacks to offset 100% of taxable income for taxable years beginning before 2021. Additionally, the CARES Act allows net operating losses incurred in 2018, 2019 and 2020 to be carried back to each of the five preceding taxable years to generate a refund of previously paid income taxes. In April 2020, we filed a claim to carryback a portion of our 2019 net operating losses to 2017 and received a $7.1 million tax refund in May 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had $173.5 million of U.S. federal and $105.5 million of state net operating loss carryforwards available to reduce future taxable income, which will be carried forward indefinitely for U.S. federal tax purposes and will expire beginning in 2028 through 2040 for state tax purposes.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Revenue
Total revenue decreased by $41.5 million, or 29%, to $101.4 million for 2019, from $142.9 million for 2018. The product revenue decreased by $51.5 million and license and service revenue increased by $10.0 million. The decrease in product revenue was primarily due to a decrease of approximately $36.3 million, driven by the mix of products sold towards our lower-priced sensors, and a decrease of approximately $7.8 million related to a reduction in average selling price and a decrease of approximately $2.5 million driven by lower unit volume. In addition, we issued a $4.1 million one-time refund to a related party customer in order to compensate them for unforeseen challenges associated with the use of certain new products purchased from us in 2018. Starting in 2018, we strategically reduced the price of our higher volume products to continue to drive additional adoption of our smart vision solutions in multiple end markets. Our overall unit volume remained consistent in 2019 across an increased customer base. The increase in license and services revenue was primarily due to higher services revenue related to product validation and repair services, and to a lesser extent, increases in product licensing related revenue.
The $34.9 million decrease in North America revenue was due to a decrease of approximately $18.3 million due to reduction in volume of units sold to existing customers driven by customer program timing, coupled with a decrease of approximately $14.7 million driven by the mix of products sold towards our lower-priced sensors, and a decrease of approximately $4.3 million due to decrease in average selling price of units sold, partially offset by an increase of $2.5 million in license and service revenue. The $11.0 million decrease in Asia-Pacific revenue was primarily due to a decrease of approximately $17.5 million due to change in mix of products sold, and a $4.1 million one-time refund to a related party customer, partially offset by an increase of $1.6 million related to increased sales volume and an increase of $6.6 million in services revenues. The $4.3 million increase in Europe, Middle East and Africa revenue was driven by an increase of approximately $10.8 million due to an increase in purchasing volume from customers, partially offset by the impact of a decrease of approximately $4.3 million driven by reduction in average selling price, and a decrease of approximately $2.1 million driven by a change in mix of products sold.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue decreased by $40.4 million, or 36%, to $71.6 million for 2019, from $112.1 million for 2018. The decrease in cost of revenue was driven by decrease in $41.2 million of product revenue and offset by increase in $0.7 million license and service cost. The decrease of product cost primarily due to an approximately $8.3 million decrease in product costs resulting from the decrease in product volume and change in product mix during 2019, an approximately $13.6 million decrease in personnel costs related to manufacturing labor and overhead from manufacturing process improvements, and an approximately $16.0 million in material cost and utilization savings.
Gross margin increased from 22% for 2018 to 29% for 2019. The increase was primarily due to a change in revenue mix with an increase in license and service revenue, savings on material cost and utilization and increased resource utilization in 2019 resulting from the improvements we made in our manufacturing processes in 2018.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $4.9 million, or 9%, to $56.9 million for 2019, from $52.0 million for 2018. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $4.7 million in personnel related costs, mainly driven by an increase in employee headcount contributed primarily to the acquisition of Mapper in July 2019, an increase of $1.9 million in allocated facility and IT expenses, and an increase of $0.8 million in depreciation expense, partially offset by a decrease of $3.0 million in prototype product development costs and a decrease of $0.3 million in professional services.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses decreased by $0.3 million, or 1%, to $21.9 million for 2019 from $22.1 million for 2018. The decrease was primarily attributable to a reduction of $1.0 million in personnel-related costs, mainly driven by a decrease in employee headcount, a decrease of $0.2 million in professional services, partially offset by increases of $0.7 million in demonstration product expenses and $0.2 million in travel and trade show expenses.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $7.2 million, or 55%, to $20.1 million for 2019 from $12.9 million for 2018. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $7.8 million in legal, accounting and other professional services, partially offset by a decrease of $0.5 million in personnel-related costs, mainly driven by a decrease in employee headcount, a decrease of $0.2 million in depreciation and other allocated expenses.
Interest Income, Interest Expense and Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest income was $1.1 million in 2019 compared to $0.6 million in 2018. The increase was primarily related to an increase in our invested funds due to the proceeds from the Series B and B-1 preferred stock financing completed in September 2018 and October 2019, respectively.
Other income (expense), net was $35,000 in 2019 compared to $(136,000) in 2018. The change was primarily related to foreign exchange gain or loss resulting from foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations in 2019 and 2018.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States, China and Germany. Our effective tax rate increased from (11.9)% in 2018 to 1.0% in 2019. This change was primarily due to taxes incurred by foreign subsidiaries and state taxes and partially offset by release of income tax reserves. Due to the change in our valuation allowance on our federal and state deferred tax assets, our provision for income taxes in 2018 includes the effect of establishing a full valuation allowance for the existing net deferred tax assets. We also continue to provide a full valuation allowance on our net deferred tax assets in 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments totaling $350.3 million, which were held for working capital purposes. Our cash equivalents and short-term investments are comprised of money market funds, U.S. government and agency securities, corporate debt securities and commercial paper. To date, our principal sources of liquidity have been payments received from sales to customers and the net proceeds we received through the Business Combination, PIPE offering and private placements of the pre-combination Velodyne convertible preferred stock. In 2020, we received $247.0 million in net proceeds from the Business Combination and PIPE offering on September 29, 2020 and $73.7 million in net proceeds from the exercises of our warrants. In April 2020 and October 2019, we received $19.9 million and $49.8 million, respectively, in net proceeds from the sale of our Series B-1 convertible preferred stock. In 2021, we received an additional $89.3 million from the exercises of our warrants as of March 10, 2021.
In January 2020, we entered into a loan and security agreement with a financial institution which provides a $25.0 million revolving line of credit (the “2020 Revolving Line”), as amended in September 2020 and December 2020, with an option to increase the credit limit up to an additional $15.0 million with the bank’s approval (Incremental Revolving Line). As part of the 2020 Revolving Line, there is a letter of credit sublimit of $5.0 million. The advances under the 2020 Revolving Line bear interest at a rate per annum equal to the prime rate plus an applicable margin of 1.5% for prime rate advances, or LIBOR rate plus an applicable margin of 2.5% for LIBOR advances. The unused revolving line facility fee is 0.15% per annum of the average unused portion of the Revolving Line. In addition, there is a $50,000 non-refundable commitment fee if we exercise the Incremental Revolving Line option. The revolving line of credit is secured by certain of our assets. The 2020 Revolving Line matured on February 27, 2021 and we intend to extend for one additional year. There were no outstanding borrowings under the 2020 Revolving Line as of December 31, 2020.
On April 8, 2020, we received loan proceeds of $10.0 million under the CARES Act’s Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). The principal and accrued interest are forgivable after 24 weeks as long as the borrower uses the loan proceeds for eligible purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities, and maintains its payroll levels and that approval is received from the relevant government entity. The unforgiven portion of the PPP loan is payable over two years at an interest rate of 1% per annum, with a deferral of interest payments for ten months after the expiration of the 24-week covered period.
On July 2, 2020, we sold our Morgan Hill building to a third-party and received net proceeds of $12.3 million.
We have incurred negative cash flows from operating activities and significant losses from operations in the past as reflected in our accumulated deficit of $315.7 million as of December 31, 2020. We expect to continue to incur operating losses at least for the next 12 months due to the investments that we intend to make in our business and, as a result, we may require additional capital resources to grow our business. We believe that current cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments and available borrowing capacity under the revolving credit facility will be sufficient to fund our operations for
at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements, however, will depend on many factors, including our lidar sales volume, the timing and extent of spending to support our R&D efforts in smart vision technology, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, and market adoption of new and enhanced products and features. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services, and technologies, including intellectual property rights. From time to time, we may seek to raise additional funds through equity and debt. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired and on reasonable terms, our business, results of operations, and financial condition be adversely affected.
Cash Flow Summary
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
During 2020, operating activities used $68.4 million in cash. The primary factors affecting our operating cash flows during this period were our net loss of $149.9 million, impacted by our non-cash net expense of $96.6 million primarily consisting of stock-based compensation of $91.5 million, depreciation and amortization of $8.4 million, write-off of deferred IPO costs of $3.5 million and provision for doubtful accounts of $0.5 million, partially offset by a gain of $7.5 million from sale of assets held-for-sale. The cash used in changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $20.6 million which primarily consists of an increase of $2.6 million in accounts receivable, a decrease of $6.7 million in accrued expenses and other liabilities due to timing of payments, and an increase of $11.3 million in unbilled receivables from a licensing arrangement with a customer. These amounts were partially offset by cash provided from changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $5.4 million was primarily due to an increase of $9.0 million in contract liabilities primarily due to deferred revenues from a licensing arrangement, partially offset by a decrease of $6.1 million in customer deposit. The cash provided from changes in our operating assets and liabilities also included a decrease of $1.6 million in inventories due to decreased sales volume of certain products, a decrease of $0.2 million in prepaid and other current assets and an increase of $0.7 million in accounts payable due to timing of payments.
During 2019, operating activities used $43.2 million in cash. The primary factors affecting our operating cash flows during this period were our net loss of $67.2 million, impacted by our non-cash charges of $5.9 million primarily consisting of depreciation and amortization of $8.0 million, partially offset by deferred income tax of $2.0 million. The cash provided from changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $24.3 million was primarily due to an increase of $13.6 million in accrued expenses and other liabilities due to timing of payments, a decrease of $9.6 million in accounts receivable and a decrease of $1.1 million in other noncurrent assets. These amounts were partially offset by cash used in changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $6.2 million which primarily consists of an increase of $3.6 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets, a decrease of $1.7 million in contract liabilities due to the timing of billings and cash received in advance of revenue and an increase of $0.9 million in inventories due to decreased sales volume of certain products.
During 2018, operating activities used $30.5 million in cash. The primary factors affecting our operating cash flows during this period were our net loss of $62.3 million, impacted by our non-cash charges of $12.9 million primarily consisting of depreciation and amortization of $6.8 million and deferred income tax of $5.8 million. The cash provided from changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $28.0 million was primarily due to a decrease in inventories of $21.3 million as we consumed previously purchased inventory, an increase in contract liabilities of $4.3 million due to the timing of billings and cash received in advance of revenue and a decrease in accounts receivable of $2.4 million. These amounts were partially offset by cash used in changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $9.0 million which primarily consists of decreases of $4.4 million in accounts payable and $2.4 million in accrued expenses and other liabilities due to timing of payments, and an increase of $1.3 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets.
Investing Activities
During 2020, cash used in investing activities was $134.5 million, which was primarily used to purchase short-term investments of $145.7 million and purchase property, plant and equipment of $3.3 million, partially offset by proceeds from the sale of our Morgan Hill building of $12.3 million and sales and maturities of short-term investments of $2.2 million.
During 2019, cash provided by investing activities was $29.5 million, which was primarily from sales and maturities of short-term investments of $62.6 million and proceeds from repayment of notes receivable from stockholders of $3.5 million, partially offset by cash used to purchase short-term investments of $28.8 million, purchase property, plant and equipment of $5.2 million and to acquire Mapper of $2.5 million.
During 2018, cash used in investing activities was $19.4 million, which was primarily used to purchase short-term investments of $35.3 million and purchase property, plant and equipment of $6.9 million, partially offset by sales and maturities of short-term investments of $20.8 million and proceeds from the cancellation of corporate-owned life insurance policies of $2.1 million.
Our machinery and equipment is depreciated over a useful life of approximately five years.
Financing Activities
During 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $347.7 million, consisting primarily of net proceeds of $247.0 million from the Business Combination and PIPE offering, $73.7 million from exercises of public warrants, $19.9 million from issuance of preferred stock and proceeds of $10.0 million from the PPP loan, partially offset by $1.1 million cash paid for IPO costs and $1.8 million cash paid for repurchases of common stock.
During 2019, cash provided by financing activities was $49.8 million consisting of net proceeds from the issuance of Series B-1 preferred stock in October 2019.
During 2018, cash provided by financing activities was $44.2 million consisting of net proceeds of $46.7 million from the issuance of Series B preferred stock in September 2018, partially offset by $2.5 million use of cash to repurchase our common stock.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements and do not have any holdings in variable interest entities.