Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, amalgamation, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. On September 15, 2020, we completed our Initial Public Offering of 34,500,000 Units, including 4,500,000 Units that were issued pursuant to the underwriters’ exercise of their over-allotment option in full. The Units were sold at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds to us of approximately $345.0 million. We incurred offering costs of approximately $19.5 million, inclusive of approximately $12.1 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
On September 15, 2020, simultaneously with the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, we completed the private sale of 5,933,333 Private Placement Warrants at a purchase price of $1.50 per warrant to TortoiseEcofin Borrower, an affiliate of our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds to us of approximately $8.9 million.
Approximately $345.0 million of the net proceeds from our Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants has been deposited in the Trust Account established for the benefit of our public shareholders.
Our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association provide that, other than the withdrawal of interest to pay income taxes, none of the funds held in the Trust Account will be released until the earliest of: (a) the completion of the initial business combination; (b) the redemption of any Class A ordinary shares included in the Units sold in the Initial Public Offering that have been properly tendered in connection with a shareholder vote to amend our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association to affect the substance or timing of our obligation to redeem 100% of such public shares if we have not consummated an initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or 27 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering if we have executed a letter of intent, agreement in principle or definitive agreement for an initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering but have not completed an initial business combination within such 24-month period (the “Combination Period”); and (c) the redemption of 100% of the public shares if we are unable to complete an initial business combination within the Combination Period. The proceeds deposited in the Trust Account could become subject to the claims of our creditors, if any, which could have priority over the claims of our public shareholders.
In connection with the Initial Public Offering, we entered into a Forward Purchase Agreement pursuant to which we may elect, in our sole and absolute discretion, to offer CIBC National Trust the opportunity to purchase Forward Purchase Units, consisting of one Class A ordinary share and one-fourth of one redeemable warrant, where each whole redeemable warrant is exercisable to purchase one Class A ordinary share at an exercise price of $11.50 per share, and, if CIBC National Trust accepts such offer, it commits to purchase at least a minimum aggregate amount equal to either (a) 10% of the gross proceeds from a private placement that may close simultaneously with the closing of our Initial Business Combination or (b) 10% of the gross proceeds from the Initial Public Offering, at CIBC National Trust’s sole discretion, and up to a Maximum Aggregate Amount of $100,000,000 of Forward Purchase Units at a price per unit equal to the public offering price of the Units sold in the Initial Public Offering, in a private placement that will close simultaneously with the closing of our initial business combination. The Forward Purchase Agreement is subject to conditions, including CIBC National Trust specifying the amount of units between the Minimum Aggregate Amount and Maximum Aggregate Amount it wishes to purchase after we notify CIBC National Trust of our intention to offer it the opportunity to purchase Forward Purchase Units. We may specify, in our sole and absolute discretion and at any time prior to or after CIBC National Trust has indicated its Specified Amount, an amount below the Specified Amount that we are willing to sell to CIBC National Trust. CIBC National Trust may choose to accept our offer to purchase the Forward Purchase Units entirely within its sole discretion. Accordingly, if CIBC National Trust does not accept our offer to purchase the Forward Purchase Units, it will not be obligated to purchase the Forward Purchase Units. We entered into a subscription agreement with CIBC National Trust in connection with the Business Combination Agreement pursuant to which CIBC National Trust agreed to purchase, subject to the satisfaction of applicable closing conditions, shares of our Class A Common Stock. As a result, on February 8, 2021, we delivered a notice to CIBC National Trust stating that we will not elect to offer CIBC National Trust the opportunity to purchase Forward Purchase Units pursuant to the Forward Purchase Agreement.
We intend to effectuate an initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our Initial Public Offering, the sale of the Private Placement Warrants and from additional issuances, if any, of our shares, debt or a combination of shares and debt. We are pursuing acquisition opportunities and, at any given time, may be in various stages of due diligence or preliminary discussions with respect to a number of potential acquisitions. However, we cannot assure you that we will be able to complete the acquisition of suitable target candidates on favorable terms or at all.
Proposed Business Combination
Business Combination Agreement
On February 7, 2021, we entered into the Business Combination Agreement with Merger Subs and Volta, pursuant to which First Merger Sub will merge with and into Volta, with Volta surviving the First Merger as our wholly owned subsidiary, and the Surviving Corporation will subsequently merge with and into Second Merger Sub, with Second Merger Sub surviving the Second Merger as our wholly owned subsidiary.
The consummation of the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement is subject to approval of our shareholders and the satisfaction of other customary closing conditions, and the transactions are expected to be completed late in the second quarter or in the first half of the third quarter of 2021.
Domestication
Prior to the Effective Time, we will domesticate as a Delaware corporation in accordance with Section 388 of the DGCL and the applicable provisions of the Companies Act.
In connection with the Domestication, (a) our Class A ordinary shares will convert automatically, on a one-for-one basis, into shares of Class A Common Stock, (b) our Class B ordinary shares will convert automatically, on a one-for-one basis, into shares of Class A Common Stock, (c) our warrants to purchase Class A ordinary shares will convert automatically into warrants to purchase Class A Common Stock (d) our Units will convert automatically into units presenting one share of Class A Common Stock and one-fourth of one redeemable warrant; (e) a dual class structure will be implemented and we will be authorized to issue shares of Class B Common Stock that will carry voting rights in the form of ten votes per such share; and (f) we will immediately be renamed Volta Inc. upon the Effective Time.
Stockholder Support Agreement
In connection with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, we entered into a Stockholder Support Agreement with Volta and certain shareholders of Volta pursuant to which such shareholders agreed to vote all of their shares of Volta Common Stock and shares of Volta Preferred Stock in favor of the approval and adoption of the Proposed Transactions, including agreeing to execute a written consent within forty-eight hours of a registration statement on Form S-4 filed by us becoming effective. Additionally, such shareholders have agreed, among other things, not to, prior to the Effective Time (a) transfer any of their shares of Volta Common Stock and Volta Preferred Stock (or enter into any arrangement with respect thereto), subject to certain customary exceptions or (b) enter into any voting arrangement that is inconsistent with the Stockholder Support Agreement.
Lock-Up Agreement
In connection with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, the founders of Volta entered into the Lock-Up Agreement with us and Volta pursuant to which they have agreed, subject to certain customary exceptions, not to effect any (a) direct or indirect sale, assignment, pledge, hypothecation, disposition, loan or other transfer, or entry into any agreement with respect to any sale, assignment, pledge, hypothecation, disposition, loan or other transfer, with respect to any shares of Class A Common Stock or Class B Common Stock held by them immediately after the Effective Time, including any shares of Class A Common Stock or Class B Common Stock issuable upon the exercise of options or warrants to purchase shares of Class A Common Stock or Class B Common Stock held by them immediately following the BCA Closing or (b) publicly announce any intention to effect any transaction specified in clause (a), in each case, until the date that is the earlier of (i) one year after the BCA Closing and (ii) the earlier to occur of, subsequent to the BCA Closing, (x) the first date on which the last reported sale price of the Class A Common Stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as equitably adjusted for share sub-divisions, share dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30 trading-day period commencing at least 150 days after the BCA Closing and (y) the date on which there is consummated a subsequent liquidation, merger, share exchange or other similar transaction which results in all of our stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of Class A Common Stock for cash, securities or other property.
Our bylaws after the BCA Closing will include transfer restrictions on our securities issued to the investors of Volta in connection with the First Merger for a period of six (6) months after the BCA Closing.
Sponsor Letter
In connection with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, we entered into the Sponsor Letter with Volta, our Sponsor and the other holders of our Founder Shares pursuant to which, among other things, our Sponsor and each other holder agreed to (a) waive the anti-dilution rights set forth in Article 17.3 of the amended and restated memorandum and articles of association, (b) comply with the non-solicitation provisions in the Business Combination Agreement, and (c) vote all of our shares held by them in favor of the adoption and approval of the Business Combination Agreement and the Proposed Transactions.
Subscription Agreements
In connection with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, we entered into the Subscription Agreements with the Subscribers, pursuant to which the Subscribers agreed to purchase, and we agreed to sell to the Subscribers, an aggregate of 30,000,000 shares of Class A Common Stock, for a purchase price of $10.00 per share and an aggregate purchase price of $300,000,000, in a private placement.
The closing of the sale of the Private Placement Shares pursuant to the Subscription Agreements will take place on the date of, and at a time immediately prior to or substantially concurrently with, the BCA Closing and is contingent upon, among other customary closing conditions, the consummation of the Proposed Transactions. The purpose of the Private Placement is to raise additional capital for use by the combined company following the BCA Closing.
Pursuant to the Subscription Agreements, we agreed that, within 30 calendar days after the consummation of the Proposed Transactions, we will file with the SEC (at our sole cost and expense) a registration statement registering the resale of the Private Placement Shares, and we shall use commercially reasonable efforts to have the Private Placement Resale Registration Statement declared effective as soon as practicable after the filing thereof, but no later than the earlier of (i) 60 calendar days (or 90 calendar days if the SEC notifies us that it will review the Private Placement Resale Registration Statement) following the BCA Closing and (ii) the tenth business day after the SEC notifies us that the Private Placement Resale Registration Statement will not be reviewed or will not be subject to further review.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any significant operations nor generated any operating revenue to date. Our only activities from inception through the IPO Closing Date related to our formation and our Initial Public Offering. Although we have not generated operating revenue, we have generated non-operating income in the form of investment income from investments held in the Trust Account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company, as well as costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans.
For the period from July 24, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $364,000, which consisted entirely of general and administrative expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $0.9 million in our operating bank account, and working capital of approximately $1.2 million.
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a payment of $25,000 of expenses on our behalf by our Sponsor in exchange for the issuance of Class B ordinary shares, par value $0.0001, the loan of approximately $181,000 from our Sponsor pursuant to an unsecured promissory note (the “Note”) and the proceeds from the consummation of the sale of the Private Placement Warrants not held in the Trust Account. We fully repaid the Note on September 21, 2020. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loan.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that the Company will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of an initial business combination and one year from the date of the filing of this report. Over this time period, these funds will be used for payment of general and administrative expenses as well as expenses associated with identifying, evaluating and performing due diligence on prospective target businesses and structuring, negotiating and consummating the initial business combination.
Management is continuing to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have an effect on the Company’s financial position, results of its operations and/or search for a target company and the closing of the business combination, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
In July 2020, 7,187,500 Founder Shares were issued to our Sponsor in exchange for the payment of $25,000 of expenses on our behalf. In September 2020, we effected a share capitalization with respect to our Class B ordinary shares of 1,437,500 shares thereof, resulting in our Sponsor holding an aggregate of 8,625,000 Founder Shares. In connection with the Initial Public Offering, our Sponsor transferred 35,000 Founder Shares to each of Juan J. Daboub, Karin McKinnell Leidel and Sidney L. Tassin (collectively, our “independent directors”). The Founder Shares are identical to the Class A ordinary shares included in the Units sold in our Initial Public Offering except that the Founder Shares are Class B ordinary shares which automatically convert into Class A ordinary shares at the time of the initial business combination and are subject to certain transfer restrictions, as described in more detail below.
The holders of the Founder Shares have agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of: (a) one year after the completion of the initial business combination and (b) subsequent to the initial business combination, (i) if the last reported sale price of our Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share sub-divisions, share dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the consummation of the initial business combination, or (ii) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, share exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of our shareholders having the right to exchange their ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneously with the consummation of our Initial Public Offering, we completed the sale of the Private Placement Warrants to TortoiseEcofin Borrower, generating gross proceeds of approximately $8.9 million. Each Private Placement Warrant is exercisable for one of the Company’s Class A ordinary shares at an exercise price of $11.50 per share. A portion of the purchase price of the Private Placement Warrants was added to the proceeds from our Initial Public Offering held in the Trust Account. If the initial business combination is not completed within the Combination Period, the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants held in the Trust Account will be used to fund the redemption of the public shares (subject to the requirements of applicable law) and the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless. The Private Placement Warrants will be non-redeemable for cash and exercisable on a cashless basis so long as they are held by TortoiseEcofin Borrower or its permitted transferees.
TortoiseEcofin Borrower agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of its Private Placement Warrants until 30 days after the completion of the initial business combination.
Note Payable to Our Sponsor
On July 29, 2020, our Sponsor agreed to loan us funds to cover expenses related to our Initial Public Offering pursuant to the Note. The Note was non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of 180 days and the closing of our Initial Public Offering. The Company borrowed approximately $181,000 under the Note and repaid the Note in full on September 21, 2020.
Administrative Services Agreement
Pursuant to an administrative services agreement between us and Tortoise Capital Advisors, L.L.C., an affiliate of our Sponsor, dated September 10, 2020, we agreed to pay Tortoise Capital Advisors, L.L.C. a total of $10,000 per month for office space, utilities and administrative support. Upon completion of the initial business combination or our liquidation, the agreement will terminate. We incurred $36,667 for expenses in connection with the administrative services agreement for the period from July 24, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020. No amounts were due as of December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The Company has identified the following as its critical accounting policies:
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, 32,901,830 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.
Net Income Per Ordinary Share
Net income per ordinary share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted-average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants to purchase an aggregate of 14,558,333 of the Company’s Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted income per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method.
Our statement of operations includes a presentation of income per share for ordinary shares subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income per share. Net income per ordinary share, basic and diluted for Class A ordinary shares are calculated by dividing the interest income (loss) earned on investment securities held in the Trust Account, net of applicable taxes available to be withdrawn from the Trust Account, which was $0 for the period from July 24, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, by the weighted average number of Class A ordinary shares outstanding for the period. Net loss per ordinary share, basic and diluted for Class B ordinary shares is calculated by dividing the net loss of approximately $364,000, less income attributable to Class A ordinary shares, by the weighted average number of Class B ordinary shares outstanding for the period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
On September 10, 2020, we entered into an administrative services agreement pursuant to which we have agreed to pay Tortoise Capital Advisors, L.L.C., an affiliate of our Sponsor, a total of $10,000 per month for office space, utilities and administrative support. Upon completion of the initial business combination or our liquidation, the agreement will terminate.
The underwriters of our Initial Public Offering were entitled to underwriting discounts and commissions of 5.5%, of which 2.0% (approximately $6.9 million) was paid at the closing of our Initial Public Offering and 3.5% (approximately $12.1 million) was deferred. The deferred underwriting discounts and commissions will become payable to the underwriters upon the consummation of the initial business combination and will be paid from the amounts held in the Trust Account. The underwriters are not entitled to any interest accrued on the deferred underwriting discounts and commissions.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (a) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 of the JOBS Act, (b) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (c) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting and Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (d) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of our Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the IPO Closing Date or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.