ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
Forward-Looking Statements
Management’s discussion and analysis, and other sections of this annual report, contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These forward-looking statements are based on assumptions that management has made in light of experience in the industries in which the Company operates, as well as management’s perceptions of historical trends, current conditions, expected future developments and other factors believed to be appropriate under the circumstances. These statements are not guarantees of performance or results. They involve risks, uncertainties (some of which are beyond the Company’s control) and assumptions. Management believes that these forward-looking statements are based on reasonable assumptions. Many factors could affect the Company’s actual financial results and cause them to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements. These factors include, among other things, risk factors described from time to time in the Company’s reports to the Securities and Exchange Commission, as well as future economic and market circumstances, industry conditions, company performance and financial results, operating efficiencies, availability and price of raw materials, availability and market acceptance of new products, product pricing, domestic and international competitive environments, and actions and policy changes of domestic and foreign governments.
The following discussion and analysis provides information which management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our consolidated results of operations and financial position. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes.
General
NM - Not Meaningful
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
FISCAL 2020 COMPARED WITH FISCAL 2019
Overview
The increase in net sales in 2020, as compared with 2019, was due to higher sales in the Utility and Irrigation segments that were offset by lower sales in the ESS and Coatings segments. The changes in net sales in 2020, as compared with 2019, were as follows:
Volume effects are estimated based on a physical production or sales measure. Since products we sell are not uniform in nature, pricing and mix relate to a combination of changes in sales prices and the attributes of the product sold. Accordingly, pricing and mix changes do not necessarily result in operating income changes.
Increased project sales for offshore and other complex steel structures, solar tracking solutions, and international Irrigation is the primary contributor to the increase in sales volume for fiscal 2020, as compared to 2019. Average steel prices for both hot rolled coil and plate were lower in North America and China in fiscal 2020, as compared to 2019, contributing to lower average selling prices for the Utility segment.
The Company acquired the following businesses:
•In the first quarter of 2020, we acquired the remaining 49% of AgSense that the Company did not own (Irrigation).
•In the first quarter of 2020, we acquired 16% of the remaining 25% of Convert Italia that the Company did not own (Utility).
•Energia Solar Do Brasil ("Solbras") in the second quarter of 2020, a leading provider of solar energy solutions for agriculture (Irrigation).
COVID-19 Impact on Financial Results and Liquidity
We are considered an essential business because of the products and services that serve critical infrastructure sectors as defined by many governments around the world. All our manufacturing facilities were open and fully operational as of December 26, 2020. Our manufacturing facilities in Argentina, France, Malaysia, New Zealand, Philippines, and South Africa were temporarily closed for part of the first half of 2020 due to government mandates. We continue to monitor incidence of COVID-19 on a continuous basis, particularly in areas reporting recent increases in infection. To protect the safety, health and well-being of employees, customers, suppliers and communities, CDC and WHO guidelines are being followed in all facilities.
We generated strong cash flows from operating activities during 2020 resulting in cash flows from operating activities, net of capital expenditures, in excess of net earnings for fiscal 2020. Our main focus is to maintain liquidity to support the working capital needs of our operations and maintain our investment grade credit rating.
The ultimate magnitude of COVID-19, including the extent of its impact on the Company’s financial and operational results, cash balances and available borrowings on our line of credit, will be determined by the length of time the pandemic continues, its effect on the demand for the Company’s products and services and supply chain, as well as the effect of governmental regulations imposed in response to the pandemic.
Restructuring Plan
During 2020, the Company executed certain regional restructuring activities (the "2020 Plan") primarily in the ESS and Utility segments and a U.S. specific early retirement program covering all segments. The 2020 Plan included the closure of one U.S. Coatings facility. The decrease in 2020 gross profit and operating income due to restructuring expense by segment is as follows:
Currency Translation
In 2020, we realized a reduction in operating profit, as compared with fiscal 2019, due to currency translation effects. The breakdown of this effect by segment was as follows:
Gross Profit, SG&A, and Operating Income
At a consolidated level, gross profit as a percent of sales was higher in 2020, as compared with 2019, due to customer pricing discipline (the decline in cost of sales from lower raw material costs was slightly more than the decrease in lower average selling prices) and an increase in sales volumes for the Irrigation segment and associated operating leverage of fixed costs. Gross profit improved for the ESS, Utility, and Irrigation segments in 2020, but was lower for Coatings due to lower sales volumes.
The Company saw an increase in selling, general, and administrative (SG&A) expense in 2020, as compared to 2019. The increase was due to recording a partial impairment of goodwill and tradename for the Access Systems business, higher compensation related costs including sales commissions for the North American infrastructure businesses, higher incentives due to improved operations, and restructuring activities. These increases were partially offset by lower travel costs, foreign currency translation effects, and reduced SG&A deferred compensation expense (offset by an increase of the same amount in other expense).
Net Interest Expense and Debt
Net interest expense in 2020 was higher than 2019, due to a higher average borrowings during the year. Interest income was lower in 2020, as compared to 2019, due to lower interest rates.
Other Income/Expense
The change in other income/expenses in 2020, as compared to 2019, was due to the change in valuation of deferred compensation assets which resulted in lower other income of $3.5 million. This amount is shown as "Gain on investments (unrealized)" on the consolidated statements of earnings. The change related to deferred compensation assets are offset by an opposite change of the same amount in SG&A expense. The remaining change was due to fluctuations in foreign currency transaction gains/losses and a higher pension benefit in 2020.
Income Tax Expense
Our effective income tax rate in 2020 and 2019 was 25.7% and 23.9%, respectively. The increase in the effective tax rate is a result of the partial impairment of goodwill and tradename for the Access Systems business that is not fully tax deductible.
Earnings Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests
Earnings attributable to noncontrolling interests was lower in 2020 as compared to 2019, due to the acquisition of the remaining noncontrolling interests of AgSense and partial acquisition of the noncontrolling interest of Covert in the first quarter of 2020.
Cash Flows from Operations
Our cash flows provided by operations was $316.3 million in fiscal 2020, as compared with $307.6 million provided by operations in fiscal 2019. The increase in operating cash flow in 2020, as compared with 2019, was due to the $40.9 million increase in non-current contract liability partially offset by the increase in accounts receivable and the early payment (December 2020) of the required 2021 annual contribution to the Delta pension plan.
Engineered Support Structures (ESS) segment
Net sales were lower in 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily driven by lower sales volumes for access systems. Sales were higher for the lighting, traffic, and highway safety and communication products businesses and lower for access systems.
Global lighting, traffic, and highway safety product sales in 2020 were higher by $6.3 million, as compared to 2019. Sales volumes in North America increased due to a stronger transportation market and higher pricing. Europe sales volumes were lower due to the temporary plant shutdown in France and market demand disruptions due to COVID-19. Lighting, traffic, and highway safety product sales in the Asia-Pacific region decreased in 2020, as compared to 2019, due primarily to continued market weakness in India attributed to COVID-19.
Communication product line sales were higher by $1.3 million in 2020 as compared with 2019. Communication product sales in Europe improved due to an increase in volume in the U.K. and Asia-Pacific sales volumes decreased marginally. In North America, communication product sales volumes decreased due to lower demand for communication towers and components.
Access Systems product line net sales decreased by $26.1 million in 2020, as compared to 2019. In early 2020, we decided to exit the detention center systems product line, which contributed to the sales decline along with unfavorable foreign currency translation effects. Impacts from subdued construction spending in Australia and COVID-19 impacts in Asia-Pacific also contributed to a decrease in sales volume.
Gross profit was higher in 2020, as compared to 2019, due to lower cost of raw materials across the segment and an approximate $7.0 million one-time loss recognized on certain access systems projects in 2019 that did not recur in 2020. SG&A was higher in 2020 versus 2019 due to recording a partial goodwill and tradename impairment for the Access Systems business of $16.6 million, restructuring costs of $6.6 million, and higher sales commissions in North America. Operating income decreased in 2020 due to the goodwill and tradename impairment of the Access Systems business and restructuring costs, partially offset by lower raw material costs for all businesses and a one-time $7 million loss recorded on certain access systems projects in third quarter of 2019 that did not recur in 2020.
Utility Support Structures (Utility) segment
In the Utility segment, sales increased in 2020, as compared with 2019, due to large project work for the international solar tracking solutions and offshore and other complex structures product lines and improved sales volumes for steel and concrete structures in North America. A number of our sales contracts in North America contain provisions that tie the sales price to published steel index pricing at the time our customer issues their purchase order. This resulted in a decrease to the average selling prices for our steel utility structures product line for 2020, as compared with 2019.
Offshore and other complex steel structures sales increased $29.9 million and solar tracking solutions sales increased $38.9 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, due to an increase in sales volumes attributed to large projects.
Gross profit increased in 2020, as compared to 2019, due to higher sales volumes and its associated operating leverage of fixed costs. In addition, the business incurred approximately $3.0 million of inspection costs during 2019 to
finalize the requirements from a 2015 commercial settlement that did not recur in 2020. We recognized a $2.8 million impairment of a facility in 2020 that was sold in the fourth quarter. SG&A expense was higher in 2020, as compared with 2019, due to higher sales commissions and incentives related to improved operating results in North America and a $2.7 million allowance recognized in third quarter 2020 against an international accounts receivable. Certain other restructuring actions, including the early retirement program, also contributed to the increase in SG&A. Operating income increased primarily due to higher sales volumes in 2020 compared to 2019.
Coatings segment
Coatings segment sales decreased in 2020, as compared to 2019, due to lower volumes in North America and Asia, reduced sales pricing attributed to lower zinc costs, and unfavorable foreign currency translation. Sales volumes decreased in North America in 2020, as compared to 2019, due primarily to decreased industrial production attributed largely to the economic impacts from COVID-19. In Asia-Pacific region, sales volumes improved in Australia, which were more than offset by decreased volumes in Asia that were impacted by the economic disruptions from COVID-19. Sales pricing also declined in Asia-Pacific due to lower zinc costs and customer mix.
SG&A expense in 2020 was comparable to 2019. SG&A expense in 2020 included one-time costs related to closing down a coatings location in North America and the early retirement program that was offset by one-time expenses associated with a legal settlement in 2019 that did not recur in 2020. Operating income was lower in 2020, compared to 2019, due to sales volume decreases in North America and Asia and the associated operating deleverage of fixed costs.
Irrigation segment
The increase in Irrigation segment net sales in 2020, as compared to 2019, is primarily due to higher sales volumes for international irrigation. The sales improvement is offset by unfavorable foreign currency translation effects and slightly lower sales pricing due to the reduced cost of steel. The sales volume increase for international irrigation of approximately $74 million was attributed to deliveries on the multi-year Egypt project and a strong market in Brazil. The increase was offset by unfavorable currency translation effects of approximately $21 million from a weaker Brazilian real and South African rand. In North America, higher sales volumes for systems and parts was partially offset by sales pricing due to lower steel costs. In 2020, sales of technology-related products and services continued to increase, as growers continued adoption of technology to reduce costs and enhance profitability.
SG&A was higher in 2020, as compared to 2019, due to higher product development expenses, one-time costs associated with the early retirement program, and higher incentives due to improved business performance. Operating income increased in 2020 over 2019, due to higher sales volumes in international markets and lower raw material costs.
Net corporate expense
Corporate SG&A expense was higher in 2020 as compared to 2019. The increase can be attributed to higher incentive expenses due to improved business performance and one-time costs associated with the early retirement program. The increase was partially offset by the change in valuation of deferred compensation plan assets which resulted in lower expense. The change in deferred compensation plan assets is offset by the same amount in other income/expenses.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
FISCAL 2019 COMPARED WITH FISCAL 2018
Overview
The increase in net sales in 2019, as compared with 2018, was due to higher sales in the ESS, Utility, and Coatings segments that were substantially offset by lower sales in the Irrigation and Other segments. The changes in net sales in 2019, as compared with 2018, were as follows:
Volume effects are estimated based on a physical production or sales measure. Since products we sell are not uniform in nature, pricing and mix relate to a combination of changes in sales prices and the attributes of the product sold. Accordingly, pricing and mix changes do not necessarily directly result in operating income changes.
Average steel index prices for both hot rolled coil and plate were lower in North America and China in 2019, as compared to 2018, resulting in lower average costs of sales and improved gross profit.
The Company acquired the following companies during 2019 and 2018:
•A majority ownership stake in Torrent Engineering and Equipment ("Torrent") in the first quarter of 2018 (Irrigation).
•Derit Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. ("Derit") in the third quarter of 2018, which operates a lattice steel manufacturing facility located in India (Utility and Coatings).
•A majority ownership stake in Convert Italia SpA ("Convert") in the third quarter of 2018, a provider of engineered solar tracker solutions (Utility).
•Walpar in the third quarter of 2018, a domestic manufacturer of overhead sign structures (ESS).
•CSP Coating Systems ("CSP Coatings") in the fourth quarter of 2018, a coatings provider in New Zealand (Coatings).
•Larson Camouflage ("Larson") in the first quarter of 2019, an industry leading provider of architectural and camouflage concealment solutions for the wireless telecommunication market (ESS).
•United Galvanizing ("United") in the first quarter of 2019, a domestic coatings provider (Coatings).
•Connect-It Wireless, Inc. ("Connect-It") in the second quarter of 2019, a domestic communication components business (ESS).
The Company divested of its grinding media business in the second quarter of 2018, which resulted in a pre-tax loss of approximately $6.1 million. The grinding media business is reported in Other and the loss was recorded in other income (expenses) on the Consolidated Statements of Earnings.
Restructuring Plan
In February 2018, the Company announced a restructuring plan related to certain operations in 2018, primarily in the ESS segment, through consolidation and other cost-reduction activities (the "2018 Plan"). The Company incurred pre-tax expenses from the 2018 Plan of $34.0 million in 2018.
Currency Translation
In 2019, we realized a reduction in operating profit, as compared with fiscal 2018, due to currency translation effects. The breakdown of this effect by segment was as follows:
Gross Profit, SG&A, and Operating Income
At a consolidated level, the increase in gross margin (gross profit as a percent of sales) in 2019, as compared with 2018, can be attributed to restructuring costs incurred in 2018 of $18.4 million, lower raw material costs, and improved selling prices across our infrastructure businesses. The ESS and Utility segments realized an increase in gross margin in 2019, while Irrigation and Coatings realized a decrease in gross margin.
The Company saw a decrease in selling, general, and administrative (SG&A) expense in 2019, as compared to 2018. The decrease was driven by higher nonrecurring expenses in 2018 including impairment of the goodwill and trade name of the offshore and other complex structures ("Offshore") business totaling $15.8 million, restructuring costs of $15.6 million, expenses from recently acquired businesses of $9.0 million, and acquisition diligence expenses of $4.4 million. The decrease was partially offset by higher deferred compensation expenses of $6.8 million (offset recognized in other expense as described below), and higher compensation and project related costs in 2019.
Operating income was higher for the ESS and Utility segments and lower for the Irrigation and Coatings segments in 2019, as compared to 2018. The overall increase in operating income can be attributed to the Offshore goodwill and trade name impairment and restructuring costs incurred in 2018 and a lower cost structure resulting from those activities in 2019.
Net Interest Expense and Debt
Net interest expense for 2019 was lower than 2018 due to a debt refinancing in the third quarter of 2018 that included retiring $250.2 million senior unsecured notes due 2020 at 6.625% and issuing new senior unsecured notes of $200.0 million due 2044 and $55.0 million due 2054 at 5.0% and 5.25%, respectively. Costs associated with the refinancing of debt totaled $14.8 million. In addition, the Company entered into certain cross currency swaps in 2018 that effectively swaps the Company's U.S. denominated debt for Euro and Danish kroner debt at lower interest rates which reduces interest expense. Interest income was lower in 2019 due to having less cash on hand to invest during the year.
Other Income/Expense
The increase in other income in 2019, as compared with 2018, is due to the change in valuation of deferred compensation assets in 2019 that resulted in additional income of $6.8 million. This amount is offset by a reduction of the same amount in SG&A expense. The Company also divested of its grinding media business in 2018 that resulted in a loss of $6.1 million.
Income Tax Expense
Our effective income tax rate in 2019 and 2018 was 23.9% and 29.7%, respectively. The 2018 tax rate was higher due to certain restructuring costs and impairment charges for which no tax benefits were recorded.
Earnings Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests
Noncontrolling interest expense in 2019 was consistent with 2018.
Cash Flows from Operations
Our cash flows provided by operations was $307.6 million in 2019, as compared with $153.0 million provided by operations in 2018. The increase in operating cash flows was due to improved working capital management offset by higher contributions to the Delta pension plan. The lower working capital is primarily due to a larger liability for customer billings in excess of costs and earnings (accrued expenses). This was partially offset by the 2019 Delta pension plan contribution (the 2018 annual payment was contributed early in December 2017) which is a use of cash flows from operations.
Engineered Support Structures (ESS) segment
The increase in sales in 2019 as compared with 2018, was due to recent acquisitions, improved communication product line sales, and improved sales pricing. Sales were partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency translation effects of $28.3 million.
Global lighting and traffic, and highway safety product sales in 2019 were $2.3 million higher as compared to 2018, due to higher sales pricing and increased sales volumes. Sales volumes and pricing in North America were higher across commercial and transportation markets and also increased due to the acquisition of Walpar. Sales in Europe were lower in 2019, as compared to 2018, due to volume decreases from ceasing manufacturing operations in Morocco and unfavorable foreign currency translation effects as the value of the euro depreciated against the U.S. dollar. Sales volumes in Asia-Pacific were higher in India due to improved demand, offset by lower demand in China for lighting and traffic products. Highway safety product sales decreased in 2019, as compared to 2018, due to a slowdown in government spending in Australia and India and certain project sales in 2018 that did not reoccur in 2019.
Communication product line sales increased by $39.1 million in 2019, as compared with 2018. In North America, communication structure and component sales increased in 2019 due to strong demand from the network expansion by providers and acquisition of Larson and Connect-It. In Asia-Pacific, sales volumes decreased due to lower demand in China and Australia for new wireless communication structures.
Access Systems product line net sales decreased in 2019 by $16.0 million, as compared to 2018. The decrease was attributed to lower sales volumes in Australia and unfavorable foreign currency translation effects.
Gross profit, as a percentage of sales, and operating income for the segment were higher in 2019, as compared to 2018, due to improved sales volume and pricing, restructuring costs incurred in 2018, and recent acquisitions. The improvements in profitability were partially offset by an approximate $7 million loss recognized in 2019 on certain access systems projects and much lower gross profit during the second half of 2019 attributed to weak ANZ access systems market conditions. SG&A spending was lower in 2019, as compared to 2018, due to restructuring costs incurred in 2018 and foreign currency translation effects. The decrease in SG&A expense was partially offset by the expenses of recent acquisitions.
Utility Support Structures (Utility) segment
In the Utility segment, sales increased in 2019 as compared with 2018, due to higher sales pricing in North America and the acquisition of Convert and Derit that was offset by lower North America volumes and unfavorable foreign currency translation effects. A number of our sales contracts in North America contain provisions that tie the sales price to published steel index pricing at the time our customer issues their purchase order. Specific to North America, the average sales price increase was partially offset by lower sales volumes for steel utility structures; concrete utility structure sales volumes were higher. The 2018 acquisitions of Convert and Derit contributed $43.9 million of additional sales in 2019, as compared to 2018.
Offshore and other complex structures sales decreased in 2019, as compared to 2018, due to lower sales pricing and unfavorable foreign currency translation effects, partially offset by sales volume increases.
Gross profit as a percentage of sales increased in 2019, as compared to 2018, due to improved sales pricing in North America and restructuring costs incurred in 2018. SG&A expense was lower in 2019, as compared with 2018, due to the goodwill and trade name impairment recorded in 2018 for Offshore business of $15.8 million that was partially offset by expenses associated with recent acquisitions and higher compensation related expenses.
Coatings segment
Coatings segment sales increased in 2019, as compared to 2018, due to increased sales prices and the acquisition of United, CSP Coatings, and Derit. Sales volume demand otherwise decreased in North America in 2019, as compared to 2018, due to lower industrial economy growth in the U.S. offset somewhat by price actions. In the Asia-Pacific region, the acquisition of Derit and CSP Coatings and price increases to recover zinc cost increases drove improved sales in 2019 as compared to 2018.
Gross profit increased in 2019 as compared to 2018, due to contributions from recent acquisitions. SG&A expense was higher in 2019, as compared to 2018, due to expenses of recent acquisitions and non-recurring expenses. 2019 included approximately $3.0 million of expenses associated with a legal settlement; in 2018 the business recorded the reversal of an environmental remediation liability related to one of our North America galvanizing locations of $1.9 million. Operating income was lower in 2019 compared to 2018, due to sales volume decreases globally and non-recurring expenses.
Irrigation segment
The decrease in Irrigation segment net sales in 2019, as compared to 2018, is primarily due to lower sales volumes in North America and international markets and unfavorable foreign currency translation effects. Continued low farm commodity prices and uncertainty around trade disputes with China dampened net farm income and caused growers to delay irrigation investments. However, sales of technology-related products and services continue to grow, as growers are increasing adoption of technology to reduce costs and enhance profitability. The decrease in international sales can be attributed to project delays and lower overall large project work across most regions. In addition, the weakening of the Brazilian real and South African rand in 2019 resulted in lower sales due to currency translation.
SG&A was higher in 2019, as compared to 2018. The increase can be attributed to expenses associated with the recent acquisitions and planned higher product development expenses. Operating income for the segment decreased in 2019 due to lower sales volumes for the tubing and international irrigation businesses and the associated operating deleverage of fixed factory and SG&A costs.
Other
In April 2018, the Company completed the sale of Donhad, a mining consumable business with operations in Australia. There are no remaining businesses recorded within Other.
Net corporate expense
Corporate SG&A expense was higher in 2019 as compared to 2018. The increase can be attributed to $6.8 million of increased appreciation of deferred compensation plan assets. The increase in deferred compensation plan assets is offset by the same amount in other income/expense.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Cash Flows
Working Capital and Operating Cash Flows-Net working capital was $881.3 million at December 26, 2020, as compared with $918.4 million at December 28, 2019. The decrease in net working capital in 2020 is attributed to an increase in accrued compensation and benefits which is primarily driven by an approximately $11 million liability for the early retirement program and higher accrual for incentives earned during 2020. Cash flow provided by operations was $316.3 million in 2020, as compared with $307.6 million in 2019 and $153.0 million in 2018. The increase in operating cash flow in 2020, as compared to 2019, was the result of improved working capital management, offset by the required 2021 annual contribution to the Delta pension plan being made early in December 2020.
Investing Cash Flows-Capital spending in fiscal 2020 was $106.7 million, as compared with $97.4 million in fiscal 2019 and $72.0 million in fiscal 2018. The increase in capital spending in 2020 resulted from a number of plant expansions in the North America utility business. The decrease in investing cash outflows in 2020, as compared to 2019, was due to a decrease in acquisition spending. We expect our capital spending for the 2021 fiscal year to be approximately $110.0 million.
Financing Cash Flows-Our total interest-bearing debt decreased to $766.3 million at December 26, 2020, from $787.5 million at December 28, 2019. Financing cash outflows increased in 2020, as compared to 2019, due to the Company paying down debt balances and higher purchases of noncontrolling interests. In 2019, net proceeds were received for additional borrowings.
Guarantor Summarized Financial Information
We are providing the following information in compliance with Rule 3-10 and Rule 13-01 of Regulation S-X with respect to our two tranches of senior unsecured notes. All of the senior notes are guaranteed, jointly, severally, fully and unconditionally (subject to certain customary release provisions, including sale of the subsidiary guarantor, or sale of all or substantially all of its assets) by certain of the Company’s current and future direct and indirect domestic and foreign subsidiaries (collectively the “Guarantors”). The Parent is the Issuer of the notes and consolidates all Guarantors.
The financial information of Issuer and Guarantors is presented on a combined basis with intercompany balances and transactions between Issuer and Guarantors eliminated. The Issuer’s or Guarantors' amounts due from, amounts due to, and transactions with non-guarantor subsidiaries are separately disclosed.
Combined financial information is as follows:
Supplemental Combined Parent and Guarantors Financial Information
For the three year period ended December 26, 2020
Supplemental Combined Parent and Guarantors Financial Information
December 26, 2020 and December 28, 2019
Included in noncurrent assets is a due from non-guarantor subsidiaries receivable of $88,309 and $54,915 at December 26, 2020 and December 28, 2019. Included in noncurrent liabilities is a due to non-guarantor subsidiaries payable of $262,935 and $249,056 at December 26, 2020 and December 28, 2019.
Capital Allocation Philosophy
We have historically funded our growth, capital spending and acquisitions through a combination of operating cash flows and debt financing. In May 2014, our Board of Directors approved and publicly announced a capital allocation philosophy with the following priorities for cash generated:
•working capital and capital expenditure investments necessary for future sales growth;
•dividends on common stock in the range of 15% of the prior year's fully diluted net earnings;
•acquisitions; and
•return of capital to shareholders through share repurchases.
We also announced our intention to manage our capital structure to maintain our investment grade debt rating. Our most recent ratings were Baa3 by Moody's Investors Services, Inc., BBB- by Fitch Ratings, and BBB+ by Standard and Poor's Rating Services. We would be willing to allow our debt rating to fall to BBB- to finance a special acquisition or other opportunity. We expect to maintain a ratio of debt to invested capital which will support our current investment grade debt rating.
The Board of Directors in May 2014 authorized the purchase of up to $500 million of the Company's outstanding common stock from time to time over twelve months at prevailing market prices, through open market or privately-negotiated transactions. The Board of Directors authorized an additional $250 million of share purchases, without an expiration date in both February 2015 and again in October 2018. The purchases will be funded from available working capital and short-term borrowings and will be made subject to market and economic conditions. We are not obligated to make any repurchases and may discontinue the program at any time. As of December 26, 2020, we have acquired approximately 6.4 million shares for approximately $852.0 million under these share repurchase programs.
Sources of Financing
Our debt financing at December 26, 2020 consisted primarily of long-term debt. During 2018, the Company issued an additional $200 million aggregate principal amount of its 5.00% senior notes due 2044 and $55 million aggregate principal amount of its 5.25% senior notes due 2054 and redeemed $250.2 million in remaining aggregate principal amount of the 2020 senior notes. Our long-term debt as of December 26, 2020, principally consists of:
•$450 million face value ($436.6 million carrying value) of senior unsecured notes that bear interest at 5.00% per annum and are due in October 2044.
•$305 million face value ($297.6 million carrying value) of senior unsecured notes that bear interest at 5.25% per annum and are due in October 2054.
We are allowed to repurchase the notes subject to the payment of a make-whole premium. Both tranches of these notes are guaranteed by certain of our subsidiaries.
Our revolving credit facility with JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A., as Administrative Agent, and the other lenders party thereto, has a maturity date of October 18, 2022. The credit facility provides for $600 million of committed unsecured revolving credit loans with available borrowings thereunder to $400 million in foreign currencies. We may increase the credit facility by up to an additional $200 million at any time, subject to lenders increasing the amount of their commitments. The leverage ratio of 3.5X increases to 3.75X for the four consecutive fiscal quarters after certain material acquisitions. The Company and our wholly-owned subsidiaries Valmont Industries Holland B.V. and Valmont Group Pty. Ltd., are authorized borrowers under the credit facility. The obligations arising under the credit facility are guaranteed by the Company and its wholly-owned subsidiaries PiRod, Inc., Valmont Coatings, Inc., Valmont Newmark, Inc. and Valmont Queensland Pty. Ltd.
The interest rate on our borrowings will be, at our option, either:
(a) LIBOR (based on a 1, 2, 3 or 6 month interest period, as selected by us) plus 100 to 162.5 basis points, depending on the credit rating of our senior debt published by Standard & Poor's Rating Services and Moody's Investors Service, Inc.; or
(b) the higher of
•the prime lending rate,
• the Federal Funds rate plus 50 basis points, and
•LIBOR (based on a 1 month interest period) plus 100 basis points (inclusive of facility fees),
plus, in each case, 0 to 62.5 basis points, depending on the credit rating of our senior debt published by Standard & Poor's Rating Services and Moody's Investors Service, Inc.
A commitment fee is also required under the revolving credit facility which accrues at 10 to 25 basis points, depending on the credit rating of our senior debt published by Standard and Poor's Rating Services and Moody's Investor Services, Inc., on the average daily unused portion of the commitment under the revolving credit facility.
At December 26, 2020, we had no outstanding borrowings under the revolving credit facility. The revolving credit facility has a maturity date of October 18, 2022 and contains certain financial covenants that may limit our additional borrowing capability under the agreement. At December 26, 2020, we had the ability to borrow $585.4 million under this facility, after consideration of standby letters of credit of $14.6 million associated with certain insurance obligations. We also maintain certain short-term bank lines of credit totaling $144.7 million; $109.7 million of which was unused at December 26, 2020.
Our senior unsecured notes and revolving credit agreement each contain cross-default provisions which permit the acceleration of our indebtedness to them if we default on other indebtedness that results in, or permits, the acceleration of such other indebtedness.
These debt agreements contain covenants that require us to maintain certain coverage ratios and may limit us with respect to certain business activities, including capital expenditures. These debt agreements allow us to add estimated EBITDA from acquired businesses for periods we did not own the acquired businesses. The debt agreements also provide for an adjustment to EBITDA, subject to certain specified limitations, for non-cash charges or gains that are non-recurring in nature.
Our key debt covenants are as follows:
•Leverage ratio - Interest-bearing debt is not to exceed 3.50x Adjusted EBITDA (or 3.75x Adjusted EBITDA after certain material acquisitions) of the prior four quarters; and
•Interest earned ratio - Adjusted EBITDA over the prior four quarters must be at least 2.50x our interest expense over the same period.
At December 26, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants related to these debt agreements. The key covenant calculations at December 26, 2020 were as follows (amounts in thousands):
The calculation of Adjusted EBITDA-last four quarters is presented under the column for fiscal 2020 in footnote (b) to the table "Selected Five-Year Financial Data" in Item 6 - Selected Financial Data.
Our businesses are cyclical, but we have diversity in our markets, from a product, customer and a geographical standpoint. We have demonstrated the ability to effectively manage through business cycles and maintain liquidity. We have consistently generated operating cash flows in excess of our capital expenditures. Based on our available credit facilities, recent issuance of senior unsecured notes and our history of positive operational cash flows, we believe that we have adequate liquidity to meet our needs for fiscal 2021 and beyond.
We have cash balances of $400.7 million at December 26, 2020, approximately $208.6 million is held in our non-U.S. subsidiaries. If we distributed our foreign cash balances certain taxes would be applicable. At December 26, 2020, we have a liability for foreign withholding taxes and U.S. state income taxes of $3.2 million and $0.7 million, respectively.
FINANCIAL OBLIGATIONS AND FINANCIAL COMMITMENTS
We have future financial obligations related to (1) payment of principal and interest on interest-bearing debt, (2) Delta pension plan contributions, (3) operating leases and (4) purchase obligations. These obligations at December 26, 2020 were as follows (in millions of dollars):
Long-term debt mainly consisted of $755.0 million principal amount of senior unsecured notes. The Delta pension plan contributions are related to the current cash funding commitments to the plan with the plan's trustees. Operating leases relate mainly to various production and office facilities and are in the normal course of business.
Unconditional purchase commitments relate to purchase orders for zinc, aluminum and steel, all of which we plan to use in 2021, and certain capital investments planned for 2021. We believe the quantities under contract are reasonable in light of normal fluctuations in business levels and we expect to use the commodities under contract during the contract period.
At December 26, 2020, we had approximately $23.7 million of various long-term liabilities related to certain income tax and other matters. These items are not scheduled above because we are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate as to the timing of any potential payments.
OFF BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We maintain standby letters of credit for contract performance on certain sales contracts.
MARKET RISK
Changes in Prices
Certain key materials we use are commodities traded in worldwide markets and are subject to fluctuations in price. The most significant materials are steel, aluminum, zinc and natural gas. Over the last several years, prices for these commodities have been volatile. The volatility in these prices was due to such factors as fluctuations in supply and demand conditions, government tariffs and the costs of steel-making inputs. Steel is most significant for our Utility Support Structures segment where the cost of steel has been approximately 50% of the net sales, on average. In 2018, we began using steel hot rolled coil derivative contracts on a limited basis to mitigate the impact of rising steel prices on operating income. Assuming a similar sales mix, a hypothetical 20% change in the price of steel would have affected our net sales from our Utility Support Structures segment by approximately $64 million for the year ended December 26, 2020.
We have also experienced volatility in natural gas prices in the past several years. Our main strategies in managing these risks are a combination of fixed price purchase contracts with our vendors to reduce the volatility in our purchase prices and sales price increases where possible. We use natural gas swap contracts on a limited basis to mitigate the impact of rising gas prices on our operating income.
Risk Management
Market Risk-The principal market risks affecting us are exposure to interest rates, foreign currency exchange rates and commodity prices. At times, we utilize derivative financial instruments to hedge these exposures, but we do not use derivatives for trading purposes.
Interest Rates-Our interest-bearing debt at December 26, 2020 was mostly fixed rate debt. Our notes payable and a small portion of our long-term debt accrue interest at a variable rate. Assuming average interest rates and borrowings on variable rate debt, a hypothetical 10% change in interest rates would have affected our interest expense in 2020 and 2019 by approximately $0.1 million. Likewise, we have excess cash balances on deposit in interest-bearing accounts in financial institutions. An increase or decrease in interest rates of ten basis points would have impacted our annual interest earnings in 2020 and 2019 by approximately $0.3 million and $0.3 million, respectively.
Foreign Exchange-Exposures to transactions denominated in a currency other than the entity’s functional currency are not material, and therefore the potential exchange losses in future earnings, fair value and cash flows from these transactions are not material. The Company is also exposed to investment risk related to foreign operations. From time to time, as market conditions indicate, we will enter into foreign currency contracts to manage the risks associated with anticipated future transactions, current balance sheet positions, and foreign subsidiary investments that are in currencies other than the functional currencies of our businesses. At December 26, 2020, the Company had outstanding foreign currency forward contracts which mitigate foreign currency risk of the Company's investment in its Brazilian real and euro denominated businesses. The forward contracts, which qualify as cash flow hedges, mature in the first quarter of 2021. The Company also has two outstanding fixed-for-fixed cross currency swaps (“CCS”), swapping U.S. dollar principal and interest payments on a portion of its 5.00% senior unsecured notes due 2044 for Danish krone (DKK) and Euro denominated payments. The CCS were entered into in 2019 in order to mitigate foreign currency risk on the Company's Euro and DKK investments and to reduce interest expense. The notional of the Euro and DKK CCS are $80.0 million and $50.0 million, respectively, and mature in 2024. In 2019, the Company had outstanding foreign currency forward contracts which mitigate foreign currency risk of the Company's investment in its Australian denominated businesses. The forward contracts, which qualified as net investment hedges, were settled in 2020 with the Company receiving $12.0 million. Much of our cash in non-U.S. entities is denominated in foreign currencies, where fluctuations in exchange rates will impact our cash balances in U.S. dollar terms. A hypothetical 10% change in the value of the U.S. dollar would impact our reported cash balance by approximately $16.6 million in 2020 and $14.1 million in 2019.
We manage our investment risk in foreign operations by borrowing in the functional currencies of the foreign entities or by utilizing hedging instruments (as discussed above) where appropriate. The following table indicates the change in the recorded value of our most significant investments at year-end assuming a hypothetical 10% change in the value of the U.S. Dollar.
Commodity risk- Steel hot rolled coil is a significant commodity input used by all of our segments in the manufacture of our products, with the exception of Coatings. Steel prices are volatile and we may utilize derivative instruments to mitigate commodity price risk on fixed price orders. In 2019 and 2018, the Company entered into steel hot rolled coil forward contracts which qualified as a cash flow hedge of the variability in the cash flows attributable to future steel purchases. There are no outstanding steel coil forward contracts at December, 26, 2020.
Natural gas is a significant commodity used in our factories, especially in our Coatings segment galvanizing operations, where natural gas is used to heat tanks that enable the hot-dipped galvanizing process. Natural gas prices are volatile and we mitigate some of this volatility through the use of derivative commodity instruments. Our current policy is to manage this commodity price risk for 0-50% of our U.S. natural gas requirements for the upcoming 6-12 months through the purchase of natural gas swaps based on NYMEX futures prices for delivery in the month being hedged. The objective of this policy is to mitigate the impact on our earnings of sudden, significant increases in the price of natural gas. At December 26, 2020, we have open natural gas swaps for 60,000 MMBtu.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The following accounting policies involve judgments and estimates used in preparation of the consolidated financial statements. There is a substantial amount of management judgment used in preparing financial statements. We must make estimates on a number of items, such as impairments of long-lived assets, income taxes, revenue recognition for the product lines recognized over time, inventory obsolescence, and pension benefits. We base our estimates on our experience and on other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Further, we re-evaluate our estimates from time to time and as circumstances change. Actual results may differ under different assumptions or conditions. The selection and application of our critical accounting policies are discussed annually with our audit committee.
Depreciation, Amortization and Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Our long-lived assets consist primarily of property, plant and equipment, right-of-use (lease) assets, and goodwill and intangible assets acquired in business acquisitions. We have assigned useful lives to our property, plant and equipment and certain intangible assets ranging from 3 to 40 years. Upon adoption of ASC 842, Leases in 2019, the Company impaired the right-of-use asset for one of our galvanizing facilities in Australia as it will not generate sufficient cash flows to recover the carrying value. Impairment losses were recorded in 2020 and 2018 as facilities were closed and certain fixed assets were no longer expected to be used as a result of our restructuring plans.
We identified twelve reporting units for purposes of evaluating goodwill and we annually evaluate our reporting units for goodwill impairment during the third fiscal quarter, which usually coincides with our strategic planning process. We assess the value of our reporting units using after-tax cash flows from operations (less capital expenses) discounted to present value. The key assumptions in the discounted cash flow analysis are the discount rate and the projected cash flows. We also use sensitivity analysis to determine the impact of changes in discount rates and cash flow forecasts on the valuation of the reporting units. For our solar tracking structure reporting unit, we project meaningful annual revenue growth for the foreseeable future due to strong market conditions. Therefore, we valued the terminal value for this reporting unit using a multiple of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA), as that is the valuation technique we’d
expect a third party to use. We analyze EBITDA multiples for other industrial companies with similar product lines in determining what to use in the model. For both the 2020 and 2019 annual impairment test, we did not first perform the qualitative assessment of each of our reporting units using our judgment.
Our access systems reporting unit required an interim impairment test during fiscal 2020 due to various economic forecasts showing a depressed price of oil for the next few years. A revised view of the Australian market performed in conjunction with the executed restructuring activities required a re-assessment of the financial projections for this reporting unit resulting in lower projected net sales, operating income, and cash flows for this reporting unit. Accordingly, we recognized a $12.6 million impairment of goodwill in the second quarter of 2020. The estimated fair value of all of our reporting units exceeded their respective carrying value, so no goodwill was impaired during our annual impairment test in 2020. A goodwill impairment of $14.4 million, which represents all of the goodwill of the offshore and other complex steel reporting unit, was recorded in the third quarter of 2018.
If our assumptions on discount rates and future cash flows change as a result of events or circumstances, and we believe these assets may have declined in value, then we may record impairment charges, resulting in lower profits. Our reporting units are all cyclical and their sales and profitability may fluctuate from year to year. The Company continues to monitor changes in the global economy that could impact future operating results of its reporting units. If such conditions arise, the Company will test a given reporting unit for impairment prior to the annual test. In the evaluation of our reporting units, we look at the long-term prospects for the reporting unit and recognize that current performance may not be the best indicator of future prospects or value, which requires management judgment.
Our indefinite-lived intangible assets consist of trade names. We assess the values of these assets apart from goodwill as part of the annual impairment testing. We use the relief-from-royalty method to evaluate our trade names, under which the value of a trade name is determined based on a royalty that could be charged to a third party for using the trade name in question. The royalty, which is based on a reasonable rate applied against estimated future sales, is tax-effected and discounted to present value. The most significant assumptions in this evaluation include estimated future sales, the royalty rate and the after-tax discount rate. For our evaluation purposes, the royalty rates used vary between 0.5% and 1.5% of sales and the after-tax discount rate of 12.0% to 15.0%, which we estimate to be the after-tax cost of capital for such assets.
In conjunction with the interim goodwill impairment test of access systems, impairment indicators were noted in the Webforge and Locker trade names. We recognized a resulting impairment charge of $3.9 million against these two trade names in second quarter of 2020. We performed our annual impairment test of all trade named in the third quarter of 2020 and determined none were impaired. In 2018, an impairment of $1.4 million was recorded against the offshore and other complex steel structures trade name (Valmont SM).
Inventories
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost, determined on a first-in, first-out basis, or net realizable value. We write down slow-moving and obsolete inventory by the difference between the value of the inventory and our estimate of the reduced value based on potential future uses, the likelihood that overstocked inventory will be sold and the expected selling prices of the inventory. If our ability to realize value on slow-moving or obsolete inventory is less favorable than assumed, additional inventory write downs may be required.
Income Taxes
We record valuation allowances to reduce our deferred tax assets to amounts that are more likely than not to be realized. We consider future taxable income expectations and tax-planning strategies in assessing the need for the valuation allowance. If we estimate a deferred tax asset is not likely to be fully realized in the future, a valuation allowance to decrease the amount of the deferred tax asset would decrease net earnings in the period the determination was made. Likewise, if we subsequently determine that we are able to realize all or part of a net deferred tax asset in the future, an adjustment reducing the valuation allowance would increase net earnings in the period such determination was made.
At December 26, 2020, we had approximately $81.9 million in deferred tax assets relating to tax credits and loss carryforwards, with a valuation allowance of $44.5 million, including $2.7 million in valuation allowances remaining in the Delta entities related to capital loss carryforwards, which are unlikely ever to be realized. If circumstances related to our deferred tax assets change in the future, we may be required to increase or decrease the valuation allowance on these assets, resulting in an increase or decrease in income tax expense and a reduction or increase in net income. Also, we consider the earnings in our greater than 50% owned non-U.S. subsidiaries to not be indefinitely reinvested and, accordingly, we have a
deferred tax liability of $3.9 million related to these unremitted foreign earnings for future taxes that will be incurred when cash is repatriated.
We are subject to examination by taxing authorities in the various countries in which we operate. The tax years subject to examination vary by jurisdiction. We regularly consider the likelihood of additional income tax assessments in each of these taxing jurisdictions based on our experiences related to prior audits and our understanding of the facts and circumstances of the related tax issues. We include in current income tax expense any changes to accruals for potential tax deficiencies. If our judgments related to tax deficiencies differ from our actual experience, our income tax expense could increase or decrease in a given fiscal period.
Pension Benefits
Delta Ltd. maintains a defined benefit pension plan for qualifying employees in the United Kingdom. There are no active employees as members in the plan. Independent actuaries assist in properly measuring the liabilities and expenses associated with accounting for pension benefits to eligible employees. In order to use actuarial methods to value the liabilities and expenses, we must make several assumptions. The critical assumptions used to measure pension obligations and expenses are the discount rate and expected rate of return on pension assets.
We evaluate our critical assumptions at least annually. Key assumptions are based on the following factors:
• Discount rate is based on the yields available on AA-rated corporate bonds with durational periods similar to that of the pension liabilities.
• Expected return on plan assets is based on our asset allocation mix and our historical return, taking into consideration current and expected market conditions. Most of the assets in the pension plan are invested in corporate bonds, the expected return of which are estimated based on the yield available on AA rated corporate bonds. The long-term expected returns on equities are based on historic performance over the long-term.
• Inflation is based on the estimated change in the consumer price index (“CPI”) or the retail price index (“RPI”), depending on the relevant plan provisions.
The discount rate used to measure the defined benefit obligation was 1.40% at December 26, 2020. The following tables present the key assumptions used to measure pension expense for 2021 and the estimated impact on 2021 pension expense relative to a change in those assumptions:
Revenue Recognition
Effective the first day of fiscal 2018, we adopted the requirements of Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606). Please see note 1 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on the new standard and the cumulative effect from the modified retrospective adjustment.
We determine the appropriate revenue recognition for our contracts by analyzing the type, terms and conditions of each contract or arrangement with a customer. We have no contracts with customers, under any product line, where we could earn variable consideration. With the exception of our Utility segment and the wireless communication structures product line, our inventory is interchangeable for a variety of the product line’s customers. There is one performance obligation for revenue recognition. Our Irrigation and Coatings segments recognize revenue at a point in time, which is when the service has been performed or when the goods ship; this is the same time that the customer is billed. Lighting, traffic, highway safety, and access system product lines within the ESS segment recognize revenue and bill customers at a point in time, which is typically when the product ships or when it is delivered, as stipulated in the customer contract.
The following provides additional information about our contracts with utility and wireless communication structures customers, where the revenue is recognized over time, the judgments we make in accounting for those contracts, and the resulting amounts recognized in our financial statements.
Accounting for utility structures and wireless communication monopole contracts: Steel and concrete utility and wireless communication monopole structures are engineered to customer specifications resulting in limited ability to sell the structure to a different customer if an order is canceled after production commences. The continuous transfer of control to the customer is evidenced either by contractual termination clauses or by our rights to payment for work performed to-date plus a reasonable profit as the products do not have an alternative use to us. Since control is transferring over time, revenue is recognized based on the extent of progress towards completion of the performance obligation. We have certain wireless communication structures customers' contracts where we do not have the right to payment for work performed. In those instances, we recognize revenue at a point in time which is time of shipment of the structure.
The selection of the method to measure progress towards completion requires judgment. For our steel and concrete utility and wireless communication structure product lines, we recognize revenue on an inputs basis, using total production hours incurred to-date for each order as a percentage of total hours estimated to produce the order. The completion percentage is applied to the order’s total revenue and total estimated costs to determine reported revenue, cost of goods sold and gross profit. Our enterprise resource planning (ERP) system captures the total costs incurred to-date and the total production hours, both incurred to-date and forecast to complete. Revenue from the offshore and other complex steel structures business is also recognized using an inputs method, based on the cost-to-cost measure of progress. Under the cost-to-cost measure of progress, the extent of progress towards completion is measured based on the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs at completion of the performance obligation.
Management must make assumptions and estimates regarding manufacturing labor hours and wages, the usage and cost of materials, and manufacturing burden / overhead recovery rates for each production facility. For our steel, concrete and wireless communication structures, production of an order, once started, is typically completed within three months. Projected profitability on open production orders is reviewed and updated monthly. We elected the practical expedient to not disclose the partially satisfied performance obligation at the end of the period when the contract has an original expected duration of one year or less.
We also have a few steel structure customer orders in a fiscal year that require one or two years to complete, due to the quantity of structures. Burden rates and routed production hours, per structure, will be adjusted if and when actual costs incurred are significantly higher than what had been originally projected. This resets the timing of revenue recognition for future periods so it is better aligned with the new production schedule. For our offshore and other complex steel structures, we update the estimates of total costs to complete each order quarterly. Based on these updates, revenue in the current period may reflect adjustments for amounts that had been previously recognized. During fiscal 2020 and 2019, there were no changes to inputs/estimates which resulted in adjustments to revenue for production that occurred prior to the beginning of the year. A provision for loss on the performance obligation is recognized if and when an order is projected to be at a loss, whether or not production has started.