ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following management’s discussion and analysis is provided in addition to the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes to assist in understanding our results of operations and financial condition.
In December 2019, VMware completed the acquisition of Pivotal Software, Inc. (“Pivotal”), which was, at the time, a subsidiary of VMware’s parent company, Dell Technologies Inc. (“Dell”). The purchase of the controlling interest in Pivotal from Dell was accounted for as a transaction between entities under common control in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 805-50, Business Combination - Related Issues, which requires retrospective combination of entities for all periods presented, as if the combination had been in effect since the inception of common control. As such, prior period
financial information has been recast. The recast financial statements combine VMware’s historical financial results with those of Pivotal.
Additionally, effective with the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, VMware is presenting new revenue and cost of revenue line items entitled, “subscription and SaaS revenue” and “cost of subscription and SaaS revenue.” Previously, subscription and software-as-a-service (“SaaS”) revenue was referred to as “hybrid cloud subscription and SaaS revenue” and was allocated between license revenue and services revenue on the consolidated statements of income. In light of our recent acquisitions, management decided to separately present revenue recognized from subscription and SaaS offerings as management believes it provides a more meaningful representation of the nature of its revenue. Revenue and its related costs from prior periods were reclassified to conform to the current presentation.
Period-over-period changes are calculated based upon the respective underlying, non-rounded data. We refer to our fiscal years ended January 29, 2021, January 31, 2020 and February 1, 2019 as “fiscal 2021,” “fiscal 2020,” and “fiscal 2019,” respectively. Unless the context requires otherwise, we are referring to VMware, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries when we use the terms “VMware,” the “Company,” “we,” “our” or “us.”
Discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 26, 2020.
Overview
We originally pioneered the development and application of virtualization technologies with x86 server-based computing, separating application software from the underlying hardware. Information technology (“IT”) driven innovation continues to disrupt markets and industries. Technologies emerge faster than organizations can absorb, creating increasingly complex environments. IT is working at an accelerated pace to harness new technologies, platforms and cloud models, ultimately guiding businesses through a digital transformation. To take on these challenges, we are working with customers in the areas of hybrid and multi-cloud, modern applications, networking, security and digital workspaces. Our software provides a flexible digital foundation to enable customers in their digital transformations.
Our portfolio supports and addresses the key priorities of our customers including accelerating their cloud journey, migrating and modernizing their applications, empowering digital workspaces, transforming networking and embracing intrinsic security. We enable customers to digitally transform their operations as they ready their applications, infrastructure and employees for constantly evolving business needs.
We sell our solutions using enterprise agreements (“EAs”) or as part of our non-EA, or transactional, business. EAs are comprehensive offerings that may include license and subscription and SaaS, offered both directly by us and through certain channel partners that also provide for multi-year maintenance and support. We continue to experience strong renewals resulting in additional license sales of both our existing and newer products and solutions.
Our vSphere and vRealize Cloud Management products form the foundation of our customers’ private cloud environments and provide the capabilities for our customers to extend their private cloud to the public cloud and to help them run, manage, secure and connect all their applications across all clouds and devices. During fiscal 2021, we saw a decline in our on-premises license sales, which were negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
During fiscal 2021, revenue growth in our subscription and SaaS offerings was primarily driven by our VMware Cloud Provider Program (“VCPP”), VMware Workspace ONE (“Workspace ONE”), VMware Tanzu, VMware Cloud on AWS and VMware Carbon Black Cloud. We expect revenue growth derived from our subscription and SaaS offerings to continue. In addition, we expect operating margin to be negatively impacted in fiscal 2022 as a result of our incremental investment in our subscription and SaaS portfolio.
During fiscal 2021, we saw an increase in the portion of our sales occurring through our subscription and SaaS offerings compared to the portion of our on-premises solutions sold with perpetual licenses. As this trend continues, a greater portion of our revenue will be recognized over time as subscription and SaaS revenue rather than license revenue, which is typically recognized in the fiscal period in which sales occur. As a result, the rate of growth in our license revenue, which has historically been viewed as a leading indicator of our business performance, may be less relevant and we believe that the overall growth rate of our combined license and subscription and SaaS revenue, as well as the growth in remaining performance obligations, will become better indicators of our future growth prospects.
Dell Go-to-Market Initiatives
We continue joint marketing, sales, branding and product development efforts with Dell and other Dell companies to enhance the collective value we deliver to our mutual customers. During fiscal 2021, revenue from Dell, including purchases of
products and services directly from us, as well as through our channel partners, accounted for 35% of our consolidated revenue. These purchases included Dell as an original equipment manufacturer (“OEM”), which accounted for 12% of our revenue from Dell, or 4% of our consolidated revenue, during fiscal 2021. The remaining revenue from Dell consisted of Dell acting as a distributor to other non-Dell resellers, reselling products and services as a reseller or purchasing products and services for its own internal use. On certain transactions, Dell Financial Services (“DFS”) also provided financing to our end users at our end users’ discretion.
COVID-19 Impact
The worldwide spread of COVID-19 has resulted in, and may continue to cause, a global slowdown of economic activity while also disrupting sales channels and marketing activities for an unknown period of time until the disease is contained. While the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material adverse financial impact on our operations to date, the future course of the pandemic, any resulting economic impact and the degree and rate of economic recovery remain highly uncertain and continue to rapidly evolve. Although the pandemic has not had the level of financial impact on our business in fiscal 2021 we initially expected, we did experience negative impacts on our sales and certain of our financial results and there continues to be uncertainty regarding the economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and the extent to which it will have a negative impact on our sales and our financial results into fiscal 2022. For example, license revenue decreased during fiscal 2021 due in part to the effects of COVID-19 as a number of our customers’ business plans were impacted by the pandemic. We also expect our operating margin to benefit into fiscal 2022 from some of the short-term COVID-19 impacts on our operating expenses, including travel-, employee- and facilities-related costs.
We continue to closely monitor the impact of the pandemic on all aspects of our business.
Results of Operations
Approximately 70% of our sales are denominated in the United States (“U.S.”) dollar. In certain countries, however, we also invoice and collect in various foreign currencies, principally euro, British pound, Japanese yen, Australian dollar, and Chinese renminbi. In addition, we incur and pay operating expenses in currencies other than the U.S. dollar. As a result, our financial statements, including our revenue, operating expenses, unearned revenue and the resulting cash flows derived from the U.S. dollar equivalent of foreign currency transactions, are affected by foreign exchange fluctuations.
Revenue
Our revenue during the periods presented was as follows (dollars in millions):
Revenue from our subscription offerings consisted primarily of our VCPP cloud-based offerings that are billed to customers on a consumption basis and revenue from VMware Tanzu and other offerings that are billed on a subscription basis. Revenue from our SaaS offerings consisted primarily of our Unified Endpoint Management mobile solution within Workspace ONE, VMware Cloud on AWS, CloudHealth by VMware and VMware SD-WAN by VeloCloud offerings, and newer SaaS offerings, such as VMware Carbon Black Cloud.
License revenue relating to the sale of on-premises licenses that are part of a multi-year contract is generally recognized upon delivery of the underlying license, whereas revenue derived from our subscription and SaaS offerings is generally recognized over time as customers consume the services or ratably over the term of the subscription, commencing upon provisioning of the service.
License Revenue
License revenue decreased during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, as a result of the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on license sales, and due to a shift in demand from our on-premises solutions sold with perpetual licenses to cloud-based solutions. Additionally, as customers adopt our cloud-based offerings, license revenue may be lower and subject to greater fluctuation in the future, driven by a higher percentage of cloud-based offerings being sold as well as the variability of large deals between fiscal quarters, which deals historically have had a large license revenue impact.
Subscription and SaaS Revenue
Subscription and SaaS revenue increased during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. Revenue growth from our VCPP, Workspace ONE, VMware Tanzu, VMware Cloud on AWS and VMware Carbon Black Cloud offerings continued to contribute to subscription and SaaS revenue growth during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020.
Services Revenue
During fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, software maintenance revenue continued to benefit from maintenance contracts sold in previous periods. In each period presented, customers purchased, on a weighted-average basis, approximately three years of support and maintenance with each new license purchased.
Professional services revenue increased during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. Services we provide through our technical account managers and our continued focus on solution deployments, including our networking, security, cloud management and digital workspace offerings, contributed to the increase in professional services revenue. We continue to also focus on enabling our partners to deliver professional services for our solutions, and as such, our professional services revenue may vary as we continue to leverage our partners. Timing of service engagements will also impact the amount of professional services revenue we recognize during a period.
Unearned Revenue
Unearned revenue as of the periods presented consisted of the following (table in millions):
Unearned subscription and SaaS revenue is generally recognized over time as customers consume the services or ratably over the term of the subscription, commencing upon provisioning of the service.
Unearned software maintenance revenue is attributable to our maintenance contracts and is generally recognized ratably over the contract duration. The weighted-average remaining contractual term as of January 29, 2021 was approximately two years. Unearned professional services revenue results primarily from prepaid professional services and is generally recognized as the services are performed.
Remaining Performance Obligations and Backlog
Remaining Performance Obligations
Remaining performance obligations represent the aggregate amount of the transaction price in contracts allocated to performance obligations not delivered, or partially undelivered, as of the end of the reporting period. Remaining performance
obligations include unearned revenue, multi-year contracts with future installment payments and certain unfulfilled orders against accepted customer contracts at the end of any given period.
As of January 29, 2021, the aggregate transaction price allocated to remaining performance obligations was $11.3 billion, of which approximately 55% is expected to be recognized as revenue over the next twelve months and the remainder thereafter. As of January 31, 2020, the aggregate transaction price allocated to remaining performance obligations was $10.3 billion, of which approximately 54% was expected to be recognized as revenue during fiscal 2021, and the remainder thereafter.
Backlog
Backlog is comprised of unfulfilled purchase orders or unfulfilled executed agreements at the end of a given period and is net of related estimated rebates and marketing development funds. Backlog consists of licenses, subscription and SaaS, and services. As of January 29, 2021, our total backlog was $93 million, and our backlog related to licenses was $23 million. For our backlog related to licenses, we generally expect to deliver and recognize as revenue during the following quarter. Backlog totaling $18 million as of January 29, 2021 was excluded from the remaining performance obligations because such contracts are subject to cancellation until fulfillment of the performance obligation occurs.
As of January 31, 2020, our total backlog was $18 million, and our backlog related to licenses was $5 million. The amount excluded from the remaining performance obligations because such contracts are subject to cancellation until fulfillment of the performance obligation occurs was not material as of January 31, 2020.
The amount and composition of backlog will fluctuate period to period, and backlog is managed based upon multiple considerations, including product and geography. We do not believe the amount of backlog is indicative of future sales or revenue or that the mix of backlog at the end of any given period correlates with actual sales performance of a particular geography or particular products and services.
Cost of License Revenue, Cost of Subscription and SaaS Revenue, Cost of Services Revenue and Operating Expenses
Our cost of services revenue and operating expenses primarily reflected increasing cash-based employee-related expenses, driven by incremental growth in salaries and headcount, both organic and through acquisitions, across most of our income statement expense categories, offset in part by decreased travel-related costs resulting from travel restrictions imposed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic for fiscal 2021.
Cost of License Revenue
Cost of license revenue primarily consists of the cost of fulfillment of our SD-WAN offerings, royalty costs in connection with technology licensed from third-party providers and amortization of intangible assets. The cost of fulfillment of our software and hardware SD-WAN offerings includes personnel costs and related overhead associated with delivery of our products.
Cost of license revenue during the periods presented was as follows (dollars in millions):
Cost of license revenue remained relatively consistent in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020.
Cost of Subscription and SaaS Revenue
Cost of subscription and SaaS revenue primarily includes personnel costs and related overhead associated with hosted services supporting our SaaS offerings. Additionally, cost of subscription and SaaS revenue also includes depreciation of equipment supporting our subscription and SaaS offerings.
Cost of subscription and SaaS revenue during the periods presented was as follows (dollars in millions):
Cost of subscription and SaaS revenue increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily due to increased amortization of intangible assets of $83 million and growth in costs associated with hosted services to support our SaaS offerings of $64 million. The increase was also driven by increased equipment and depreciation of $31 million, as well as growth in cash-based employee-related cost of $16 million, which was driven by incremental growth in headcount and salaries, both organic and through acquisitions.
Cost of Services Revenue
Cost of services revenue primarily includes the costs of personnel and related overhead to deliver technical support for our products and costs to deliver professional services. Additionally, cost of services revenue includes depreciation of equipment supporting our service offerings.
Cost of services revenue during the periods presented was as follows (dollars in millions):
Cost of services revenue increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily due to growth in cash-based employee-related expenses of $112 million, primarily driven by incremental growth in headcount and salaries, both organic and through acquisitions. The increase was also driven by increased stock-based compensation of $16 million, primarily driven by increased restricted stock unit awards granted to our employees. These increases were partially offset by decreased travel-related costs of $49 million, resulting from travel restrictions imposed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as decreased facilities-related costs of $15 million.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses include the personnel and related overhead associated with the development of our product software and service offerings. We continue to invest in and focus on expanding our subscription and SaaS offerings.
Research and development expenses during the periods presented were as follows (dollars in millions):
Research and development expenses increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily due to growth in cash-based employee-related expenses of $237 million, primarily driven by incremental growth in headcount and salaries, both organic and through acquisitions, as well as increased stock-based compensation of $65 million, primarily driven by increased restricted stock unit awards granted to our employees. The increase was also driven by increased equipment and depreciation of $51 million. These increases were partially offset by decreased travel-related costs of $34 million resulting from travel restrictions imposed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as a decrease in capitalized internal-use software development costs of $21 million and facilities-related costs of $13 million.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses include personnel costs, sales commissions and related overhead associated with the sale and marketing of our license, subscription and SaaS and services offerings, as well as the cost of product launches and marketing initiatives. A significant portion of our sales commissions are deferred and recognized over the expected period of benefit.
Sales and marketing expenses during the periods presented were as follows (dollars in millions):
Sales and marketing expenses increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily due to growth in cash-based employee-related expenses of $154 million, primarily driven by incremental growth in headcount and salaries, both organic and through acquisitions, as well as increased stock-based compensation of $28 million, primarily driven by increased restricted stock unit awards granted to our employees. The increase was also driven by increased equipment and depreciation of $17 million. These increases were partially offset by decreased travel-related costs of $169 million resulting from travel restrictions imposed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses include personnel and related overhead costs to support the business. These expenses include the costs associated with finance, human resources, IT infrastructure and legal, as well as expenses related to corporate costs and initiatives.
General and administrative expenses during the periods presented were as follows (dollars in millions):
General and administrative expenses decreased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by a decrease in litigation expenses of $474 million due to the derecognition of accrued litigation loss of $237 million recognized in fiscal 2020 in connection with certain patent litigation, as well as decreased acquisition-related costs of $41 million. The decrease was also driven by decreased travel-related costs of $23 million resulting from travel restrictions imposed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as decreased equipment and depreciation of $17 million, stock based compensation of $11 million primarily due to departure of certain executives, and third-party professional services costs of $10 million. These decreases were partially offset by growth in cash-based employee-related expenses of $47 million, primarily driven by incremental growth in headcount and salaries, both organic and through acquisitions, as well as an increase in facilities-related cost of $31 million.
Refer to Note E to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for
a description of certain claims and litigation.
Realignment
Realignment expenses during the periods presented were as follows (dollars in millions):
During the third quarter of fiscal 2021, we approved a plan to streamline our operations and better align resources with our business priorities. As a result of this action, approximately 280 positions were eliminated in fiscal 2021. We recognized $42 million of severance-related realignment expenses in fiscal 2021 on the consolidated statements of income. Actions associated with this plan were substantially complete by the end of fiscal 2021.
Actions associated with a plan initiated in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 were completed during fiscal 2021.
Interest Expense
Interest expense during the periods presented was as follows (dollars in millions):
Interest expense increased in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily driven by the three series of unsecured senior notes issued during the first quarter of fiscal 2021 in the aggregate amount of $2.0 billion, and the senior unsecured term loan facility entered into during the third quarter of fiscal 2020 (the “Term Loan”) and repaid during the third quarter of fiscal 2021.
Other Income (Expense), net
Other income (expense), net during the periods presented was as follows (dollars in millions):
The change in other income (expense), net in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily driven by a net unrealized gain of $163 million recognized on one of our investments in equity securities, which completed its initial public offering during the third quarter of fiscal 2021, compared to an unrealized gain of $21 million recognized in fiscal 2020. Additionally, unrealized losses on our investments in privately held companies were $14 million in fiscal 2021, compared to unrealized gains of $16 million in fiscal 2020.
The fair value of the publicly traded investment is determined primarily using the quoted market price of its common stock. As a result, any volatility in its publicly traded common stock introduces a degree of variability to our consolidated statements of income.
Income Tax Provision (Benefit)
The following table summarizes our income tax provision (benefit) during the periods presented (dollars in millions):
The change in our effective income tax rate in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily driven by a decrease in discrete tax benefits related to intra-group transfers of certain of our intellectual property rights. During fiscal 2020, a discrete tax benefit of $4.9 billion was recognized with a deferred tax asset due to an intra-group transfer of certain of our intellectual property rights to our Irish subsidiary. During fiscal 2021, a discrete tax benefit of $59 million was recognized with a deferred tax asset due to an intra-group transfer of Pivotal’s intellectual property rights to our Irish subsidiary. The change was also driven by a decrease in excess tax benefits recognized, which were $41 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $182 million in fiscal 2020.
We are included in Dell’s consolidated tax group for U.S. federal income tax purposes and will continue to be included in Dell’s consolidated tax group for periods in which Dell beneficially owns at least 80% of the total voting power and value of our combined outstanding Class A and Class B common stock as calculated for U.S. federal income tax purposes. The percentage of voting power and value calculated for U.S. federal income tax purposes may differ from the percentage of outstanding shares beneficially owned by Dell due to the greater voting power of our Class B common stock as compared to our Class A common stock and other factors. Each member of a consolidated tax group during any part of a consolidated return year is jointly and severally liable for tax on the consolidated return of such year and for any subsequently determined deficiency thereon. Should Dell’s ownership fall below 80% of the total voting power or value of our outstanding stock in any period, then we would no longer be included in the Dell consolidated tax group for U.S. federal income tax purposes, and our U.S. federal income tax would be reported separately from that of the Dell consolidated tax group.
Although our results are included in the Dell consolidated return for U.S. federal income tax purposes, our income tax provision or benefit is calculated primarily as though we were a separate taxpayer. However, under certain circumstances, transactions between us and Dell are assessed using consolidated tax return rules.
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, we completed the acquisition of Pivotal. Pivotal will continue to file its separate tax return for U.S. federal income tax purposes as it left the Dell consolidated tax group at the time of Pivotal’s initial public offering (“IPO”) in April 2018.
Our effective tax rate in the future will depend upon the proportion of our income before provision for income taxes earned in the U.S. and in jurisdictions with a tax rate lower than the U.S. statutory rate. Our non-U.S. earnings are primarily earned by
our subsidiary organized in Ireland, where the rate of taxation is lower than our U.S. tax rate, and as such, our annual effective tax rate can be significantly affected by the composition of our earnings in the U.S. and non-U.S. jurisdictions. Our future effective tax rate may be affected by such factors as changes in tax laws, changes in our business or statutory rates, changing interpretation of existing laws or regulations, the impact of accounting for stock-based compensation and the recognition of excess tax benefits or tax deficiencies within the income tax provision or benefit in the period in which they occur, the impact of accounting for business combinations, our acquisition of Pivotal, which was accounted for as a common control transaction, shifts in the amount of earnings in the U.S. compared with other regions in the world and overall levels of income before tax, changes in our international organization, as well as the expiration of statute of limitations and settlements of audits.
Our Relationship with Dell
The information provided below includes a summary of transactions with Dell and Dell’s consolidated subsidiaries (collectively, “Dell”).
Transactions with Dell
We engaged with Dell in the following ongoing related party transactions, which resulted in revenue and receipts, and unearned revenue for us:
•Pursuant to OEM and reseller arrangements, Dell integrates or bundles our products and services with Dell’s products and sells them to end users. Dell also acts as a distributor, purchasing our standalone products and services for resale to end-user customers through VMware-authorized resellers. Revenue under these arrangements is presented net of related marketing development funds and rebates paid to Dell. In addition, we provide professional services to end users based upon contractual agreements with Dell.
•Dell purchases products and services from us for its internal use.
•From time to time, we and Dell enter into agreements to collaborate on technology projects, and Dell pays us for services or reimburses us for costs incurred by us, in connection with such projects.
During the years ended January 29, 2021, January 31, 2020 and February 1, 2019, revenue from Dell accounted for 35%, 31% and 25% of our consolidated revenue, respectively. During the years ended January 29, 2021, January 31, 2020 and February 1, 2019, revenue recognized on transactions where Dell acted as an OEM accounted for 12%, 12% and 13% of revenue from Dell, respectively, or 4%, 4% and 3% of our consolidated revenue, respectively.
Dell purchases our products and services directly from us, as well as through our channel partners. Information about our revenue and receipts, and unearned revenue from such arrangements, for the periods presented consisted of the following (table in millions):
Sales through Dell as a distributor, which is included in reseller revenue, continues to grow rapidly.
Customer deposits resulting from transactions with Dell were $214 million and $194 million as of January 29, 2021 and January 31, 2020, respectively.
We engaged with Dell in the following ongoing related party transactions, which resulted in costs to us:
•We purchase and lease products and purchase services from Dell.
•From time to time, we and Dell enter into agreements to collaborate on technology projects, and we pay Dell for services provided to us by Dell related to such projects.
•In certain geographic regions where we do not have an established legal entity, we contract with Dell subsidiaries for support services and support from Dell personnel who are managed by us. The costs incurred by Dell on our behalf related to these employees are charged to us with a mark-up intended to approximate costs that would have been incurred had we contracted for such services with an unrelated third party. These costs are included as expenses on our consolidated statements of income and primarily include salaries, benefits, travel and occupancy expenses. Dell also
incurs certain administrative costs on our behalf in the U.S. that are recorded as expenses on our consolidated statements of income.
•In certain geographic regions, Dell files a consolidated indirect tax return, which includes value added taxes and other indirect taxes collected by us from our customers. We remit the indirect taxes to Dell, and Dell remits the tax payment to the foreign governments on our behalf.
•From time to time, we invoice end users on behalf of Dell for certain services rendered by Dell. Cash related to these services is collected from the end user by us and remitted to Dell.
•From time to time, we enter into agency arrangements with Dell that enable us to sell our subscriptions and services, leveraging the Dell enterprise relationships and end customer contracts.
Information about our payments for such arrangements during the periods presented consisted of the following (table in millions):
(1) Amount includes indirect taxes that were remitted to Dell during the periods presented.
We also purchase Dell products through Dell’s channel partners. Purchases of Dell products through Dell’s channel partners were not significant during the periods presented.
From time to time, we and Dell also enter into joint marketing, sales, branding and product development arrangements, for which both parties may incur costs.
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, we entered into an arrangement with Dell to transfer approximately 250 professional services employees from Dell to us. These employees are experienced in providing professional services that deliver our technology and this transfer centralizes these resources within our Company in order to serve our customers more efficiently and effectively. The transfer was substantially completed during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020 and did not have a material impact to the consolidated financial statements. We also expect that Dell will continue to resell our consulting solutions.
During the third quarter of fiscal 2019, we acquired technology and employees related to the Dell EMC Service Assurance Suite, which provides root cause analysis management software for communications service providers, from Dell. The purchase of the Dell EMC Service Assurance Suite was accounted for as a transaction by entities under common control. The amount of the purchase price in excess of the historical cost of the acquired assets was recognized as a reduction to retained earnings on the consolidated balance sheets. Transition services provided by Dell over a period of 18 months, starting from the date of the acquisition, were not significant.
Dell Financial Services
DFS provided financing to certain of our end users at our end users’ discretion. Upon acceptance of the financing arrangement by both our end users and DFS, amounts classified as trade accounts receivable are reclassified to due from related parties, net on the consolidated balance sheets. Revenue recognized on transactions financed through DFS was recorded net of financing fees. Financing fees on arrangements accepted by both parties were $60 million, $66 million and $40 million during the years ended January 29, 2021, January 31, 2020 and February 1, 2019, respectively.
Due To/From Related Parties, Net
Amounts due to and from related parties, net as of the periods presented consisted of the following (table in millions):
(1) Includes an immaterial amount related to our current operating lease liabilities due to related parties.
We also recognized an immaterial amount related to non-current operating lease liabilities due to related parties. This amount has been included in operating lease liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets as of January 29, 2021 and January 31, 2020.
Amounts in due from related parties, net, excluding DFS and tax obligations, include the current portion of amounts due to and due from related parties. Amounts included in due from related parties, net are generally settled in cash within 60 days of each quarter-end.
Special Dividend
On July 1, 2018, VMware’s board of directors declared a conditional $11.0 billion Special Dividend, payable pro-rata to VMware stockholders as of the record date. The Special Dividend was paid on December 28, 2018 to stockholders of record as of the close of business on December 27, 2018 in the amount of $26.81 per outstanding share of VMware common stock. Dell was paid approximately $9.0 billion in cash as a result of its financial interest in VMware’s common stock as of the record date.
The Special Dividend was paid in connection with the closing of a transaction by Dell pursuant to which holders of Dell Class V common stock, which was designed to track the economic performance of VMware, exchanged the Dell Class V common stock for Dell Class C common stock or cash or both, resulting in the elimination of the Dell Class V common stock. Refer to Note Q to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
Notes Payable to Dell
As of January 29, 2021 and January 31, 2020, we had an outstanding promissory note payable to Dell in the principal amount of $270 million due December 1, 2022. The note may be prepaid without penalty or premium. Interest is payable quarterly in arrears at the annual rate of 1.75%. During each of the years ended January 29, 2021, January 31, 2020 and February 1, 2019, interest expense on the notes payable to Dell was not significant.
Other Related Party Transactions
Prior to the acquisition of Pivotal, certain members of Pivotal’s board of directors were executives of Ford Motor Company (“Ford”) and General Electric Company (“GE”), and these companies were customers of Pivotal. Revenue recognized from sales to Ford while it was a related party was not significant during the year ended January 31, 2020 and was $12 million during the year ended February 1, 2019. During the year ended February 1, 2019, revenue recognized from sales to GE while it was a related party was not significant. Subsequent to fiscal 2019, GE was no longer a related party. Subsequent to our acquisition of Pivotal, Ford was no longer a related party.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of the periods presented, we held cash and cash equivalents as follows (table in millions):
Cash equivalents primarily consisted of amounts invested in money market funds. We limit the amount of our investments with any single issuer and monitor the diversity of the portfolio and the amount of investments held at any single financial institution, thereby diversifying our credit risk.
We continue to expect that cash generated by operations will be our primary source of liquidity. We also continue to believe that existing cash, cash equivalents and our borrowing capacity, together with any cash generated from operations, will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next twelve months. While we believe these cash sources will be sufficient to fund our operations, our overall level of cash needs may be affected by capital allocation decisions that may include the number and size of acquisitions and stock repurchases, among other things. We remain committed to a balanced capital allocation policy through investing in our product and solution offerings, acquisitions and returning capital to stockholders through share repurchases. Additionally, given the unpredictable nature of our outstanding legal proceedings, an unfavorable resolution of one or more legal proceedings, claims, or investigations could have a negative impact on our overall liquidity.
On July 15, 2020, Dell announced that it is exploring potential alternatives with respect to its ownership interest in VMware, including a potential Spin-Off. VMware has formed a Special Committee to evaluate and engage in discussions and negotiations with Dell with respect to any proposal that may be made by Dell with respect to a Spin-off. As part of the discussions, VMware expects that it may negotiate with Dell the payment of a special cash dividend by VMware, which would
be paid on a pro rata basis to all VMware stockholders that VMware might fund, in part, through the incurrence of additional indebtedness.
The 2017 Tax Act imposed a Transition Tax and eliminated U.S. Federal taxes on foreign subsidiary distributions. The Transition Tax was calculated on a separate tax return basis. Our unpaid liabilities related to the Transition Tax as of January 29, 2021 was $564 million, which we expect to pay over the next five years pursuant to a letter agreement between Dell, EMC and VMware executed during the first quarter of fiscal 2020. Actual tax payments made to Dell pursuant to the tax sharing agreement may differ materially from our total estimated tax liability calculated on a separate tax return basis. The difference between our estimated liability and the amount paid to Dell is recognized as a component of additional paid-in capital, generally in the period in which the consolidated tax return is filed.
Our cash flows summarized for the periods presented were as follows (table in millions):
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities increased by $537 million during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, primarily driven by an increase in cash collections due to increased sales, as well as lower payments associated with lower travel spending due to the COVID-19 pandemic. These activities were partially offset by an increase in cash payments for employee-related expenses, including salaries and commissions, resulting primarily from growth in headcount, as well as increased tax payments during fiscal 2021.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities decreased by $2.0 billion during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, primarily driven by a decrease in cash used in business combinations.
Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities increased by $250 million during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was driven primarily by the repayment of the $1.5 billion Term Loan during fiscal 2021, as well as the redemption of the $1.3 billion unsecured senior note due August 21, 2020. These activities were partially offset by the net cash proceeds received from the issuance of long-term debt of $2.0 billion during fiscal 2021, as well as the cash payment for the acquisition of Pivotal during fiscal 2020 and a decrease of $389 million in repurchases of shares of our Class A common stock during fiscal 2021.
Unsecured Senior Notes
The following table summarizes the principal on our two series of unsecured senior notes issued August 21, 2017 and our three series of unsecured senior notes issued April 7, 2020 (collectively, the “Senior Notes”) as of January 29, 2021 (amounts in millions):
Interest on the Senior Notes issued on April 7, 2020 is payable semiannually in arrears, on May 15 and November 15 of each year, beginning November 15, 2020. The interest rate on each note issued on April 7, 2020 is subject to adjustment based on certain rating events. Interest on the Senior Notes issued on August 21, 2017 is payable semiannually in arrears, on February 21 and August 21 of each year. During the years ended January 29, 2021, January 31, 2020 and February 1, 2019, $114 million, $122 million and $122 million, respectively, was paid for interest related to the Senior Notes.
The Senior Notes also contain restrictive covenants that, in certain circumstances, limit our ability to create certain liens, to enter into certain sale and leaseback transactions and to consolidate, merge, sell or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of our assets.
On May 11, 2020, we exercised a make-whole call and redeemed the $1.3 billion unsecured senior note due August 21, 2020 at a premium. We intend to use the remaining net proceeds of the Senior Notes for general corporate purposes, including mergers and acquisitions, repayment of other indebtedness or stock repurchases.
Revolving Credit Facility
On September 12, 2017, we entered into an unsecured credit agreement establishing a revolving credit facility with a syndicate of lenders that provides us with a borrowing capacity of up to $1.0 billion, for general corporate purposes. The credit agreement contains certain representations, warranties and covenants. Commitments under the revolving credit facility are available for a period of five years, which may be extended, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions, by up to two one-year periods. As of January 29, 2021 and January 31, 2020, there was no outstanding borrowing under the revolving credit facility.
Senior Unsecured Term Loan Facility
On September 26, 2019, we entered into the Term Loan with a syndicate of lenders that provided us with a borrowing capacity of up to $2.0 billion through February 7, 2020, for general corporate purposes. During the third quarter of fiscal 2021, we repaid the outstanding balance of $1.5 billion on the Term Loan.
Note Payable to Dell
Refer to “Our Relationship with Dell” in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 for disclosure regarding our note payable to Dell.
Stock Repurchase Program
From time to time, we repurchase stock pursuant to authorized stock repurchase programs in open market transactions as permitted by securities laws and other legal requirements. We are not obligated to purchase any shares under our stock repurchase programs. The timing of any repurchases and the actual number of shares repurchased depends on a variety of factors, including our stock price, cash requirements for operations and business combinations, corporate and regulatory requirements and other market and economic conditions. Purchases may be discontinued at any time we believe additional purchases are not warranted. From time to time, we also purchase stock in private transactions, such as with Dell. All shares repurchased under our stock repurchase programs are retired.
Refer to Note Q to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for stock repurchase authorizations approved by our board of directors for the periods presented.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
Guarantees and Indemnification Obligations
We enter into agreements in the ordinary course of business with, among others, customers, distributors, resellers, system vendors and systems integrators. Most of these agreements require us to indemnify the other party against third-party claims alleging that one of our products infringes or misappropriates a patent, copyright, trademark, trade secret or other intellectual property right. Certain of these agreements require us to indemnify the other party against certain claims relating to property damage, personal injury, or the acts or omissions by us and our employees, agents or representatives.
We have agreements with certain vendors, financial institutions, lessors and service providers pursuant to which we have agreed to indemnify the other party for specified matters, such as acts and omissions by us and our employees, agents, or representatives.
We have procurement or license agreements with respect to technology that we have obtained the right to use in our products and agreements. Under some of these agreements, we have agreed to indemnify the supplier for certain claims that may be brought against such party with respect to our acts or omissions relating to the supplied products or technologies.
We have agreed to indemnify our directors and executive officers, to the extent legally permissible, against all liabilities reasonably incurred in connection with any action in which such individual may be involved by reason of such individual being
or having been a director or officer. Our by-laws and charter also provide for indemnification of our directors and officers to the extent legally permissible, against all liabilities reasonably incurred in connection with any action in which such individual may be involved by reason of such individual being or having been a director or executive officer. We also indemnify certain employees who provide service with respect to employee benefits plans, including, for example, the members of the Administrative Committee of the VMware 401(k) Plan, and employees who serve as directors or officers of our subsidiaries.
In connection with certain acquisitions, we have agreed to indemnify the former directors and officers of the acquired company in accordance with the acquired company’s by-laws and charter in effect immediately prior to the acquisition or in accordance with indemnification or similar agreements entered into by the acquired company and such persons. We typically purchase a “tail” directors and officers insurance policy, which should enable us to recover a portion of any future indemnification obligations related to the former directors and officers of an acquired company.
We are unable to determine the maximum potential amount under these indemnification agreements due to our limited history with prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each situation. Historically, costs related to these indemnification provisions have not been significant.
Contractual Obligations
We have various contractual obligations impacting our liquidity. The following represents our contractual obligations as of January 29, 2021 (table in millions):
(1)Consists of principal and interest payments on the Senior Notes. Refer to “Liquidity and Capital Resources” for a discussion of the public debt offering we issued on August 21, 2017 and April 7, 2020 in the aggregate principal amount of $4.8 billion as of January 29, 2021.
(2)Consists of principal and interest payments on the outstanding note payable to Dell. Refer to “Liquidity and Capital Resources” for a discussion of the $270 million note payable we entered into with Dell per the note exchange agreement from January 21, 2014.
(3)Consists of both operating and finance leases. Our operating leases are primarily for facility space and land. Amounts in the table above exclude legally binding minimum lease payments for leases signed but not yet commenced of $72 million, as well as expected sublease income.
(4)Consists of future cash payments related to the Transition Tax.
(5)As of January 29, 2021, we had $508 million of gross uncertain tax benefits, excluding interest and penalties. The timing of future payments relating to these obligations is highly uncertain. Based on the timing and outcome of examinations of our subsidiaries, the result of the expiration of statutes of limitations for specific jurisdictions or the timing and result of ruling requests from taxing authorities, it is reasonably possible that within the next 12 months total unrecognized tax benefits could be potentially reduced by approximately $14 million.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
In preparing our consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”), we are required to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the amounts reported on our financial statements and the accompanying disclosures. Estimates and assumptions about future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty and therefore require the exercise of judgment. We base our estimates, assumptions and judgments on historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates may change in future periods and will be recognized in the consolidated financial statements as new events occur and additional information becomes known. Actual results could differ from those estimates and any such differences
may be material to our financial statements. We believe that the critical accounting policies and estimates set forth below involve a higher degree of judgment and complexity in their application than our other significant accounting policies. Our senior management has reviewed our critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. Historically, our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to our critical accounting policies have not differed materially from actual results. Refer to Note A to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information on significant accounting policies and estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
As the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve, estimates and assumptions about future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty and therefore require increased judgment. These estimates and assumptions may change in future periods and will be recognized in the consolidated financial statements as new events occur and additional information becomes known. To the extent our actual results differ materially from those estimates and assumptions, our future financial statements could be affected.
Revenue Recognition
We derive revenue primarily from licensing software under perpetual licenses or consumption-based contracts and related software maintenance and support, software subscriptions (“subscriptions”), hosted services, training and consulting services. We account for a contract with a customer if all criteria defined by the guidance are met, including collectibility of consideration is probable. At inception of a contract with a customer, we evaluate whether the promised products and services represent distinct performance obligations within the context of the contract. Performance obligations that are both capable of being distinct on their own and distinct within the context of the contract are recognized on their own as distinct performance obligations. Performance obligations under which both of these two criteria are not met are recognized as a combined, single performance obligation. Determining whether our licenses, subscriptions and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately or together often involves assumptions and significant judgments that can have a significant impact on the timing and amount of revenue recognized.
Revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of licenses, subscription or services to our customer in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those licenses, subscriptions or services. Control of a promised license, subscription or service may be transferred to a customer either at a point in time or over time, which affects the timing of revenue recognition. Licenses that represent distinct performance obligations are recognized at a point in time when the software license keys have been made available to the customer. Licenses sold as part of our subscriptions that do not represent distinct performance obligations are recognized over time along with the associated services that form a combined performance obligation with the software. Management assesses relevant contractual terms in contracts with customers and applies significant judgment in identifying and accounting for all terms and conditions in certain contracts.
In addition, revenue from on-premises license software sold to OEMs is recognized when the sale to the end user occurs. Revenue is recognized upon reporting by the OEMs of their sales, and for the period where information of the underlying sales has not been made available, revenue is recognized based upon estimated sales. Our VCPP partners license on-premises software from us on a monthly basis under a usage-based model. Revenue recognition is based on fees associated with reported license consumption by the VCPP partners and includes estimates for the period when consumption information has not been made available. Certain contracts include third-party offerings and revenue may be recognized net of the third-party costs, based upon an assessment as to whether we had control of the underlying third-party offering.
We enter into revenue contracts with multiple performance obligations in which a customer may purchase combinations of licenses, maintenance and support, subscriptions, hosted services, training, consulting services, and rights to future products and services. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate total transaction value to the identified underlying performance obligations based on relative standalone selling price (“SSP”). We typically estimate SSP of services based on observable transactions when the services are sold on a standalone basis and those prices fall within a reasonable range. We utilize the residual approach to estimate SSP for products or services sold to customers due to highly variable pricing. Changes in assumptions or judgments used in determining standalone selling price could have a significant impact on the timing and amount of revenue we report in a particular period.
Professional services include design, implementation, training and consulting services. Professional services performed by us represent distinct performance obligations as they do not modify or customize licenses sold. These services are not highly interdependent or highly interrelated to licenses sold such that a customer would not be able to use the licenses without the professional services. Revenue from professional services engagements performed for a fixed fee, for which we are able to make reasonably dependable estimates of progress toward completion, is recognized based on progress. We believe this method of measurement provides the closest depiction of our performance in transferring control of the professional services.
Rebate Reserves
We offer rebates to certain channel partners, which are recognized as a reduction to revenue or unearned revenue. Rebates based on actual partner sales are recognized as a reduction to revenue as the underlying revenue is recognized. Rebates earned based upon partner achievement of cumulative level of sales are recognized as a reduction of revenue proportionally for each sale that is required to achieve the target.
The estimated reserves for channel rebates and sales incentives are based on channel partners’ actual performance against the terms and conditions of the programs, historical trends and the value of the rebates. The accuracy of these reserves for these rebates and sales incentives depends on our ability to estimate these items and could have a significant impact on the timing and amount of revenue we report.
Deferred Commissions
Sales commissions, including the employer portion of payroll taxes, earned by our sales force are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract, and are deferred and generally amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected period of benefit. The expected period of benefit is generally determined using the contract term or underlying technology life, if renewals are expected and the renewal commissions are not commensurate with the initial commissions. The determination of the expected period of benefit requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, including the life of the underlying technology and the estimated period of contract renewal. We believe the assumptions and estimates we have made are reasonable. Differences in the estimated period of benefit could have a significant impact on the timing and amount of amortization expense recognized.
Accounting for Income Taxes
We are included in Dell’s consolidated tax group for U.S. federal income tax purposes and will continue to be included in Dell’s consolidated group for periods in which Dell beneficially owns at least 80% of the total voting power and value of our combined outstanding Class A and Class B common stock as calculated for U.S. federal income tax purposes. The percentage of voting power and value calculated for U.S. federal income tax purposes may differ from the percentage of outstanding shares beneficially owned by Dell due to the greater voting power of our Class B common stock as compared to our Class A common stock and other factors. Each member of a consolidated group during any part of a consolidated return year is jointly and severally liable for tax on the consolidated return of such year and for any subsequently determined deficiency thereon.
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, we completed the acquisition of Pivotal. Pivotal will continue to file its separate tax return for U.S. federal income tax purposes as it has since left the Dell consolidated tax group at the time of Pivotal’s IPO in April 2018.
Our income tax expense and the related income tax balance sheet accounts is calculated primarily as though we were a separate taxpayer. However, under certain circumstances, transactions between us and Dell are assessed using consolidated tax return rules. The difference between the income taxes payable that is calculated on a separate tax return basis and the amount paid to Dell pursuant to our tax sharing agreement with Dell is presented as a component of additional paid-in capital, generally in the period in which the consolidated return is filed. Our assumptions, judgments and estimates used to calculate our income tax expense considers current tax laws, our interpretation of current tax laws and possible outcomes of current and future audits conducted by foreign and domestic tax authorities.
We establish reserves for income taxes to address potential exposures involving tax positions that could be challenged by federal, state and foreign tax authorities, which may result in proposed assessments. In the ordinary course of our global business there are many intercompany transactions, including the transfer of intellectual property, where the ultimate tax determination could be challenged by the tax authorities. In the instance of transfers of intellectual property, the related deferred tax asset recognized is based on the intellectual property’s current fair value. Management applies significant judgment when determining the fair value of the intellectual property, which serves as the tax basis of the deferred tax asset, and in evaluating the associated tax laws in the applicable jurisdictions. Our assumptions, estimates, and judgments used to determine the reserve relating to these positions considers current tax laws, interpretation of current tax laws and possible outcomes of current and future examinations conducted by tax authorities. As part of the Dell consolidated group, and separately, we are subject to the periodic examination of our income tax returns by the IRS and other domestic and foreign tax authorities. We regularly assess the likelihood of outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of our reserves and any potential adjustments that may result from the current and future examinations. We believe such estimates to be reasonable; however, the final determination from examinations and changes in tax laws could significantly impact the amounts provided for income taxes in the consolidated financial statements.
Our deferred tax assets reflect our estimates of the amount and category of future taxable income, such as income from operations and capital gains, and also take into account valuation allowances that consider other key factors that might restrict
our ability to realize the deferred tax assets. Actual operating results and the underlying amount and category of income in future years could render our current assumptions, judgments and estimates of recoverable net deferred taxes inaccurate.
Business Combinations
We allocate the purchase price of acquirees to the identifiable assets acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interests in an acquiree, which are measured based on the acquisition date fair value. Goodwill is measured as the excess of consideration transferred over the net amounts of the identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired and the liabilities assumed at the acquisition date.
The allocation of the purchase price requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions to determine the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed and the related useful lives of the acquired assets, when applicable, as of the acquisition date. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made are reasonable, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain. Examples of critical estimates used in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired or may acquire in the future include but are not limited to:
•future expected cash flows from sales, maintenance agreements and acquired developed technologies;
•the acquired company’s trade name and customer relationships as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired trade name and customer relationships will continue to be used in the combined company’s product portfolio; and
•discount rates used to determine the present value of estimated future cash flows.
These estimates are inherently uncertain and unpredictable, and if different estimates were used the purchase price for the acquisition could be allocated to the acquired assets and liabilities differently from the allocation that we have made. Additionally, unanticipated events and circumstances may occur, which may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results.