ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Vontier Corporation (“Vontier”, the “Company,” “we,” “us,” or “our”) is a global industrial technology company that focuses on critical technical equipment, components, software and services for manufacturing, repair and servicing in the mobility infrastructure industry worldwide. We supply a wide range of solutions, spanning advanced environmental sensors, fueling equipment, field payment hardware, remote management and workflow software, vehicle tracking and fleet management software, solutions for traffic light control and vehicle mechanics’ and technicians’ equipment. We market our products and services to retail and commercial fueling operators, commercial vehicle repair businesses, municipal governments and public safety entities and fleet owners/operators on a global basis.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is designed to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of management and is intended to help the reader understand the results and operations and financial condition of the Company. Our MD&A should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying Notes to the Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
BASIS OF PRESENTATION
The accompanying Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements present our historical financial position, results of operations, changes in equity and cash flows in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The combined financial statements for periods prior to the Separation were derived from Fortive’s consolidated financial statements and accounting records and prepared in accordance with GAAP for the preparation of carved-out combined financial statements. Through the date of the Separation, all revenues and costs as well as assets and liabilities directly associated with Vontier have been included in the combined financial statements. Prior to the Separation, the combined financial statements also included allocations of certain general, administrative, sales and marketing expenses from Fortive’s corporate office and from other Fortive businesses to the Company and allocations of related assets, liabilities, and the Former Parent’s investment, as applicable.
Following the Separation, the consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Vontier and those of our wholly-owned subsidiaries and no longer include any allocations from Fortive. Accordingly:
•The Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020 consists of our balances, while the Combined Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2019 consists of the combined balances of the Vontier Businesses.
•The Consolidated and Combined Statement of Earnings and Comprehensive Income for the year ended December 31, 2020 consist of our results from the date of the Separation through December 31, 2020 and the combined results of the Vontier Businesses from January 1, 2020 through the date of the Separation. The Combined Statements of Earnings and Comprehensive Income for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, consist of the combined results of the Vontier Businesses.
•The Consolidated and Combined Statement of Changes in Stockholders’ Equity for the year ended December 31, 2020 consists of our consolidated activity from the date of the Separation through December 31, 2020 and the combined activity of the Vontier Businesses from January 1, 2020 through the date of the Separation. The Combined Statements of Changes in Stockholders’ Equity for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, consist of the combined activity of the Vontier Businesses.
•The Consolidated and Combined Statement of Cash Flows for the year ended December 31, 2020 consists of our consolidated activity from the date of the Separation through December 31, 2020 and the combined activity of the Vontier Businesses from January 1, 2020 through the date of the Separation. The Combined Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, consist of the combined activity of the Vontier Businesses.
Our Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements may not be indicative of our results had we been a separate stand-alone entity throughout the periods presented, nor are the results stated herein indicative of what our financial position, results of operations and cash flows may be in the future.
All significant transactions between the Company and Fortive have been included in the accompanying Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for all periods presented. Cash transactions with Fortive prior to the Separation are reflected in the accompany Consolidated and Combined Statements of Changes in Stockholders’ Equity as “Net transfers to Former Parent” and “Consideration to Former Parent in connection with the Separation” and in the accompanying Consolidated and Combined Balance Sheets within “Former Parent’s investment”. Former Parent’s investment, which included Retained earnings (Accumulated deficit) prior to the Separation, represents Fortive’s interest in our recorded net assets prior to the Separation. In addition, the accumulated net effect of intercompany transactions between us and Fortive or Fortive affiliates for periods prior to the Separation are included in Former Parent’s investment.
On October 9, 2020, in connection with the Separation, Former Parent’s investment was redesignated within stockholders’ equity. The Agreements include a “Wrong-Pockets Provision” that allows the parties to make adjustments to ensure the separation-related transactions were executed in accordance with the Agreements. In periods subsequent to the Separation, we may make adjustments to balances transferred at the Separation date in accordance with the Wrong-Pockets Provision. Any such adjustments are recorded through stockholders’ equity.
The financial statements include our accounts and the accounts of our subsidiaries. All intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated upon consolidation. The Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements also reflect the impact of noncontrolling interests. Noncontrolling interests do not have a significant impact on our consolidated and combined results of operations, therefore net earnings and net earnings per share attributable to noncontrolling interests are not presented separately in our Consolidated and Combined Statements of Earnings and Comprehensive Income. Net earnings attributable to noncontrolling interests have been reflected in selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”) and were insignificant in all periods presented.
Our historical Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements include expense allocations for certain support functions that are provided on a centralized basis within Fortive, such as corporate costs, shared services and other selling, general and administrative costs that benefit the Company, among others. The allocations were determined on a reasonable basis; however, the amounts are not necessarily representative of the amounts that would have been reflected in the financial statements had the Company been an entity that operated independently of Fortive during the applicable periods. Related-party allocations prior to the Separation, including the method for such allocation, are discussed further in Note 20. Related-Party Transactions to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements.
Following the distribution, pursuant to agreements with Fortive, we expect that Fortive will continue to provide us with some of the services related to these functions on a transitional basis in exchange for agreed-upon fees, and we expect to incur other costs to replace the services and resources that will not be provided by Fortive. We will also incur additional costs as a separate public company. As a separate public company, our total costs related to such support functions may differ from the costs that were historically allocated to us.
These additional costs are primarily for the following:
•additional personnel costs, including salaries, benefits and potential bonuses and/or share-based compensation awards for staff additions to replace support provided by Fortive that is not covered by the transition services agreement; and
•corporate governance costs, including board of director compensation and expenses, audit and other professional services fees, annual report and proxy statement costs, SEC filing fees, transfer agent fees, consulting and legal fees and stock exchange listing fees.
Certain factors could impact the nature and amount of these separate public company costs, including the finalization of our staffing and infrastructure needs.
We expect these additional separate public company costs in excess of the costs that have been historically allocated to us to range between approximately $35 million and $45 million per year. Moreover, we expect we may incur certain nonrecurring internal costs to implement certain new systems.
Prior to the Separation, we were dependent upon Fortive for all our working capital and financing requirements under Fortive’s centralized approach to cash management and financing of operations of its subsidiaries. With the exception of cash, cash equivalents and borrowings clearly associated with Vontier and related to the Separation, including the financial transactions described below, financial transactions relating to our business operations prior to the Separation were accounted for through Former Parent’s investment. Accordingly, none of the Former Parent’s cash, cash equivalents or debt at the corporate level was assigned to us in the financial statements for periods prior to the Separation.
OVERVIEW
General
Please see “Item 1. Business - General” included in this Annual Report for a discussion of the Company’s strategies for delivering long-term shareholder value. Vontier offers critical technical equipment, components, software and services for manufacturing, repair, and servicing in the mobility infrastructure industry worldwide. We supply a wide range of mobility technologies and diagnostics and repair technologies solutions, spanning advanced environmental sensors, fueling equipment, field payment hardware, remote management and workflow software, vehicle tracking and fleet management software-as-a-service solutions, professional vehicle mechanics’ and technicians’ equipment and traffic priority control systems. We market our products and services to retail and commercial fueling operators, commercial vehicle repair businesses, municipal governments, and public safety entities and fleet owners/operators on a global basis.
Our research and development, manufacturing, sales, distribution, service and administrative operations are located in more than 30 countries across North America, Asia Pacific, Europe and Latin America. In addition, we sell our products in these countries and multiple other markets in these regions.
Business Performance
The global outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization in March 2020 and has surfaced in nearly all regions around the world, which resulted in governments implementing strict measures to help contain or mitigate the spread of the virus, including quarantines, “shelter-in-place” and “stay at home” orders, travel restrictions, school and commercial facility closures, re-opening restrictions, among others (collectively “virus control measures”). Further, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security’s Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency issued Guidance documents for use by businesses and states defining “critical-infrastructure” industries that may continue to operate despite the virus control measures implemented. These virus control measures led to slowdowns or shutdowns for businesses deemed both “essential” and “non-essential” in affected areas, causing significant disruption in the financial markets both globally and in the United States, especially in the second quarter. As of the end of the year, the virus control measures had eased in most regions and all of our locations were open and operating.
Given the nature of our business, COVID-19 impacted our businesses and operating results during the year ended December 31, 2020, directly with reduced demand from customers operating in non-essential end markets and indirectly with reduced demand created by macroeconomic disruption or disruption in adjacent end markets. COVID-19 impacted our businesses and operating results broadly across all geographies, as virus control measures were deployed in most regions during the year ended December 31, 2020. Our business was impacted less in the second half of the year by the virus control measures as restrictions eased and demand returned.
While differences exist among our businesses, on an overall basis, demand for our hardware and software products and services decreased during the first half of the year and increased during the second half of the year ended December 31, 2020. As compared to the comparable period of 2019, aggregate year-over-year total sales decreased 2.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Sales from existing businesses declined 1.2% during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the comparable period of 2019. The decrease in total sales and sales from existing businesses during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by the direct and indirect impacts of COVID-19 which was partially offset by strong demand for and shipments of fuel management systems in North America related to the enhanced credit card security requirements for outdoor payment systems based on the Europay, Mastercard and Visa (“EMV”) global standards and Mexico regulatory demand. Our diagnostics and repair portfolio also experienced periods of strong demand across most product categories, most notably specialty and hardline tools. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates and other items negatively impacted our sales growth by 1.0% during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the comparable period in 2019.
Geographically, year-over-year total sales and sales from existing businesses for the year ended December 31, 2020, increased by an insignificant amount in developed markets and declined at a rate in the high-single digits in high-growth markets. These movements were primarily driven by a decline in Western Europe at a high-single digit rate and a decline in Asia of more than 20% which was partially offset by a low-single digit increase in North America.
Outlook
While we expect overall sales and sales from existing businesses to be relatively flat on a year-over-year basis in 2021, we continue to monitor macro-economic and geopolitical developments including global uncertainties related to governmental policies toward international trade, monetary and fiscal policies and the impacts of COVID-19. We will also continue to monitor the other factors identified above in “Item 1A. Risk Factors”
We are closely monitoring the health of our employees, and have implemented safety protocols at our facilities to ensure the health and safety of our employees. In addition, we are continuing to monitor the financial health of our suppliers and customers, and their ability to maintain production capacity and meet our operational requirements. Individuals contracting or being exposed to COVID-19, or who are unable to report to work due to future virus control measures, may significantly disrupt production throughout our supply chain and negatively impact our sales channels. Further, our customers may be directly impacted by business curtailments or weak market conditions, and may not be willing or able to accept shipments of products, may cancel orders, and may not be able to pay us on a timely basis.
Despite the virus control measures in place in geographies critical to our supply chain, we have successfully implemented solutions to support our operations and have not experienced significant production material shortages, supply chain constraints, or distribution limitations impacting our operations as of the date of this Report.
To mitigate the impact of the economic conditions from the COVID-19 pandemic as well as geopolitical uncertainties related to governmental policies toward international trade, monetary and fiscal policies, we will continue applying and deploying the Vontier Business System to actively manage our supply chain and drive operating efficiencies, and continue to collaborate with our customers and suppliers to minimize disruption to their businesses. Additionally, we will continue actively managing our working capital with a focus on maximizing cash flows and cost efficiency. We continue to assess market conditions and take actions as we deem necessary to appropriately position our businesses in light of the economic environment and geopolitical uncertainties.
Although recent volatility in the financial markets has not had a significant impact on our financial position, liquidity, and ability to meet our debt covenants as of the filing date of this Report, we continue to monitor the financial markets and general global economic conditions. If further changes in financial markets or other areas of the economy adversely affect our access to the capital markets, we would expect to rely on a combination of available cash and existing available capacity under our credit facilities to provide short-term funding. Refer to the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section for additional discussion.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of Results of Operations
Components of Sales Growth
2020 Compared to 2019
Total sales and sales from existing businesses within our mobility technologies platform decreased at a low-single digit rate during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the comparable period of 2019. The year-over-year results during the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily driven by the direct and indirect impacts of COVID-19 across most product categories and significant geographies which was partially offset by strong demand for and shipments of fuel management systems in North America related to the enhanced credit card security requirements for outdoor payment systems based on the Europay, Mastercard and Visa (“EMV”) global standards and Mexico regulatory demand.
Total sales and sales from existing businesses within our diagnostics and repair technologies platform decreased at a low-single digit rate during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the comparable period in 2019. The results in the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily driven by decreased demand across most product categories due to COVID-19 virus control measures early in the second quarter, which were partially offset by improvements in demand as the year progressed and virus control measures began to lift in certain jurisdictions.
Price increases are reflected as a component of the change in sales from existing businesses, and year-over-year price increases contributed 0.1% to sales growth during 2020 as compared to 2019.
2019 Compared to 2018
Total sales increased $106.2 million, or 4.0%, during 2019 as compared to 2018.
Sales from existing businesses within our mobility technologies portfolio grew 7.1% during 2019 as compared to 2018 due primarily to broad-based demand for fuel management systems, specifically in North America, Latin America, and Western Europe, as well as increased demand for payment solutions. The strong demand in North America was favorably impacted by the approaching deadline for the liability shift related to EMV global standards that was extended to April 2021.
Geographically, sales from existing businesses increased on a year-over-year basis in North America, Europe, and Latin America, partially offset by declines in India.
Sales from existing businesses within our diagnostics and repair technologies portfolio grew 0.9% during 2019 as compared to 2018, largely driven by increased year-over-year demand for hardline and diagnostic tools and shop equipment that was mostly offset by a decline in demand for wheel-service equipment.
Price increases are reflected as a component of the change in sales from existing businesses, and year-over-year price increases contributed 1.5% to sales growth during 2019 as compared to 2018.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales decreased $64.8 million, or 4.1%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the comparable period in 2019, due primarily to lower year-over-year sales volumes from existing businesses which were partially offset by higher labor and supply chain costs due to actions taken related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of sales increased $50.5 million, or 3.3%, during 2019 as compared to 2018. The year-over-year increase in cost of sales was due primarily to higher year-over-year sales volumes from existing businesses, and to a lesser extent the incremental cost of sales from our recently acquired businesses, increased material costs associated primarily with inflationary pressures and recently enacted tariffs, and restructuring charges, which were partially offset by changes in currency exchange rates and incremental year-over-year cost savings associated with productivity improvement initiatives and material cost and supply chain improvement actions.
Gross Profit
The year-over-year decrease in gross profit during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the comparable period in 2019, is primarily due to lower year-over-year sales volumes and higher labor and supply chain costs due to actions taken related to the COVID-19 pandemic. This was partially offset by lower year-over-year material and warranty costs and savings associated with restructuring.
The 90 basis points increase in gross profit margin during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the comparable period in 2019, is primarily due to cost savings associated with restructuring and productivity improvement initiatives, and material cost and supply chain improvement actions, partially offset by lower year-over-year sales volumes.
The year-over-year $55.7 million increase in gross profit, or 40 basis points as a percentage of sales, during 2019 as compared to 2018 was due primarily to higher year-over-year sales volumes and the favorable impact of pricing improvements, and to a lesser extent, the impact of recently acquired businesses. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates and an unfavorable sales mix partially off-set the increase in gross profit.
Operating Costs and Other Expenses
SG&A expenses increased $17.1 million, or 110 basis points as a percentage of sales, during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily due to costs associated with the Separation which was partially offset by savings from broad cost reduction efforts that reduced labor expenses to better align with reductions in demand, primarily through the use of furloughs and reductions in salaried compensation costs, as well as other reductions in discretionary spending, and to a lesser extent, year-over-year cost savings associated with restructuring and productivity improvement initiatives.
SG&A expenses decreased $8.0 million, or 100 basis points as a percentage of sales, during 2019 as compared to 2018. The decrease in SG&A was due primarily to savings from productivity improvement initiatives and changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
R&D expenses (consisting principally of internal and contract engineering personnel costs) decreased by $10.2 million, or 20 basis points as a percentage of sales, during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the comparable period in 2019 due to broad cost reduction efforts.
R&D expenses (consisting principally of internal and contract engineering personnel costs) increased $0.2 million during 2019 as compared to 2018, and R&D expenses as a percentage of sales were relatively flat, as the investments in our product development initiatives grew at a rate largely consistent with sales.
Operating Profit
Operating profit margins were 17.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of 300 basis points as compared to 20.3% in 2019.
Year-over-year operating profit margin comparisons were favorably impacted by:
•Operating expense savings from broad cost reduction efforts, and to a lesser extent, lower material costs and incremental year-over-year cost savings associated with restructuring and productivity improvement initiatives which were partially offset by lower year-over-year sales volumes from existing businesses - 100 basis points
•The year-over-year effect of businesses disposed of and acquired - 10 basis points
Year-over-year operating profit margin comparisons were unfavorably impacted by:
•The impact of the goodwill impairment of our Telematics business - 310 basis points
•Stand-up costs related to the Separation - 100 basis points
Operating profit increased $63.5 million during 2019 as compared to 2018, and as a percentage of sales, increased from 18.7% of sales in 2018 to 20.3% of sales in 2019.
The increase in operating profit was due primarily due to the following:
•Higher 2019 sales volumes from existing businesses, price increases, and incremental year-over-year cost savings associated with productivity improvement initiatives, which were partially offset by increased material costs associated primarily with inflationary pressures and recently enacted tariffs, an unfavorable sales mix, and changes in currency exchange rates - favorable 195 basis points
•The incremental year-over-year net dilutive effect of restructuring actions - unfavorable 25 basis points
•The dilutive impact of recently divested businesses - unfavorable 10 basis points
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
Sales from Existing Businesses
We define sales from existing businesses as total sales excluding (i) sales from acquired and divested businesses; (ii) the impact of currency translation; and (iii) certain other items.
•References to sales attributable to acquisitions or acquired businesses refer to GAAP sales from acquired businesses recorded prior to the first anniversary of the acquisition less the amount of sales attributable to certain divested businesses or product lines not considered discontinued operations.
•The portion of sales attributable to the impact of currency translation is calculated as the difference between (a) the period-to-period change in sales (excluding sales from acquired businesses) and (b) the period-to-period change in sales, including foreign operations, (excluding sales from acquired businesses) after applying the current period foreign exchange rates to the prior year period.
•The portion of sales attributable to other items is calculated as the impact of those items which are not directly correlated to sales from existing businesses which do not have an impact on the current or comparable period.
Sales from existing businesses should be considered in addition to, and not as a replacement for or superior to, total sales, and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
Management believes that reporting the non-GAAP financial measure of sales from existing businesses provides useful information to investors by helping identify underlying growth trends in our business and facilitating easier comparisons of our sales performance with our performance in prior and future periods and to our peers. We exclude the effect of acquisitions and divestiture-related items because the nature, size and number of such transactions can vary dramatically from period to period and between us and our peers. We exclude the effect of currency translation and certain other items from sales from existing businesses because these items are either not under management’s control or relate to items not directly correlated to sales from existing businesses. Management believes the exclusion of these items from sales from existing businesses may facilitate
assessment of underlying business trends and may assist in comparisons of long-term performance. References to sales volume refer to the impact of both price and unit sales.
INTEREST COSTS
For a discussion of our outstanding indebtedness, refer to Note 11. Financing to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements.
We recorded interest expense, net of $10.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to interest income, net of $3.3 million during the comparable period in 2019. The increase of interest expense, net of $13.3 million was primarily due to the higher average debt balances during the year resulting from the Term Loans entered into as part of the Separation.
Before the Separation, we depended on Fortive for all of our working capital and financing requirements under Fortive’s centralized approach to cash management and financing of operations of its subsidiaries. As a result, with the exception of cash, cash equivalents and borrowings clearly associated with Vontier and related to the Separation, we recorded no interest expense in our financial statements prior to the Separation. In the event that additional liquidity is required, particularly in connection with acquisitions, we may enter into additional borrowings under our credit facilities and/or access the capital markets. If we enter into such additional financing transactions, the amount of annual interest expense will increase.
INCOME TAXES
General
Income tax expense and deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect management’s assessment of future taxes expected to be paid on items reflected in our financial statements. Our effective tax rate can be affected by, among other items, changes in the mix of earnings in countries with differing statutory tax rates (including as a result of business acquisitions and dispositions), changes in the valuation of deferred tax assets and liabilities, the implementation of tax planning strategies, tax rulings, court decisions, settlements with tax authorities and changes in tax laws.
Prior to the Separation, our operating results were included in Fortive’s various consolidated U.S. federal and certain state income tax returns, as well as certain non-U.S. returns. For periods prior to the Separation, our combined financial statements reflect income tax expense and deferred tax balances as if we had filed tax returns on a standalone basis separate from Fortive. The separate return method applies the accounting guidance for income taxes to the standalone financial statements as if we were a separate taxpayer and a standalone enterprise for the periods prior to the Separation. For periods prior to the Separation, our pretax operating results include any transactions with Fortive as if it were an unrelated party.
In connection with the Separation, we entered into agreements with Fortive, including a Tax Matters Agreement. The Tax Matters Agreement distinguishes between the treatment of tax matters for “joint” filings compared to “separate” filings prior to the Separation. “Joint” filings are returns, such as the United States federal return, that include operations from both Fortive legal entities and the Company. By contrast, “separate” filings are tax returns (primarily U.S. state returns and non-U.S. returns), that exclusively include either Fortive’s or the Company’s operations, respectively. In accordance with the Tax Matters Agreement, the Company is liable for and has indemnified Fortive against all income tax liabilities involving “separate” filings for periods prior to the Separation.
On March 27, 2020, the U.S. Government passed the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”)
as an emergency economic stimulus package in response to the COVID-19 outbreak. The CARES Act contains, among other things, numerous income tax provisions. Some of these tax provisions are expected to be effective retroactively for years ended before the date of enactment. The CARES Act did not have a significant impact on our income tax provision.
We are routinely examined by various domestic and international taxing authorities. The amount of income taxes we pay is subject to audit by federal, state and foreign tax authorities, which may result in proposed assessments. The Company is subject to examination in the United States, various states and foreign jurisdictions. In accordance with the Tax Matters Agreement with Fortive, the Company is liable for taxes arising from examinations of the following: (i) the Company’s initial U.S. federal taxable year October 9, 2020 through December 31, 2020; (ii) separate company state tax returns for all periods; (iii) joint state tax returns for the period October 9, 2020 through December 31, 2020; (iv) international separate company returns for all periods; and (v) joint international tax returns that include only Vontier legal entities for all periods. We review our global tax positions on a quarterly basis. Based on these reviews, the results of discussions and resolutions of matters with certain tax authorities, tax rulings and court decisions and the expiration of statutes of limitations reserves for contingent tax liabilities are accrued or adjusted as necessary.
Pursuant to U.S. tax law, the Company’s initial U.S. federal income tax return is for the short taxable year October 9, 2020
through December 31, 2020. We expect to file our initial U.S. federal income tax return for the 2020 short tax year with the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) during 2021. Therefore, the IRS has not yet begun examination of the Company. The Company remains subject to tax audit for its separate company tax returns in various U.S. states for the tax years 2011 to 2020. Our operations in certain foreign jurisdictions remain subject to routine examination for the tax years 2007 to 2020.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
Our effective tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 was 25.7%, 22.8% and 24.0%, respectively.
Our effective tax rate for 2020 differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21.0% due primarily to the effect of recurring items including state taxes and foreign taxable earnings at a different rate than the U.S. federal statutory rate. Additionally, in 2020, there is a favorable impact related to non-taxable income which is partially offset by a non-deductible goodwill impairment and uncertain tax position accruals.
Our effective tax rate for 2019 and 2018 differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21.0% due primarily to the effect of the TCJA U.S. federal permanent differences, the impact of credits and deductions provided by law, the mix of earnings outside the United States taxed at rates different than the U.S. federal statutory rate, and state tax impacts, exclusive of the impact of external interest expense as no external debt had been allocated by Fortive.
For the periods prior to the Separation, current income tax liabilities related to entities which filed jointly with Fortive are assumed to be immediately settled with Fortive and are relieved through Former Parent’s investment. Income tax expense and other income tax related information contained in the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements are presented as if we filed a separate tax return. The separate tax return method applies the accounting guidance for income taxes to the standalone financial statements as if we were a standalone taxpayer for the periods prior to the Separation. The calculation of our income taxes on a separate income tax return basis required considerable judgment, estimates and allocations.
COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
Comprehensive income decreased by $71.8 million in 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily due to net earnings that were lower by $94.5 million which was partially offset by favorable changes in foreign currency translation adjustments of $22.2 million.
Comprehensive income increased by $105.9 million in 2019 as compared to 2018, due primarily to favorable changes in foreign currency translation adjustments of $55.9 million and net earnings that were higher by $51.0 million.
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS AND RISK MANAGEMENT
We are exposed to market risk from changes in interest rates, foreign currency exchange rates, credit risk and commodity prices, each of which could impact our financial statements. We generally address our exposure to these risks through our normal operating and financing activities. In addition, our broad-based business activities help to reduce the impact that volatility in any particular area or related areas may have on our operating profit as a whole.
Interest Rate Risk
We are exposed to interest rate risk through fluctuations in interest rates on our debt obligations. As of December 31, 2020, we had $1.8 billion outstanding of debt that was subject to variable interest rates. As a result, increases in interest rates could increase the cost of servicing our debt and could materially reduce our profitability and cash flows. We seek to manage exposure to adverse interest rate changes through our normal operating and financing activities.
A hypothetical 100 basis points increase in market interest rates as of December 31, 2020 on our variable-rate debt obligations as of December 31, 2020 would have increased our interest expense by approximately $4 million in 2020.
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
We face transactional exchange rate risk from transactions with customers in countries outside of the United States and from intercompany transactions between affiliates. Transactional exchange rate risk arises from the purchase and sale of goods and services in currencies other than our functional currency or the functional currency of an applicable subsidiary. We also face translational exchange rate risk related to the translation of financial statements of our foreign operations into U.S. dollars, our functional currency. Costs incurred and sales recorded by subsidiaries operating outside of the United States are translated into U.S. dollars using exchange rates effective during the respective period. As a result, we are exposed to movements in the exchange rates of various currencies against the U.S. dollar. The effect of a change in currency exchange rates on our net investment in international subsidiaries is reflected in the accumulated other comprehensive income component of equity. A 10% change in major currencies relative to the U.S. dollar as of December 31, 2020 would have resulted in an impact to stockholders’ equity of approximately $91 million.
Currency exchange rates negatively impacted 2020 reported sales by 0.6% as compared to 2019, as the U.S. dollar was, on average, stronger against most major currencies during 2020 as compared to exchange rate levels during 2019. If the exchange rates in effect as of December 31, 2020 were to prevail throughout 2021, currency exchange rates would positively impact 2021 estimated sales by approximately 2% relative to our performance in 2020. In general, additional weakening of the U.S. dollar against other major currencies would further positively impact our sales and results of operations on an overall basis and any strengthening of the U.S. dollar against other major currencies would adversely impact our sales and results of operations.
We have generally accepted the exposure to exchange rate movements without using derivative financial instruments to manage this risk. Both positive and negative movements in currency exchange rates against the U.S. dollar will therefore continue to affect the reported amount of sales, profit, and assets and liabilities in our Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements.
Credit Risk
We are exposed to potential credit losses in the event of nonperformance by counterparties to our financial instruments. Financial instruments that potentially subject us to credit risk consist of cash and highly-liquid investment grade cash equivalents, and receivables from customers and franchisees. We place cash and cash equivalents with various high-quality financial institutions throughout the world and exposure is limited at any one institution. Although we typically do not obtain collateral or other security to secure these obligations, we regularly monitor third party depository institutions that hold our cash and cash equivalents. We emphasize safety and liquidity of principal over yield on those funds. Concentrations of credit risk arising from receivables from customers are limited due to the diversity of our customers. We perform credit evaluations of our customers’ financial conditions and also obtain collateral or other security as appropriate. Notwithstanding these efforts, the current distress in the global economy resulting from COVID-19 may increase the difficulty in collecting receivables.
The assumptions used in evaluating our exposure to credit losses associated with our financing receivables portfolio involve estimates and significant judgment. Holding other estimates constant, a 10% increase or decrease in the expected loss rate on the consumer portfolio would have resulted in a change in the allowance for credit losses of approximately $7 million as of December 31, 2020.
No customer accounted for more than 10% of combined sales during all periods presented.
Commodity Price Risk
For a discussion of risks relating to commodity prices, refer to “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
INFLATION
The effect of inflation on our revenues and net earnings was not significant in any of the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 or 2018.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Prior to the Separation, we were dependent upon Fortive for all our working capital and financing requirements under Fortive’s centralized approach to cash management and financing of operations of its subsidiaries. With the exception of cash, cash equivalents and borrowings clearly associated with Vontier and related to the Separation, including the financial transactions described below, financial transactions relating to our business operations prior to the Separation were accounted for through Former Parent’s investment. Accordingly, none of the Former Parent’s cash, cash equivalents or debt at the corporate level was assigned to us in the financial statements for periods prior to the Separation.
As a result of the Separation, we no longer participate in Fortive’s cash management and financing operations. We assess our liquidity in terms of our ability to generate cash to fund our operating, investing and financing activities. We generate substantial cash from operating activities and believe that our operating cash flow and other sources of liquidity will be sufficient to allow us to continue to invest in existing businesses, consummate strategic acquisitions, make interest payments on our outstanding indebtedness, and manage our capital structure on a short and long-term basis. Refer also to Note 11. Financing to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for additional information.
2020 Financing and Capital Transactions
During 2020, we completed the following financing and capital transaction:
•On September 29, 2020, we entered into a credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with a syndicate of banks, consisting of a three-year, $800.0 million senior unsecured delayed draw term loan facility (the “Three-Year Term Loans”), a two-year, $1.0 billion senior unsecured delayed draw term loan facility (the “Two-Year Term Loans” and together with the Three-Year Term Loans, the “Term Loans”) and a three-year, $750.0 million senior unsecured multi-currency revolving credit facility, including a $25.0 million sublimit for swingline loans and a $75.0 million sublimit for the issuance of letters of credit (the “Revolving Credit Facility” and, together with the Term Loans, the “Credit Facilities”).
The Company used the proceeds from the Term Loans to make payments to Fortive, with $1.6 billion used as part of the consideration for the contribution of certain assets and liabilities by the Company to Fortive in connection with the Separation and with $200.0 million used to fund cash balances remaining with the Company.
Refer to Note 11. Financing to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for more information related to our long-term indebtedness.
Overview of Cash Flows and Liquidity
Following is an overview of our cash flows and liquidity:
Operating Activities
Cash flows from operating activities can fluctuate significantly from period to period as working capital needs and the timing of payments for income taxes, restructuring activities and other items impact reported cash flows.
Operating cash flows increased by $146.1 million during 2020 as compared to 2019. This year-over-year change in operating cash flows was primarily attributable to the following factors:
•2020 operating cash flows were impacted by lower net earnings as compared to 2019. Net earnings for 2020 were impacted by a year-over-year decrease in operating profits of $94.9 million, as well as a year-over-year increase in interest expense, net of $13.3 million primarily due to our current year borrowings. The year-over-year decrease in operating profit was impacted by the non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $85.3 million, which is added back as a non-cash activity, as well as an increase in stock-based compensation of $9.4 million.
•The aggregate of Accounts receivable, net, Long-term financing receivables, net, Inventories and Trade accounts payable provided $79.0 million of operating cash flows during 2020 compared to providing $50.0 million of cash during 2019. The amount of cash flow generated from or used by the aggregate of Accounts receivable, net, Long-term financing receivables, net, Inventories and Trade accounts payable depends upon various factors, including how effectively we manage the cash conversion cycle, which effectively represents the number of days that elapse from the day we pay for the purchase of raw materials and components to the collection of cash from our customers and can be significantly impacted by the timing of collections and payments in a period.
•The aggregate of Prepaid expenses and other current assets and Accrued expenses and other current liabilities provided $121.5 million of cash in 2020 as compared to using $51.8 million in 2019. The difference is due in part to an increase of accruals related to compensation and benefits and other corporate accruals as well as the timing of cash tax payments.
Operating cash flows increased by $124.2 million during 2019 as compared to 2018.
•2019 operating cash flows benefited from higher net earnings that were driven by higher operating profit. Depreciation decreased by $3.1 million and amortization increased by $1.2 million in 2019 compared to 2018. Depreciation and amortization are non-cash expenses that decrease earnings without a corresponding impact to operating cash flows.
•The aggregate of Accounts receivable, net, Long-term financing receivables, net , Inventories, and Trade accounts payable provided $50.0 million of operating cash flows during 2019 compared to using $106.3 million of cash during 2018. The amount of cash flow generated from or used by the aggregate of Accounts receivable, net, Long-term financing receivables, net, Inventories and Trade accounts payable depends upon how effectively we manage the cash conversion cycle and can be significantly impacted by the timing of collections and payments in a period. Additionally, when we originate certain financing receivables, we assume the financing receivable by crediting the franchisee’s trade accounts receivable. As a result, originations of certain financing receivables are non-cash transactions.
•The aggregate of Prepaid expenses and other current assets and Accrued expenses and other current liabilities used $51.8 million of operating cash flows in 2019 as compared to providing $35.6 million of operating cash flows in 2018. This difference is due primarily to the timing of prepaid and accrued expenses and tax-related amounts deemed to be immediately settled with Former Parent.
Investing Activities
Cash flows relating to investing activities consist primarily of cash used for acquisitions, equity investments and capital expenditures. Net cash used in investing activities was $41.7 million during 2020 compared to $40.3 million and $122.6 million of net cash used in 2019 and 2018, respectively, primarily due to cash paid for acquisitions and equity investments, net of cash received.
Capital expenditures are made primarily for increasing capacity, replacing equipment, supporting product development initiatives, improving information technology systems and purchase of equipment that is used in revenue arrangements with customers. Capital expenditures totaled $35.7 million in 2020, $38.0 million in 2019 and $42.4 million in 2018. The change in capital expenditures is due primarily to timing of investments and increased year-over-year expenditures on equipment, which contribute to our recurring revenue base.
Financing Activities and Indebtedness
Financing activities used cash of $283.9 million in 2020 compared to $499.8 million of cash used in 2019. The decrease in cash used in financing activities of $215.9 million was primarily due to the receipt of proceeds from the issuance of our Term Debt of $1.8 billion, of which $1.6 billion was paid to Fortive in connection with the Separation. The remaining change was primarily due to a decrease in the repayments of related-party borrowings of $167.1 million which was partially offset by an increase of Net transfers to Former Parent of $120.5 million. Net transfers to Former Parent represents net cash generated by operating and investing activities prior to the Separation that was transferred to Fortive and other separation related settlements between us and Fortive.
Net cash used in financing activities increased by $209.3 million during 2019 as compared to 2018, due to cash settlements of related-party loans payable in 2019.
The carrying value of total debt outstanding as of December 31, 2020 was approximately $1.8 billion. We had $750.0 million available under the Revolving Credit Facility as of December 31, 2020. Refer to Note 11. Financing to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for information regarding our financing activities and indebtedness.
Cash and Cash Requirements
As of December 31, 2020, we held approximately $380.5 million of cash and cash equivalents that were held in either operating accounts or invested in highly liquid investment-grade instruments with a maturity of 90 days or less with an annual effective rate of less than 1.0%. Approximately 55% of our cash was held outside of the United States.
We have cash requirements to support working capital needs, capital expenditures and acquisitions, pay interest and service debt, pay taxes and any related interest or penalties, fund our restructuring activities and pension plans as required and support other business needs or objectives. With respect to our cash requirements, we generally intend to use available cash and internally generated funds to meet these cash requirements, but in the event that additional liquidity is required, particularly in connection with acquisitions, we may also borrow under our credit facilities, enter into new credit facilities and borrow directly thereunder and/or access the capital markets. We also may from time to time access the capital markets, including to take advantage of favorable interest rate environments or other market conditions.
Conversely, we have made an assertion regarding the amount of earnings that we do not intend to repatriate due to local working capital needs, local law restrictions, high foreign remittance costs, previous investments in physical assets and acquisitions, or future growth needs. Such earnings are intended for indefinite foreign reinvestment and no provision for non-U.S. income taxes has been made. The amount of income taxes that may be applicable to such earnings is not readily determinable given the unknown duration of local law restrictions as applicable to such earnings, unknown changes in foreign tax law that may occur during the restriction periods, and the various alternatives we could employ if we repatriated these earnings. The cash that our foreign subsidiaries hold for indefinite reinvestment is generally used to finance foreign operations and investments, including acquisitions.
As of December 31, 2020, we believe that we have sufficient liquidity to satisfy our cash needs.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 primarily consist of our long-term debt obligations and associated interest payments under the Credit Facilities, our operating leases, as discussed in Note 10. Leases to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements, purchase obligations and other long-term liabilities reflected on the balance sheet under GAAP. Our other long-term liabilities reflected on the balance sheet under GAAP of $217.2 million are due in greater than one year and primarily consist of obligations under product service and warranty policies and allowances, performance and operating cost guarantees, litigation claims, postretirement benefits, pension benefit obligations, net tax liabilities and deferred compensation obligations. The timing of cash flows associated with these obligations is based upon management’s estimates over the terms of these arrangements and is largely based upon historical experience. Refer to “Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements” for a discussion of other contractual obligations that are not reflected in the table below.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the normal course of business, we periodically enter into agreements that require us to indemnify customers, suppliers or other business partners for specific risks, such as claims for injury or property damage arising out of the use of our products or claims alleging that our products infringe third party intellectual property. Historically, we have not experienced significant losses on these types of indemnification obligations.
Guarantees consist of outstanding standby letters of credit, bank guarantees and performance and bid bonds. These guarantees have been provided in connection with certain arrangements with vendors, customers, financing counterparties and governmental entities to secure our obligations and/or performance requirements related to specific transactions. We believe that if the obligations under these instruments were triggered, it would not have a material effect on our financial statements.
The following table sets forth, by period due or year of expected expiration, as applicable, a summary of our off-balance sheet commitments as of December 31, 2020:
Other Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have, from time to time, divested certain of our businesses and assets. In connection with these divestitures, we often provide representations, warranties and/or indemnities to cover various risks and unknown liabilities, such as claims for damages arising out of the use of products or relating to intellectual property matters, commercial disputes, environmental matters or tax matters. We have not included any such items in the contractual obligations table above because they relate to unknown conditions and we cannot reasonably estimate the potential liabilities from such matters, but we do not believe it is reasonably possible that any such liability will have a material effect on our financial statements.
Our Restated Certificate of Incorporation requires us to indemnify to the full extent authorized or permitted by law any person made, or threatened to be made a party to any action or proceeding by reason of his or her service as a director or officer of the Company, or by reason of serving at the request of the Company as a director or officer of any other entity, subject to limited exceptions. Our Amended and Restated Bylaws provide for similar indemnification rights. In addition, we have executed with each of our directors and executive officers an indemnification agreement which provides for substantially similar indemnification rights and under which we have agreed to pay expenses in advance of the final disposition of any such indemnifiable proceeding. While we maintain insurance for this type of liability, a significant deductible applies to this coverage and any such liability could exceed the amount of the insurance coverage.
Legal Proceedings
Please refer to Note 17. Litigation and Contingencies to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for information regarding legal proceedings and contingencies, and for a discussion of risks related to legal proceedings and contingencies, refer to “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base these estimates and judgments on historical experience, the current economic environment and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates and judgments.
We believe the following accounting estimates are most critical to an understanding of our financial statements. Estimates are considered to be critical if they meet both of the following criteria: (i) the estimate requires assumptions about material matters that are uncertain at the time the estimate is made, and (ii) material changes in the estimate are reasonably likely from period to period. For a detailed discussion on the application of these and other accounting estimates, refer to Note 2. Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements.
Accounts and Financing Receivables
On January 1, 2020, we adopted ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”). Concurrent with our adoption of ASU 2016-13, we updated our methodology for estimating the allowance for credit losses as provided below:
We maintain allowances for credit losses to reflect expected credit losses inherent in our portfolio of receivables. Determination of the allowances requires us to exercise judgment about the timing, frequency and severity of credit losses that could materially affect the allowances and, therefore, net earnings. The allowances for credit losses represent management’s best estimate of the credit losses expected from our trade accounts and financing receivables portfolios over the remaining contractual life. We pool assets with similar risk characteristics for this measurement based on attributes that may include asset type, duration, and/or credit risk rating. The future expected losses of each pool are estimated based on numerous quantitative and qualitative factors reflecting management’s estimate of collectability over the remaining contractual life of the pooled assets, including:
•portfolio duration;
•historical, current, and forecasted future loss experience by asset type;
•historical, current, and forecasted delinquency and write-off trends;
•historical, current, and forecasted economic conditions; and
•historical, current, and forecasted credit risk.
Expected credit losses of the financing receivables originated during the year ended December 31, 2020, as well as changes to expected credit losses during the same period, are recognized in earnings.
We regularly perform detailed reviews of our accounts receivable and financing receivables portfolios to determine if changes in the aforementioned qualitative and quantitative factors have impacted the adequacy of the allowances.
Recent deterioration in overall global economic conditions and worldwide capital markets as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic may negatively impact our customers’ ability to pay and, as a result, may increase the difficulty in collecting trade accounts and financing receivables. We did not realize notable increases in loss rates and delinquencies during the year ended December 31, 2020, and given the nature of our portfolio of receivables, our historical experience during times of challenging economic conditions, and our forecasted future impact of COVID-19 on our customers’ ability to pay, we did not record material provisions for credit losses as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic during the year ended December 31, 2020. If the financial condition of our customers were to deteriorate beyond our current estimates, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, we would be required to write-off additional receivable balances, which would adversely impact our net earnings and financial condition.
Prior to the adoption of ASU 2016-13, the level of the allowances was based on many quantitative and qualitative factors including historical loss experience by receivable type, portfolio duration, delinquency trends, economic conditions and credit risk quality.
Inventories
We record inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value, which is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business, less reasonably predictable costs of completion, disposal and transportation. We estimate the net realizable value of inventory based on assumptions of future demand and related pricing. Estimating the net realizable value of inventory is inherently uncertain because levels of demand, technological advances and pricing competition in many of our markets can fluctuate significantly from period to period due to circumstances beyond our control. If actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected, we could be required to reduce the value of our inventory, which would adversely impact our financial statements. Refer to Note 5. Inventories to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill and other intangible assets result from our acquisition of existing businesses. In accordance with accounting standards related to business combinations, neither goodwill nor indefinite-lived intangible assets are amortized; however, certain definite-lived identifiable intangible assets, primarily customer relationships and acquired technology, are amortized over their estimated useful lives. Refer to Note 7. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for additional information regarding our goodwill and other intangible assets.
Goodwill arises from the purchase price for acquired businesses exceeding the fair value of tangible and intangible assets acquired less assumed liabilities. We assess the goodwill of each of our reporting units for impairment at least annually as of the first day of the fourth quarter or more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that goodwill may not be recoverable.
A non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $85.3 million was recorded against our Telematics reporting unit as a result of our quantitative impairment assessment on March 27, 2020. No goodwill impairment charges were recorded for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018. Refer to Note 7. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for additional information regarding the Telematics impairment charge.
When evaluating for impairment, the Company may first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit or indefinite-lived intangible asset is impaired. If the Company does not perform a qualitative assessment, or if it determines that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit or indefinite-lived intangible asset exceeds its carrying amount, the Company will calculate the estimated fair value of the reporting unit or indefinite-lived intangible asset. The Company’s decision to perform a qualitative impairment assessment for an individual reporting unit in a given year is influenced by a number of factors, inclusive of the size of the reporting unit's goodwill, the significance of the excess of the reporting unit's estimated fair value over carrying value at the last quantitative assessment date, the amount of time in between quantitative fair value assessments and the date of acquisition.
As part of our 2020 annual impairment analysis, we elected to apply the qualitative goodwill impairment assessment guidance in ASC 350-20, Goodwill, for 4 of our 5 reporting units, which held approximately $817.1 million, or 77.2% of our total goodwill balance. Factors we consider in the qualitative assessment include general macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors, overall financial performance of our reporting units, events or changes affecting the composition or carrying value of the net assets of our reporting units, information related to market multiples of peer companies
and other relevant entity specific events. Based on our assessment we determined on the basis of the qualitative and quantitative factors, that the fair values of the reporting units were more likely than not greater than their respective carrying values; and therefore, a quantitative test was not required.
If we do not perform a qualitative assessment, goodwill impairment is determined by using a quantitative approach. We identify potential impairment by comparing the fair value of each reporting unit, determined using various valuation techniques, with the primary technique being a discounted cash flow analysis, to its carrying value. This process is inherently subjective and dependent upon estimates and assumptions we make with respect to future revenues, expenses, market conditions and discount rates related to the reporting unit. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds the fair value, an impairment loss is recognized.
The Company performed a quantitative impairment test for the Telematics reporting unit during the fourth quarter of 2020. It was concluded that the estimated fair value of the Telematics reporting unit exceeded its carrying value and therefore no impairment existed. The factors used by management in its impairment analysis are inherently subject to uncertainty.
We review identified intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the related carrying amounts may not be recoverable. Determining whether an impairment loss occurred requires a comparison of the carrying amount to the sum of undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. We also test intangible assets with indefinite lives at least annually for impairment. These analyses require management to make judgments and estimates about future revenues, expenses, market conditions and discount rates related to these assets.
If actual results are not consistent with management’s estimates and assumptions, goodwill and other intangible assets may be overstated, and a charge would need to be taken against net earnings which would adversely affect our financial statements.
Contingent Liabilities
As discussed in Note 17. Litigation and Contingencies to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements, we are, from time to time, subject to a variety of litigation and similar contingent liabilities incidental to our business (or the business operations of previously owned entities). We recognize a liability for any contingency that is known or probable of occurrence and reasonably estimable. These assessments require judgments concerning matters such as litigation developments and outcomes, the anticipated outcome of negotiations, the number of future claims and the cost of both pending and future claims. In addition, because most contingencies are resolved over long periods of time, liabilities may change in the future due to various factors, including those discussed in Note 17. Litigation and Contingencies to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements. If the reserves established with respect to these contingent liabilities are inadequate, we would be required to incur an expense equal to the amount of the loss incurred in excess of the reserves, which would adversely affect our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We derive revenues from the sale of products and services. If our judgments regarding revenue recognition prove incorrect, our reported revenues in particular periods may be adversely affected. Historically, our estimates of revenue have been materially correct. Refer to additional information regarding our revenue recognition policies and estimates in Note 2. Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements.
Stock-Based Compensation
For a description of our stock-based compensation accounting practices, refer to Note 2. Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 18. Stock-Based Compensation to our Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements. Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of stock-based payment awards require subjective assumptions, including the expected life of the awards, stock price volatility, and expected forfeiture rate. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based payment awards represent our best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of judgment. If actual results are not consistent with our assumptions and estimates, our equity-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
Income Taxes
For a description of our income tax accounting policies, refer to Note 2. Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 15. Income Taxes to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements.
In accordance with GAAP, deferred tax liabilities and assets are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted rates expected to be in effect during the year in which the differences reverse. Deferred tax assets generally represent items that can be used as a tax deduction or credit in our tax return
in future years for which the tax benefit has already been reflected in our Consolidated and Combined Statements of Earnings and Comprehensive Income. We establish valuation allowances for our deferred tax assets if it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. Deferred tax liabilities generally represent items that have already been taken as a deduction on our tax return but have not yet been recognized as an expense in our Consolidated and Combined Statements of Earnings and Comprehensive Income. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities due to a change in tax rates is recognized in income tax expense in the period that includes the enactment date.
We provide for unrecognized tax benefits when, based upon the technical merits, it is “more-likely-than-not” that an uncertain tax position will not be sustained upon examination. Judgment is required in evaluating tax positions and determining income tax provisions. We re-evaluate the technical merits of our tax positions and may recognize an uncertain tax benefit in certain circumstances, including when: (i) a tax audit is completed; (ii) applicable tax laws change, including a tax case ruling or legislative guidance; or (iii) the applicable statute of limitations expires. We recognize potential accrued interest and penalties associated with unrecognized tax positions in income tax expense.
Corporate Allocations
We have historically operated as part of Fortive and not as a stand-alone company. Accordingly, certain shared costs have been allocated to us and are reflected as expenses in the accompanying Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements. Management considers the allocation methodologies used to be reasonable and appropriate reflections of the related expenses attributable to us for purposes of the carved-out financial statements; however, the expenses reflected in these financial statements may not be indicative of the actual expenses that would have been incurred during the periods presented if we had operated as a separate stand-alone entity. In addition, the expenses reflected in the financial statements may not be indicative of expenses that will be incurred in the future by us. Refer to Note 20. Related-Party Transactions to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for a description of the pre-separation allocations from Fortive and related-party transactions.
NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
As discussed in Note 2. Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 4. Financing Receivables to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements, effective January 1, 2020, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”).
Refer to Note 2. Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements for additional information regarding new accounting standards.