Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements, including the notes thereto, appearing elsewhere in this annual report, as well as the section in this annual report entitled “Description of Business”. These financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and are presented in U.S. dollars.
Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Information
The statements in this annual report that are not reported financial results or other historical information are “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, as amended. These statements appear in a number of different places in this report and can be identified by words such as “estimates”, “projects”, “expects”, “intends”, “believes”, “plans”, or their negatives or other comparable words. Also look for discussions of strategy that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements include, among others, statements regarding our business plans and availability of financing for our business.
Among our forward-looking statements are those statements that relate to our plans, expenditures, and obligations. As we are a pre-revenue company we are completely dependent on capital raising activities in order to effectuate these plans or fulfill our capital obligations. Other forward-looking statements include those statements that relate to consumer acceptance of our products as well as music and entertainment industry acceptance of our services and revenue models and, our ability to implement this model.
You are cautioned that any such forward-looking statements are not guarantees and may involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements due to risks facing us or due to facts differing from the assumptions underlying our estimates. Some of these risks and assumptions include those set forth in reports and other documents we have filed with or furnished to the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) or may file from time to time. We advise you that these cautionary remarks expressly qualify in their entirety all forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf. Unless required by law, we do not assume any obligation to update forward-looking statements based on unanticipated events or changed expectations. However, you should carefully review the reports and other documents we file from time to time with the SEC.
The following discussion includes forward-looking statements about our business, financial condition, and results of operations, including discussions about management’s expectations for our business. These statements represent projections, beliefs and expectations based on current circumstances and conditions and in light of recent events and trends, and you should not construe these statements either as assurances of performance or as promises of a given course of action. Instead, various known and unknown factors are likely to cause our actual performance and management’s actions to vary, and the results of these variances may be both material and adverse. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” The following discussion should also be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements including the notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this filing.
Overview
Following the Merger on May 29, 2015, we now carry on business as a live entertainment music technology company that offers a suite of products and services which monetize and monitor music for artists, labels, performing rights organizations, publishers, writers, radio stations, venues, restaurants, bars, and other stakeholders in music.
The company’s Set.fm™ consumer app platform allows fans to purchase the concert they just experienced instantly on their mobile device, and “instant” physical collectible products are recorded and sold at shows and online through the company’s exclusive partner DiscLive Network™, the 15-year pioneer in “instant live” recording.
The company’s Soundstr™, technology is a comprehensive music identification and rights management Cloud platform that, when fully deployed, will accurately track and audit public performances of music, creating a more transparent ecosystem for general music licensing and associated royalty payments, and will help to ensure the correct stakeholders are paid through the use of our “big data” collection.
In 2016, Zach Bair was appointed as CEO of the Company, and, after deliberation with management, the Company determined that the Lively IP previously owned by the Company, although not valueless, had not been developed to the point where it could be deployed with major recording artist clients, and the decision was made to build and/or acquire other technologies which would help the company realize its goals.
On July 10, 2017, the Company entered into a Licensing Agreement with RockHouse Live Media Productions, Inc., DBA “DiscLive” or “DiscLive Network” (“DiscLive”) to formalize the terms of the Strategic Alliance entered into by the Company with DiscLive on July 21, 2016. VNUE has acquired an exclusive license from DiscLive, for three years unless earlier terminated under the Agreement, for the use of all its assets, including but not limited to the DiscLive brand, website (including eCommerce platform), intellectual property, inventory, equipment, trade secrets and anything related to its business of “instant live” recording. Under the terms of the Agreement, DiscLive granted the Company a worldwide exclusive license. In exchange for the license, DiscLive receives a license fee equal to five percent (5%) of any sales derived from the sale and use of the products and services. DiscLive is controlled by our Chief Executive Officer.
On October 16, 2017, the Company entered into an agreement with PledgeMusic, Inc., whereby the Company acquired acquire the assets of the digital live music distribution platform Set.fm from PledgeMusic . Set.fm is a do-it-yourself (DIY) platform that makes it easy for artists to record and sell their live shows directly to fans’ mobile devices, uploading simultaneously with their performance, and a platform which VNUE has already successfully utilized to record and sell digital content for major artists. The platform, which also features an innovative and easy-to-use studio app, already boasts thousands of artists and tens of thousands of fans using it.
On April 23, 2018, the Company entered into an agreement with MusicPlay Analytics, LLC (d/b/a Soundstr) (“Soundstr”) whereby the Company acquired the assets of Soundstr, a technology that aims to help businesses pay fairer music license fees based on actual music usage.
The live music and entertainment space is constantly searching for new monetization outlets. Music licensing and royalties are particular “hot button” issues in the industry. We believe that we have developed solutions that create new revenue streams, and simultaneously helps to protect the rights of the creators and will help ensure they are properly compensated. This befits not only artists, labels, publishers, and live venues but the fans as well.
Through VNUE, Inc., our wholly-owned subsidiary, we now carry on business as a live entertainment music technology company that offers a suite of products and services which monetize and monitor music for artists, labels, performing rights organizations, publishers, writers, radio stations, venues, restaurants, bars, and other stakeholders in music. The onset of Covid-19 in March 2020 has had a material adverse impact on our business as described throughout this Report. Our two main product lines are:
•
Set.fm™ / DiscLive Network™ - Our consumer app platform that allows fans to purchase the concert they just experienced instantly on their mobile device, and “instant” physical collectible products are recorded and sold at shows and online through the company’s exclusive partner DiscLive Network™, the 15-year pioneer in “instant live” recording.
•
Soundstr™ - Our technology which is a comprehensive music identification and rights management Cloud platform that, when fully deployed, can accurately track and audit public performances of music, creating a more transparent ecosystem for general music licensing and associated royalty payments, and will help to ensure the correct stakeholders are paid through the use of our “big data” collection.
While Set.fm™ and Soundstr™ are proprietary marks of the Company, DiscLive, and its related marks and names are not owned by the Company and are owned or utilized by RockHouse Live Media Productions, Inc. The Company has not filed any formal trademark applications relating to Set.fm™ with the United States US Patent and Trademark Office but has been using these marks openly since 2017 and claims common law rights to them.
On Jan 9th, 2020, the Company entered into an agreement with recording and performance artist, Matchbox Twenty “MT Agreement”), to record its 2020 tour and sell limited edition double CD sets, download cards, and digital downloads. As part of the deal, the Company agreed to pay an advance of $100,000 against sales, to MT and its affiliated companies, which was paid in full in installments, with the last installment of $40,000 paid on March 4th. We have recorded this amount as a prepaid expense on our balance sheet as of 12.31.2020
Also as part of the transaction, Ticketmaster agreed to include the option for their customers to pre-purchase a double CD set at checkout, for a price to the customer of $25.00, resulting in a net payment to VNUE of approximately $20 after Ticketmaster’s fees and taxes. Additionally, Wonderful Union, the VIP package sales company utilized by MT agreed to buy 5000 digital download cards from VNUE for $7 each (to include in VIP packages that they send to fans) for $35,000 which has been paid full. As of May 11, 2020, Ticketmaster has paid via wire $40,378 toward the aforementioned pre-sales.
Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our results of operations and financial condition for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this report. We are in the process of completing the development of our products and services and therefore have only nominal revenues or income. Accordingly, we are completely dependent on our capital raising efforts in order to complete development and roll out our products.
Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues
Our revenues for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, amount to $22,474 and $206,161, respectively, a decrease of $183,687. The decrease in revenues in 2020 compared to 2019 is primarily attributable to the onset of Covid-19 which eliminated the possibility of holding live music events which is the essential element of the Company’s business and is necessary to generate revenues. If the Covid-19 pandemic is mitigated the Company expects to resume its tour that was cancelled in 202 with Matchbox Twenty and generate revenue, however, there can be no assurances this will occur.
Direct Costs of Revenues
Our direct costs of revenues for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, amounted to $8,509 and $211,031, respectively, a decrease of $202,522. The decrease in costs resulted from decreased sales volumes.
Research and Development
Our research and development expenses for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 amounted to $-0- compared to $12,404 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. We believe that R&D is a material portion of our business plan and if we are unable to raise sufficient capital or to implement a proper R&D program we will be adversely affected. As we continue to move forward, we expect to spend more on R&D due to our product roadmap and in further developing solutions that will invoke both consumer interest as well as further automation and usability of our products.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, amounted to $601,022 and $1,177,756 respectively. The increase in general and administrative expenses in 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 was due primarily to a one-time non-cash stock based compensation charge of $590,129 in 2019 related to the issuance of preferred stock, compared to $-0- in stock based compensation in 2020. Excluding stock-based compensation, general and administrative expense in 2020 was $587,627, or at level substantially equivalent to 2019 levels.
Intangible Asset Impairment
On December 31, 2019, we conducted an impairment analysis and although we believe that we will be able to generate revenues in the future from our Sounstr asset, based on the lack of any historical sales to date or lack of any pending contracts, we determined that we could not substantiate any anticipated future revenues, and determined that the remaining book value of the intangible of $132,397 should be impaired as of December 31, 2019.
Other Income (Expenses), Net
We recorded other expense, net, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 of $3,996,719 compared to other expense, net, of $72,671 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The significant increase in other expense, net, in 2020 compared to 2019 levels was primarily due to an increase in expense based on the increase in the fair value of the derivative liability of $3,413,629, an increase in financing costs in 2020 of $713,805; offset by a decrease in the loss on the extinguishment of debt of $268,920 in 2020.
Net Loss from Operations
As a result of the foregoing revenues, direct costs of revenues, research and development expenses, general and administrative expenses, and other income (expenses), net, our net loss for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, was $4,553,777 and $1,400,098, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have funded our operations primarily through private offerings of our equity securities and loans, including convertible debt. Our ability to raise capital in the form of equity or convertible debt will be hindered if and as our stock price decreases or we are required to increase our capitalization.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $4,458.
We had negative cash flow from operating activities of $518,493 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, compared with negative cash flow from operating activities of $501,905 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019.
We had no cash used for investing activity in either 2020 or 2019.
Cash flow provided by financing activities was $470,855 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $535,810 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in cash flow provided from financing activities is primarily attributable to a reduction in proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes and promissory notes of approximately $65,000 in 2020 compared to 2019 levels.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to stockholders.
Going Concern
The Company’s auditors have expressed doubt as to the ability of the Company to continue as a going concern. The Company had a stockholders’ deficit of $16,755,676 and negative working of $8,247,522 as of December 31, 2020. Certain of the Company’s notes payable are also past due, however, we have negotiated extensions for them and continue to honor them. One of our vendors claims that we owe them $1,172,781 in unpaid interest and penalties above the principal amount due. We intend to dispute this claim. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the financial statements were issued. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments related to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Management estimates that the current funds on hand will only be sufficient to continue operations through July, 2021. Historically, the Company has used the proceeds of convertible notes to fund its operations. The Company believes that it can continue to raise proceeds during 2021, however, there can be no assurances. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on the Company’s ability to execute its strategy and in its ability to raise additional funds. Management is currently seeking additional funds, primarily through the issuance of equity or convertible debt securities for cash to operate our business. However, among other risks and uncertainties, given our low stock price, and limited number of authorized common shares available for issuance, we will likely be required to increase our authorized capital in order to accommodate these financings, which action will require shareholder approval. No assurance can be given that any future financing will be available or, if available, that it will be on terms that are satisfactory to the Company. Even if the Company is able to obtain additional financing, it may contain undue restrictions on our operations, in the case of debt financing or cause substantial dilution for our stockholders, in case or equity financing.
We have generated minimal revenues, have incurred losses since our inception, and rely upon the issuance of convertible notes to fund our operations. If we are unable to continue issuing convertible debt or raise equity or secure alternative financing, we may not be able to pursue our plans and our business may fail.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which were prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses during the reporting periods. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this prospectus, we believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to our financial results and to the understanding of our past and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s estimates and assumptions. We consider an accounting estimate to be critical if: (1) it requires us to make assumptions because the information was not available at the time or it included matters that were highly uncertain at the time we were making our estimate; and (2) changes in the estimate could have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. (See Note 2 - Significant and Critical Accounting Policies and Practices page herein).
Use of Estimates and Assumptions and Critical Accounting Estimates and Assumptions
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Critical accounting estimates are estimates for which (a) the nature of the estimate is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change and (b) the impact of the estimate on financial condition or operating performance is material. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that are believed to be reasonable in relation to the financial statements taken as a whole under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Management regularly evaluates the key factors and assumptions used to develop the estimates utilizing currently available information, changes in facts and circumstances, historical experience, and reasonable assumptions. After such evaluations, if deemed appropriate, those estimates are adjusted accordingly. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Significant estimates include the assumptions used to determine the value of the derivative liabilities, the valuation allowance for the deferred tax asset and the accruals for potential liabilities.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company evaluates its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the condensed consolidated statements of operations. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is evaluated at the end of each reporting period. Derivative instrument liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement of the derivative instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for share-based awards to employees and nonemployees directors and consultants in accordance with the provisions of ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation., and under the recently issued guidance following FASB’s pronouncement, ASU 2018-07, Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting. Under ASC 718, and applicable updates adopted, share-based awards are valued at fair value on the date of grant and that fair value is recognized over the requisite service, or vesting, period. The Company values its equity awards using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, and accounts for forfeitures when they occur.
Use of the Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the input of subjective assumptions including expected volatility, expected term, and a risk-free interest rate. The Company estimates volatility using a blend of its own historical stock price volatility as well as that of market comparable entities since the Company’s common stock has limited trading history and limited observable volatility of its own. The expected term of the options is estimated by using the Securities and Exchange Commission Staff Bulletin No. 107’s Simplified Method for Estimate Expected Term. The risk-free interest rate is estimated using comparable published federal funds rates.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of the consolidated financial statement for management’s discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.