Item 7 - Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A")
This section should be read in conjunction with the "Cautionary Statements" and "Risk Factors" in Item 1A of Part I, and Item 8 of Part II, "Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data."
We begin Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations with an overview of the business, including our strategy to give the reader a summary of the goals of our business and the direction in which our business is moving. This is followed by a discussion of the Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates that we believe are important to understanding the assumptions and judgments incorporated in our reported financial results. In the next section, we discuss our Results of Operations for the year ended February 28, 2021 compared to the years ended February 29, 2020 and February 28, 2019. Next, we present EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, and Diluted Adjusted EBITDA per common share for the year ended February 28, 2021 compared to the years ended February 29, 2020 and February 28, 2019 in order to provide a useful and appropriate supplemental measure of our performance. We then provide an analysis of changes in our balance sheet and cash flows and discuss our financial commitments in the sections entitled "Liquidity and Capital Resources." We conclude this MD&A with a discussion of "Related Party Transactions" and "Recent Accounting Pronouncements."
Business Overview and Strategy
VOXX International Corporation is a leading international distributor, manufacturer and value-added service provider in the automotive electronics, consumer electronics and biometrics industries. We conduct our business through nineteen wholly-owned subsidiaries and one majority owned subsidiary. Voxx has a broad portfolio of brand names used to market our products as well as private labels through a large domestic and international distribution network. We also function as an OEM ("Original Equipment Manufacturer") supplier to several customers, as well as market a number of products under exclusive distribution agreements.
In recent years, we have focused our attention on acquiring synergistic businesses with the addition of several new subsidiaries. These subsidiaries have helped us to expand our core business and broaden our presence in the accessory and OEM markets. Our acquisitions of Klipsch and Invision provided the opportunity to enter the manufacturing arena, and our acquisition of a controlling interest in EyeLock Inc. and EyeLock Corporation allowed us to enter the growing and innovative biometrics market. The Company has also made strategic asset purchases in order to strengthen its product offerings and increase market share, such as the acquisition of certain assets and assumption of certain liabilities of Rosen Electronics LLC in Fiscal 2018, Vehicle Safety Holding Corp. in Fiscal 2020, and Directed LLC and Directed Electronics Canada Inc. in Fiscal 2021. Our intention is to continue to pursue business opportunities which will allow us to further expand our business model while leveraging overhead and exploring specialized niche markets in the electronics industry. Notwithstanding the above acquisitions, if the appropriate opportunity arises, the Company has been willing to explore the potential divestiture of a product line or business, such as with the sale of the Company's Hirschmann subsidiary in Fiscal 2018.
The Company classifies its operations in the following three reportable segments: Automotive Electronics, Consumer Electronics, and Biometrics. The characteristics of our operations that are relied on in making and reviewing business decisions within these segments include the similarities in our products, the commonality of our customers, suppliers and product developers across multiple brands, our unified marketing and distribution strategy, our centralized inventory management and logistics, and the nature of the financial information used by our Chief Operating Decision Maker ("CODM"). The CODM reviews the financial results of the Company based on the performance of the Automotive Electronics, Consumer Electronics, and Biometrics segments.
The Company’s domestic and international business is subject to retail industry trends and conditions and the sales of new and used vehicles. Worldwide economic conditions impact consumer spending and if the global macroeconomic environment deteriorates, this could have a negative effect on the Company’s revenues and earnings. In an attempt to offset any negative market conditions, the Company continues to explore strategies and alternatives to reduce its operating expenses, such as the consolidation of facilities and IT systems, and has been introducing new products to obtain a greater market share.
Although we believe our product groups have expanding market opportunities, there are certain levels of volatility related to domestic and international markets, new car sales, increased competition by manufacturers, private labels, technological advancements, discretionary consumer spending and general economic conditions. Also, all of our products are subject to price fluctuations which could affect the carrying value of inventories and gross margins in the future.
During March 2020, a global pandemic was declared by the World Health Organization related to the rapidly growing outbreak of COVID-19, which began spreading during the fourth quarter of our 2020 fiscal year. The pandemic has significantly impacted the economic conditions in the United States, as federal, state, and local governments have reacted to the public health crisis, creating significant uncertainties in the United States, as well as the global economy. In the interest of public health and safety, U.S. jurisdictions (national, state, and local) where our primary operations and those of many of our customers are located, required mandatory business closures and capacity limitations during Fiscal 2021, or other restrictions for those that were permitted to continue to operate. As of February 28, 2021, all of our operating locations were open, some of which were at a reduced in-office employee presence.
As a result of these events, the Company has experienced certain adverse impacts on its revenues, results of operations and cash flows during Fiscal 2021. The situation is still rapidly changing and additional impacts to the Company’s business may arise that we are not aware of currently. We cannot predict whether, when, or the manner in which the conditions surrounding COVID-19 will change, including the timing of the lifting of any restrictions or closure requirements, or any subsequent re-impositions of restrictions. Due to the changing situation, the results of the first quarter ending May 31, 2021 and the full fiscal year ending February 28, 2022 could be impacted in ways we are not able to predict today, including, but not limited to, non-cash write-downs and impairments; foreign currency fluctuations; potential adjustments to the carrying value of inventory; and the delayed collections of, or inability to collect, accounts receivable. During April 2020, as a precautionary measure to ensure financial flexibility and maintain maximum liquidity in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company borrowed $20,000 from its revolving credit facilities in the U.S. This borrowing was repaid in full during the third quarter of Fiscal 2021. As of the date of this report, the Company continues to focus on cash flow and anticipates having sufficient resources to operate during Fiscal 2022.
The Company also implemented a number of other measures to help mitigate the operating and financial impact of the pandemic, including: (i) furloughing approximately 20% of its employees globally starting April 6, 2020; (ii) implementing temporary salary and hour reductions for both management and non-management level employees Company-wide, including its executive officers, and the Company’s board of directors; (iii) executing substantial reductions in expenses, service provider costs, occupancy costs, capital expenditures and overall costs, including through reduced inventory purchases; and (iv) working globally with management teams to actively explore and identify all eligible government and other initiatives available to businesses or employees impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. As of the filing date of our report, less than 1% of our employees remain on furlough. The above referenced salary and hour reductions were eliminated by the Company during the third quarter of Fiscal 2021, and the salary reductions taken were repaid to all employees during the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021.
Acquisitions and Dispositions
We have acquired and integrated several businesses, as well as divested certain businesses, the most recent of which are outlined in the Acquisitions and Dispositions section of Part I and presented in detail in Note 2 to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Net Sales Increase
Net sales over a five-year period have increased 10% from $514,530 for the year ended February 28, 2017 to $563,605 for the year ended February 28, 2021. During this period, our sales were positively impacted by the following items:
•
The introduction of new products and product lines in the Automotive Electronics and Consumer Electronics segments, such as: OEM rear seat entertainment; remote start and security products; premium audio computer speaker systems; various premium and non-premium Bluetooth and wireless speaker products; multi-room streaming audio solutions; neckband, on-ear, in-ear, and over-ear headphones; nursery products; and karaoke products,
•
the acquisition of certain assets of Rosen Electronics LLC,
•
the acquisition of certain assets of Vehicle Safety Holdings Corp.,
•
the acquisition of certain assets of Directed LLC and Directed Electronics Canada Inc.,
•
the introduction of activity tracking band fulfillment programs and the increase in product offerings under these programs,
•
international digital broadcasting upgrades necessitating the purchase of updated consumer accessory products, and
•
successful marketing and promotional activity.
These items were partially offset by:
•
impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, which caused nationwide and global business closures, including car manufacturers, car dealerships, movie theaters, and other brick and mortar businesses where our products are sold;
•
volatility in core Automotive Electronics and Consumer Electronics sales due to declines in global automotive sales, increased competition, lower selling prices, changes in technology and demand, and the volatility of the national and global economy;
•
the discontinuance and reduction of various high volume/low margin product lines such as clock radios, digital players, digital voice recorders, and portable DVD players;
•
decreased box office sales affecting the Company's cinema audio products;
•
weather factors resulting in changes in demand for aftermarket remote start products; and
•
the sale of certain branded product inventory of the Company to a third party in order to license the brand name for a commission.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates (see Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements)
General
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make certain estimates, judgments, and assumptions that we believe are reasonable based upon the information available. These estimates and assumptions can be subjective and complex and may affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues, and expenses reported in those financial statements. As a result, actual results could differ from such estimates and assumptions. During Fiscal 2021, as well as subsequent to February 28, 2021, there has been continuous and significant changes to the global economic situation as a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic. It is possible that this could cause changes to estimates as a result of the financial circumstances of the markets in which the Company operates, the price of the Company’s publicly traded equity in comparison to the Company’s carrying value, and the health of the global economy. Such changes to estimates could potentially result in impacts that would be material to the consolidated financial statements, particularly with respect to the fair value of the Company’s reporting units in relation to potential goodwill impairment and the fair value of long-lived assets in relation to potential impairment.
The significant accounting policies and estimates which we believe are the most critical in fully understanding and evaluating the reported consolidated financial results include the following:
Revenue Recognition
On March 1, 2018, the Company adopted ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, and all the related amendments (“ASC 606”), using the modified retrospective method. Most of the changes resulting from the adoption of ASC Topic 606 on March 1, 2018 were changes in presentation within the Consolidated Balance Sheet, and we made no changes to opening Retained Earnings. The impact of the adoption of ASC Topic 606 has been immaterial to our net income; however, the adoption did increase the level of disclosure concerning our net sales.
The core principle of ASC 606 is that an entity recognizes revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods and services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods and services. We apply the FASB’s guidance on revenue recognition, which requires us to recognize the amount of revenue and consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for goods and services transferred to our customers. To do this, the Company applies the five-step model prescribed by the FASB, which requires us to: (i) identify the contract with the customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
We account for a contract or purchase order when it has approval and commitment from both parties, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are identified, the contract has commercial substance, and collectability of
consideration is probable. Revenue is recognized when control of the product passes to the customer, which is upon shipment, unless otherwise specified within the customer contract or on the purchase order as delivery, and is recognized at the amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to receive for the products sold, including various forms of discounts. When revenue is recorded, estimates of returns are made and recorded as a reduction of revenue.
Sales Incentives
Sales incentives are accounted for in accordance with ASC 606. We offer sales incentives to our customers in the form of (1) co-operative advertising allowances; (2) market development funds; (3) volume incentive rebates; and (4) other trade allowances. We accrue the cost of co-operative advertising allowances, volume incentive rebates, and market development funds at the later of when the customer purchases our products or when the sales incentive is offered to the customer. We record the provision for other trade allowances at the later of when the sales incentive is offered or when the related revenue is recognized. Except for other trade allowances, all sales incentives require the customer to purchase our products during a specified period of time. All sales incentives require customers to claim the sales incentive within a certain time period (referred to as the "claim period"). All costs associated with sales incentives are classified as a reduction of net sales.
Depending on the specific facts and circumstances, we utilize either the most likely amount or the expected value methods to estimate the effect of uncertainty on the amount of variable consideration to which we would be entitled. The most likely amount method considers the single most likely amount from a range of possible consideration amounts, while the expected value method is the sum of probability-weighted amounts in a range of possible consideration amounts. Both methods are based upon the contractual terms of the incentives and historical experience with each customer. Although we make our best estimate of sales incentive liabilities, many factors, including significant unanticipated changes in the purchasing volume and the lack of claims from customers could have a significant impact on the liability for sales incentives and reported operating results. We record estimates for cash discounts, promotional rebates, and other promotional allowances in the period the related revenue is recognized (“Customer Credits”). The provision for Customer Credits is recorded as a reduction from gross sales and reserves for Customer Credits are presented within accrued sales incentives on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Unearned sales incentives are volume incentive rebates where the customer did not purchase the required minimum quantities of product during the specified time. Volume incentive rebates are reversed into income in the period when the customer did not reach the required minimum purchases of product during the specified time. Unclaimed sales incentives are sales incentives earned by the customer, but the customer has not claimed payment within the claim period (period after program has ended). Unclaimed sales incentives are investigated in a timely manner after the end of the program and reversed if deemed appropriate.
Accounts Receivable
We perform ongoing credit evaluations of our customers and adjust credit limits based upon payment history and current credit worthiness, as determined by a review of current credit information. We continuously monitor collections from our customers and maintain a provision for estimated credit losses based upon historical experience and any specific customer collection issues that have been identified. While such credit losses have historically been within management's expectations and the provisions established, we cannot guarantee that we will continue to experience the same credit loss rates that have been experienced in the past. Our five largest customer balances comprise 25% of our accounts receivable balance as of February 28, 2021. A significant change in the liquidity or financial position of any one of these customers could have a material adverse impact on the collectability of accounts receivable and our results of operations.
On March 1, 2020, we adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-13, “Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments,” which did not have a material impact on our financial statements. Our financial instruments consist of trade receivables arising from revenue transactions in the ordinary course of business. We extend credit to customers based on pre-defined criteria and trade receivables are generally due within 30 to 60 days.
Inventory
We value our inventory at the lower of the actual cost to purchase or the net realizable value of the inventory. Net realizable value is defined as estimated selling prices, less cost of completion, disposal, and transportation. We regularly review inventory quantities on-hand and record a provision in cost of sales for excess and obsolete
inventory based primarily on selling prices, indications from customers based upon current price negotiations, and purchase orders. The cost of the inventory is determined primarily on a weighted moving average basis, with a portion valued at standard cost, which approximates actual costs on the first in, first out basis. Our industry is characterized by rapid technological change and frequent new product introductions that could result in an increase in the amount of obsolete inventory quantities on-hand. In addition, and as necessary, specific reserves for future known or anticipated events may be established.
Estimates of excess and obsolete inventory may prove to be inaccurate, in which case we may have understated or overstated the provision required for excess and obsolete inventory. Although we make every effort to ensure the accuracy of our forecasts of future product demand, any significant unanticipated changes in demand or technological developments could have a significant impact on the carrying value of inventory and our results of operations.
Long-Lived and Intangible Asset Impairments
As of February 28, 2021, intangible assets totaled $90,104 and property, plant and equipment totaled $52,026. Management makes estimates and assumptions in preparing the consolidated financial statements for which actual results will emerge over long periods of time. This includes the recoverability of long-lived assets employed in the business, including assets of acquired businesses. These estimates and assumptions are closely monitored by management and periodically adjusted as circumstances warrant. For instance, expected asset lives may be shortened or an impairment recorded based upon a change in the expected use of the asset or performance of the related asset group. At the present time, management intends to continue the development, marketing and selling of products associated with its intangible assets, and there are no known restrictions on the continuation of their use.
In connection with the annual impairment test performed as of the last day of the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021, the Company determined that one of its trademarks in the Consumer Electronics segment was impaired. The impairment was the result of shortfalls in sales due to reduced demand of the product category. As a result, an impairment charge of $1,300 was recorded for the year ended February 28, 2021 (see Note 1(k)). Related long-lived assets were tested for recoverability and determined to be recoverable and therefore no additional impairments related to long-lived assets were recorded.
In connection with the annual impairment test performed as of the last day of the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020, the Company determined that several of its indefinite-lived trademarks in the Consumer Electronics segment, were impaired. The impairments were the result of the Company being unable to secure product placement into customer stores, anticipated shortfalls in sales due to economic uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, reduced demand from a large traditional brick-and-mortar customer, along with continued declines in the German economy. As a result, several indefinite-lived tradenames in the Consumer Electronics segment were impaired resulting in impairment charges of $2,828 recorded for the year ended February 29, 2020 (see Note 1(k)). Related long-lived assets were tested for recoverability and determined to be recoverable and therefore no additional impairments related to long-lived assets were recorded in the Consumer Electronics segment.
In the Biometrics segment, in connection with the annual impairment test for Fiscal 2020, the Company determined that its indefinite-lived trademark was impaired. The impairment of the trademark was the result of lack of customer acceptance of the related technology, lower than anticipated results, adjusted expectations for demand and anticipated delays of product deployment with target customers due to economic uncertainty given the COVID-19 pandemic. Related long-lived assets in the Biometrics segment were tested for recoverability and determined not to be recoverable. The fair value of the long-lived assets that were not recoverable were estimated, and when compared to their carrying value, were determined to also be impaired. As a result, total impairments in the Biometrics segment of $27,402 for indefinite-lived and definite-lived intangible assets were recorded for the year ended February 29, 2020 (see Note 1 (k)).
The combined impairment charges for both the Consumer Electronics segment and the Biometrics segment aggregated $30,230 for fiscal year ended February 29, 2020.
During the second quarter of Fiscal 2019, the Company re-evaluated its projections for several brands in its former Consumer Accessories and Automotive segments based on lower than anticipated results. Specifically, during the second quarter of Fiscal 2019, the lower than anticipated results were due to reduced product load-ins, increased competition for certain product lines, a streamlining of SKU’s, and a change in market strategy for one of its brands.
Accordingly, these were considered indicators of impairment requiring the Company to test the related indefinite-lived tradenames for impairment as of August 31, 2018. The Company also tested its indefinite-lived intangible assets as of February 28, 2019 as part of its annual impairment testing. During the fourth quarter, the Company further streamlined its SKUs in conjunction with its corporate realignment and transformation initiatives, and adjusted expectations for select customer demand, and the anticipated results from alternative sales channels for one of its brands. As a result of these analyses, it was determined that several of the Company’s former Consumer Accessories trademarks and one of the Automotive trademarks were impaired with total impairment charges of $25,789 recorded for the year ended February 28, 2019 (see Note 1(k)).
Approximately 39% of our indefinite-lived trademarks ($24,432) are at risk of impairment as of February 28, 2021. When testing indefinite-lived assets for impairment, we have the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the estimated fair value is less than its carrying amount. If we elect to perform a qualitative assessment and determine that an impairment is more likely than not, we are then required to perform the quantitative impairment test; otherwise, no further analysis is required. Under the qualitative assessment, we consider various qualitative factors, including macroeconomic conditions, relevant industry and market trends, cost factors, overall financial performance, other entity-specific events, and events affecting the indefinite-lived asset that could indicate a potential change in the fair value of our indefinite-lived assets. We also considered the specific future outlook for the indefinite-lived asset. We may also elect not to perform the qualitative assessment and instead, proceed directly to the quantitative impairment test. The Company uses an income approach, based on the relief from royalty method, to value the indefinite-lived trademarks as part of its quantitative impairment test. This impairment test involves the use of accounting estimates and assumptions, changes in which could materially impact our financial condition or operating performance if actual results differ from such estimates and assumptions. The critical assumptions in the discounted cash flow model include revenues, long-term growth rates, royalty rates, and discount rates. Management exercises judgment in developing these assumptions. Certain of these assumptions are based upon industry projections, facts specific to the trademarks and consideration of our long-term view for the trademark and the markets we operate in. If we were to experience sales declines, a significant change in operating margins which may impact estimated royalty rates, an increase in our discount rates, and/or a decrease in our projected long-term growth rates, there would be an increased risk of impairment of these indefinite-lived trademarks.
The cost of other intangible assets with definite lives and long-lived assets are amortized on an accelerated or straight-line basis over their respective lives. Management has determined that the current lives of these assets are appropriate.
Long-lived assets and certain identifiable intangibles are reviewed for impairment in accordance with ASC 360 whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying value of an asset to future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying value of the long-lived assets are not recoverable on an undiscounted basis, they are then compared to their estimated fair market value. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying value of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets.
The Company holds certain long-lived assets in Venezuela, which are held for investment purposes. During the second quarter of Fiscal 2019, the Company assessed the recoverability of these properties as a result of the country's continued economic deterioration, which included a significant currency devaluation in August of 2018. The Company estimated the future undiscounted cash flows expected to be received from these properties. The estimate of the future undiscounted cash flows considered the Company’s financial condition and its intent and ability to retain its investments for a period of time sufficient to allow for the recovery of the carrying value. The future undiscounted cash flows did not exceed the net carrying value for the long-lived assets. The estimated fair value of the properties, which also considered the current conditions of the economy in Venezuela, the volatility of the real estate market, and the significant political unrest, resulted in a full non-cash impairment charge of $3,473 for the year ended February 28, 2019. The non-cash impairment charge is included in Other Income (Expense) on the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive (Loss) Income. The value of the Company's properties held for investment purposes in Venezuela is $0 as of February 28, 2021.
Voxx’s goodwill totaled $58,311 as of February 28, 2021. Goodwill is tested for impairment as of the last day of each fiscal year at the reporting unit level. When testing goodwill for impairment, we have the option to first assess
qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If we elect to perform a qualitative assessment and determine that an impairment is more likely than not, we are then required to perform the quantitative impairment test; otherwise, no further analysis is required. Under the qualitative assessment, we consider various qualitative factors, including macroeconomic conditions, relevant industry and market trends, cost factors, overall financial performance, other entity-specific events, and events affecting the reporting unit that could indicate a potential change in fair value of our reporting unit or the composition of its carrying values. We also consider the specific future outlook for the reporting unit. We also may elect not to perform the qualitative assessment and instead, proceed directly to the quantitative impairment test. Application of the goodwill impairment test requires judgment, including the identification of reporting units, assignment of assets and liabilities to reporting units, assignment of goodwill to reporting units, and estimation of the fair value of each reporting unit. Based on the Company's goodwill impairment assessment, all the reporting units with goodwill had estimated fair values as of February 28, 2021 that exceeded their carrying values. As a result of the annual assessment, no impairment charges were recorded related to goodwill during Fiscal 2021, Fiscal 2020, or Fiscal 2019.
Goodwill allocated to our Klipsch, Invision, Rosen, VSM, and DEI reporting units was 79.8% ($46,533), 12.6% ($7,372), 1.5% ($880), 1.0% ($572 ), and 5.1% ($2,954), respectively. The fair values of the Klipsch and Invision reporting units are greater than their carrying values by approximately 544.9% ($188,149) and 25.5% ($5,094), respectively, as of February 28, 2021. The quantitative assessment utilizes either an income approach, a market approach, or a combination of these approaches to determine the fair value of its reporting units. These approaches have a degree of uncertainty. The income approach employs a discounted cash flow model to value the reporting unit as part of its impairment test. This impairment test involves the use of accounting estimates and assumptions, changes in which could materially impact our financial condition or operating performance if actual results differ from such estimates and assumptions. The critical assumptions in the discounted cash flow model are revenues, operating margins, working capital and a discount rate (developed using a weighted average cost of capital analysis). Management exercises judgment in developing these assumptions. Certain of these assumptions are based upon industry projections, facts specific to the reporting unit, market participant assumptions and data, and consideration of our long-term view for the reporting unit and the markets we operate in. The market approach employs market multiples from guideline public companies operating in our industry. Estimates of fair value are derived by applying multiples based on revenue and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (“EBITDA”) adjusted for size and performance metrics relative to peer companies. If the Klipsch reporting unit were to experience sales declines, sustained pricing pressures, unfavorable operating margins, lack of new product acceptance by consumers, changes in consumer trends and preferred shopping channels, less than anticipated results for the holiday season, a change in the peer group or performance of the peer companies, an increase to the discount rate, and/or a decrease in our projected long-term growth rates used in the discounted cash flow model, there would be an increased risk of goodwill impairment for the Klipsch reporting unit. If the Invision reporting unit experienced an increase to the discount rate, a lack or delay in new product acceptance, cancellation, or reduction in projected volumes from OEM customers, or a change in our projected long-term growth rates used in the discounted cash flow model, there would be an increased risk of goodwill impairment for the Invision reporting unit. If the Rosen, VSM, and DEI reporting units experienced an increase to the discount rate, sales declines, changes in consumer trends, or increases in cost factors, there would be an increased risk of goodwill impairment for the Rosen, VSM, and DEI reporting units.
Warranties
We offer warranties of various lengths depending upon the specific product. Our standard warranties require us to repair or replace defective product returned by both end users and customers during such warranty period at no cost. We do not sell extended warranties. We record an estimate for warranty related costs in cost of sales, based upon historical experience of actual warranty claims and current information on repair costs and contract terms with certain manufacturers. While warranty costs have historically been within expectations and the provisions established, we cannot guarantee that we will continue to experience the same warranty return rates or repair costs that have been experienced in the past. A significant increase in product return rates, or a significant increase in the costs to repair products, could have a material adverse impact on our operating results.
Stock-Based Compensation
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to compute the estimated fair value of stock-based awards. The Black-Scholes option pricing model includes assumptions regarding dividend yields, expected volatility, expected option term and risk-free interest rates. The assumptions used in computing the fair value of stock-based awards reflect our best estimates, but involve uncertainties relating to market and other conditions, many of which are outside of our control. We estimate expected volatility by considering the historical volatility of our stock, the implied volatility of publicly traded stock options in our stock and our expectations of volatility for the expected term of stock-based compensation awards. For restricted stock awards, the fair value of the award is the price on the date of grant. As a result, if other assumptions or estimates had been used for restricted stock awards granted in the current and prior periods, the total stock-based compensation expense for the current fiscal year of $1,749 could have been materially different. Furthermore, if different assumptions are used in future periods, stock-based compensation expense could be materially impacted in the future.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with the guidance issued under Statement ASC 740, "Income Taxes" (“ASC 740”) with consideration for uncertain tax positions. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount of future tax benefit that is more likely than not to be realized.
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying values of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets within the jurisdiction from which they arise, we consider all positive and negative evidence including the results of recent operations, scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities, future taxable income, and tax planning strategies. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled (see Note 8). The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities from a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
The Company accounts for uncertain tax positions in accordance with the authoritative guidance issued under ASC 740, which addresses the determination of whether tax benefits claimed or expected to be claimed on a tax return should be recorded in the financial statements. The Company may recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such position should be measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. The Company provides loss contingencies for federal, state, and international tax matters relating to potential tax examination issues, planning initiatives and compliance responsibilities. The development of these reserves requires judgments about tax issues, potential outcomes, and timing, which if different, may materially impact the Company's financial condition and results of operations. The Company classifies interest and penalties associated with income taxes as a component of Income tax expense (benefit) on the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss).
Results of Operations
Included in Item 8 of this annual report on Form 10-K are the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020 and the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss), Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ Equity and Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended February 28, 2021, February 29, 2020 and February 28, 2019. In order to provide the reader meaningful comparisons, the following analysis provides comparisons of the audited year ended February 28, 2021 with the audited year ended February 29, 2020, and the audited year ended February 29, 2020 with the audited year ended February 28, 2019. We analyze and explain the differences between periods in the specific line items of the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss).
Year Ended February 28, 2021 Compared to the Years Ended February 29, 2020 and February 28, 2019
Continuing Operations
The tables presented in this section set forth, for the periods indicated, certain Statement of Operations data for the years ended February 28, 2021 ("Fiscal 2021"), February 29, 2020 ("Fiscal 2020") and February 28, 2019 ("Fiscal 2019").
Net Sales
Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020
Automotive Electronics sales, which include both OEM and aftermarket automotive electronics, represented 29.1% of the net sales for the year ended February 28, 2021, compared to 28.9% in the prior year. Sales in this segment increased $49,749 for the year ended February 28, 2021, as compared to the prior year. The primary driver of sales increases in this segment was sales of OEM and aftermarket products related to the Company’s VSM and DEI subsidiaries, established in connection with the Company’s acquisitions in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020 and the second quarter of Fiscal 2021, respectively. Sales from these two new subsidiaries totaled approximately $71,000 and comprised approximately 43% of the segment’s sales for the year ended February 28, 2021. In the prior year, the Company’s VSM subsidiary contributed approximately $2,300 of sales to the Automotive Electronics segment. The Company also saw an increase in sales of its aftermarket security and remote start products of approximately $3,600 during the year ended February 28, 2021, partly due to a boost in demand following business re-openings after the COVID-19 shut-downs, as purchases could not be made by customers during the shutdowns. Offsetting these increases, the segment experienced sales declines in certain product lines during the year ended February 28, 2021 related to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as certain other factors. The Company experienced a net decrease in sales of OEM rear seat entertainment products totaling approximately $10,300 due to several automotive manufacturing plant shut-downs beginning in March 2020 as a result of COVID-19, including Ford, GM, FCA, and Subaru. Many plants began to gradually re-open during the second quarter of our fiscal year, and while some of the programs have begun to ramp up production again, others have yet to return to pre-COVID levels, thus negatively impacting sales for the year. Additionally, OEM rear seat entertainment sales were negatively impacted during the year ended February 28, 2021 by the cancellation of a program with one of the Company’s larger customers that had been in production during the prior year. This was partially offset by the successful launch of a new program with a customer in October 2020. The Company’s OEM remote start sales decreased approximately $6,200 during the year ended February 28, 2021 as a result of an increase in the use of Tier 1 factory installed remote start products by many automotive manufacturers (which the Company does not sell) over accessory level remote starts. This has negatively impacted the Company’s sales to certain of its OEM remote start customers. Sales of aftermarket rear seat entertainment products also decreased during the year ended February 28, 2021 by approximately $2,700 due to the COVID-19 related shutdowns of car dealerships and other brick and mortar businesses during the first quarter of the year, followed by stock-outages of several products, which continued to negatively impact sales through the remainder of the fiscal year. Finally, satellite radio fulfillment sales decreased approximately $900 during the year ended February 28, 2021 both as a result of business shut-downs during COVID-19, as well as due to the fact that most new vehicles include this product as a standard option.
Consumer Electronics sales represented 70.7% of net sales for the year ended February 28, 2021 as compared to 70.8% in the prior year. Sales increased $118,588 for the year ended February 28, 2021 as compared to the prior year due primarily to the positive sales and promotion of several of the Company’s premium audio products. During Fiscal 2021, the Company experienced greater consumer demand and achieved market share growth in its premium home theater, subwoofer, and premium wireless categories, launching a new premium wireless computer speaker
system and selling many of its products through warehouse club channels, as well as through online platforms, which resulted in an increase of approximately $118,400 in sales for the year ended February 28, 2021. The Company’s newly formed subsidiary, 11 Trading Company LLC, also began selling Onkyo and Pioneer products through new distribution agreements during the third quarter of the fiscal year, contributing to an increase of approximately $13,700 in sales for the year ended February 28, 2021. Within Europe, the Company experienced stronger online sales during year ended February 28, 2021 of approximately $6,300 due to many consumers shopping from home during the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as an increase in sales in its Do It Yourself (“DIY”) line of products, a new sales channel of discount retailers, and a shift in focus of premium audio products in Europe from low margin to traditional home theater products. Offsetting these sales increases were decreases in sales related to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as other factors. The Company experienced decreases in sales of approximately $12,200 in certain consumer electronic and accessory products for the year ended February 28, 2021, such as reception products, remotes, wireless speakers, and other power products, primarily due to nationwide brick and mortar business closures and delayed customer orders related to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as due to the Company’s continuing rationalization of SKUs for certain of these products, with the goal of limiting sales of lower margin products. There was also a decrease in sales of the Company’s premium commercial speaker products of approximately $3,100 due to the shut-down of cinemas during the pandemic. Additionally, the Company experienced a decrease in sales of its motion products during the year ended February 28, 2021 of approximately $2,700, as one of the Company’s healthcare programs ended during the fiscal year, and there was a decrease in sales of smart home security products of approximately $800, as the Company began exiting this category during Fiscal 2020. Finally, product sales in the Company’s rest of world locations declined approximately $700 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic due to overseas lockdowns and customer order delays and cancellations.
Biometrics represented 0.1% of our net sales for both of the years ended February 28, 2021 and February 29, 2020 and sales increased in the segment by $375 for the year ended February 28, 2021 as compared to the prior year. This segment experienced an increase in product sales for the year ended February 28, 2021 due to increased sales of its EXT outdoor perimeter access product, and the updated version of its Nano NXT perimeter access product, both of which launched in the second quarter of Fiscal 2020. Additionally, the Company began selling its NIXT product during the year ended February 28, 2021, which can be optionally fitted with iTEMP, a product that can take an individual’s temperature before allowing iris access.
Fiscal 2020 compared to Fiscal 2019
Automotive Electronics sales, which include both OEM and aftermarket automotive electronics, represented 28.9% of the net sales for the year ended February 29, 2020, compared to 36.2% in the prior year. Sales in this segment decreased during the year ended February 29, 2020 as compared to the prior year due to various factors, including a decline in sales of the Company’s EVO rear seat entertainment product line, which was due in part to slower sales for certain programs that began in the prior year and the discontinuation of two planned programs, which is attributable to a softening of global automotive industry sales during the year. The Company’s OEM and aftermarket security and remote start sales also declined during the year ended February 29, 2020 as a result of competition due in part to a shift in demand from analog to digital remote start products, as well as the discontinuation of passive entry programs with certain customers. Sales of aftermarket satellite radio and headrest products have declined for the year ended February 29, 2020 as compared to the prior year, as a result of an increase in standard factory equipped vehicles with these options, as well as due to price competition and increased tariffs for aftermarket headrest products. Additionally, during the year ended February 29, 2020, the Company made a non-refundable up-front payment to one of its customers as consideration for a future OEM program award, which resulted in a reduction of revenue. Offsetting the sales declines in this segment for the year ended February 29, 2020 were increases in sales of certain aftermarket safety and security products as compared to the prior year, as well as sales related to the Company’s newly acquired Vehicle Safety Holdings Corp. business in the fourth quarter.
Consumer Electronics sales represented 70.8% of net sales for the year ended February 29, 2020 as compared to 63.4% in the prior year. Sales decreased for the year ended February 29, 2020 as compared to the prior year due to several factors. The Company experienced decreases in sales of certain products, such as in the Project Nursery line, as a result of the elimination of baby video monitors; in wireless and bluetooth speakers, due a reduction in product placement with one of the Company’s larger customers and the timing of annual orders from another; in sales of smart home products, as the Company is exiting this category; and in karaoke products, due to a one time holiday sale to one of the Company’s customers in the prior year that did not repeat in the current fiscal year. The Company also continued to see a decline in sales of certain hook-up, power products, and headphones, as a result of changes in
customer demand and technology, and due to the Company’s continuing rationalization of SKUs in Fiscal 2020, with the goal of limiting sales of lower margin products. Within Europe, the Company experienced decreases in sales across all product lines, as well as in the DIY business during the year ended February 29, 2020 as a result of a slowdown in the European market. Offsetting these decreases, the Company had an increase in sales within both of its premium mobility and premium wireless and bluetooth speaker categories as a result of the launch of new lines of soundbars, Bluetooth speakers, and wireless earbuds, as well as stronger sales of several existing products. The Company’s premium home separate speaker product sales also increased as a result of the continued successful sales of its new domestic product lines that launched during the second quarter of Fiscal 2019, and additional distribution partners for the Company’s premium commercial speaker products had a favorable impact on sales for the year ended February 29, 2020 as well. Additionally, reception product sales were up for the year ended February 29, 2020 as a result of expanded SKU offerings with certain customers and stronger market share, and sales of the Company’s activity bands have increased year over year as a result of increased motion program participants, as well as additional product offerings for participants, including the Apple watch and Fitbit.
Biometrics represented 0.1% of our net sales for the year ended February 29, 2020, compared to 0.2% in the prior year. This segment experienced a decrease in product sales for the year ended February 29, 2020 as a result of its product mix, as the Company was selling more of its higher dollar Hbox products during the year ended February 28, 2019. During the year ended February 29, 2020, the Company began selling its EXT outdoor perimeter access product, as well as an updated version of its Nano NXT perimeter access product, which both sell at a lower price point and have not yet achieved the sales volumes to surpass prior year sales dollars.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin Percentage
Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020
Gross margins in the Automotive Electronics segment increased 370 basis points for the year ended February 28, 2021. The primary driver of the margin increases in this segment has been sales of OEM and aftermarket products related to the Company’s VSM and DEI subsidiaries, whose products have higher profit margins than those typically achieved by the segment. DEI’s sales were not present in the prior year, and VSM contributed to sales for one month of Fiscal 2020, or 2% of the segment’s sales. The increase in sales of higher margin aftermarket remote start and security products also contributed positively to the segment’s margins during the year ended February 28, 2021. Offsetting these positive impacts, the decline in sales of higher margin OEM security and remote start products during the year ended February 28, 2021, due to the shift in demand from accessory level remote starts to production level, factory installed remote starts, caused a decline in margins. In addition, there was a decline in aftermarket headrest sales during the year ended February 28, 2021, which typically generate higher margins for the segment and thus had a negative impact on margins for the year.
Gross margins in the Consumer Electronics segment decreased 120 basis points for the year ended February 28, 2021 compared to the prior year. Margin declines during the year ended February 28, 2021 were primarily driven by the Company’s newest line of premium wireless computer speakers, as well as other premium audio products sold through warehouse club channels, which have contributed positively to sales, but have been sold at lower margins than those typically associated with the Company’s premium wireless speaker products. The Company’s premium headphone margins also negatively impacted the segment’s overall margins during the year ended February 28, 2021 due to close out sales of certain older products in preparation for the launch of its newest line of wireless earbuds,
which contributed to an increase in sales of these product, but a decline in the margins. Additionally, although sales in Europe have increased during the year ended February 28, 2021, the increase in sales generated from a new sales channel of discount retail customers has generated lower margins and has had a negative impact on the year. As an offset to these negative impacts, the segment has experienced margin increases during the year ended February 28, 2021 due to factors including a shift in focus of premium audio products in Europe from low margin to traditional home theater products. Additionally, while the Company experienced decreases in sales of certain product lines during the year ended February 28, 2021, such as reception products and remotes, the margins earned on these products improved as compared to the prior year due to the movement of production out of China.
Gross margins in the Biometrics segment improved for the year ended February 28, 2021 compared to the prior year. The increase in margins for the year ended February 28, 2021 was primarily a result of prior year events that negatively impacted the segment’s margins in Fiscal 2020. Certain tooling and defective repair costs incurred during the year ended February 29, 2020, as well as the provision of beta samples to certain customers at no cost during the prior year, negatively impacted Fiscal 2020 margins. A large sale made at a loss during the year ended February 29, 2020 also caused lower margins in the prior year. During the year ended February 28, 2021, the Company provided more onsite and remote support to customers, which generates higher margins for the segment. Offsetting these positive margin impacts for the year ended February 28, 2021 has been the reduction in pricing on certain products, which has helped to drive higher sales in Fiscal 2021 but has resulted in lower margins for the segment. In addition, the release of inventory reserves in the prior year had a positive impact on the segment’s gross margin in Fiscal 2020, thus negatively impacting the current year margin comparisons.
Fiscal 2020 compared to Fiscal 2019
Gross margins in the Automotive Electronics segment decreased 480 basis points for the year ended February 29, 2020. The decrease in margins was driven primarily by the declines in higher margin OEM security, remote start, and rear seat entertainment sales, which also resulted in lower absorption of fixed overhead costs in the current year periods, further decreasing margins for the segment. Additionally, slow moving write-off adjustments were made during the fiscal year, in part due to the slower rear seat entertainment sales and the discontinuation of certain programs. There was also a decline in aftermarket headrest product sales, which typically generate higher margins for the segment. Margins were negatively affected further during the year ended February 29, 2020 by tariff increases, as certain of the Company’s products are manufactured in China, while production of certain other products were relocated to other countries with higher labor costs. During the year ended February 29, 2020, the Company also made a non-refundable up-front payment to a customer as consideration for a future OEM program award, which negatively impacted margins. As an offset to these margin declines during the year ended February 29, 2020, the Automotive Electronics segment experienced declines in satellite radio sales, which contribute lower margins to the group, while increased sales of certain aftermarket security products and products related to the newly acquired Vehicle Safety Holdings Corp. business contributed favorably to margins for the year.
Gross margins in the Consumer Electronics segment increased 200 basis points for the year ended February 29, 2020 compared to the prior year. Margin increases during the year ended February 29, 2020 were driven in part by increased sales of the Company’s high margin premium wireless and bluetooth speakers, mobility products, home separate, and commercial speakers, as well as the result of heavy discounts offered on older mobility products in the prior year, such as wired headphones and neckbands, that did not repeat in the current year. Margins have been negatively affected during the year ended February 29, 2020 by tariff increases, as certain of the Company’s products are manufactured in China, while production of certain other products were relocated to other countries with higher labor costs. The Company offset some of the effects of these tariff increases, where possible, with price increases. Margin declines were also driven by declining sales of products with typically higher margins, such as Project Nursery and karaoke products, as well as by sales declines within the European market and higher warehousing costs incurred related to the use of a third party for warehousing services in Europe beginning during the first quarter of Fiscal 2020.
Gross margins in the Biometrics segment increased for the year ended February 29, 2020 compared to the prior year. These increases were primarily due to the write off slow moving inventory and parts in Fiscal 2019 related to its myris product, which negatively impacted margins in the prior year. Offsetting these factors were sales of certain inventory during the year ended February 28, 2019 that had been previously written off, and contributed positively to margins in the prior year, as well as higher sales of licensing fees in the prior year, which earned higher margins for the segment. Additionally, during the year ended February 29, 2020, the Company incurred certain tooling and
defective repair costs, as well as provided beta samples to certain customers and prospects at no charge, which negatively impacted margins for the current fiscal year.
Operating Expenses
Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020
The Company experienced an overall decrease in operating expenses of $24,011 for Fiscal 2021 as compared to Fiscal 2020; however, in the absence of intangible asset impairment charges in both years, operating expenses would have increased by $4,919.
Selling expenses have increased $4,467 for the year ended February 28, 2021. This increase was primarily due to increased commission expense of approximately $4,600 as a result of higher sales for the fiscal year. A net increase in salary expense of approximately $1,200 was due to the additional headcount created by acquisitions resulting in the establishment of the VSM and DEI subsidiaries in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020 and the second quarter of Fiscal 2021, respectively, as well as additional hires related to the Company’s new 11 Trading Company subsidiary related to distribution agreements for Onkyo and Pioneer products. This was slightly offset by the furlough of certain employees during the fiscal year due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Web advertising and platform expenses increased approximately $1,800 for the year ended February 28, 2021 due to an increase in online traffic, with many consumers working and shopping from home during the mandatory quarantines and business shutdowns throughout the country as a result of the pandemic. Additionally, credit card fees increased approximately $600 primarily as a result of the Company’s DEI subsidiary, established in connection with the Company’s acquisition in the second quarter of Fiscal 2021, whose subscription sales are transacted online. Offsetting these increases in selling expenses for the year ended February 28, 2021 were decreases due to factors directly related to the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in the temporary shut-down of many brick and mortar stores and mandatory quarantine orders during the first quarter of our Fiscal 2021 year, with phased re-openings taking place beginning in the second quarter through the remainder of our fiscal year. The elimination of all non-essential travel Company-wide resulted in a decrease in travel and entertainment expenses of approximately $1,700. Additionally, trade show expenses decreased approximately $1,800 as all events were either cancelled or held virtually due to COVID-19.
General and administrative expenses increased $1,157 during the year ended February 28, 2021. Increases in general and administrative expenses were due in part to a net increase in salary expense of approximately $3,300 during the fiscal year. Salary increases were due to higher bonus accruals as a result of the positive performance of the Company for the year ended February 28, 2021, as well as due to increased headcount resulting from the Company’s new DEI and VSM subsidiaries established in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020 and the second quarter of Fiscal 2021, respectively. This was offset by the furlough of certain employees during the year ended February 28, 2021, as well as due to the prior year grant of 200,000 fully vested shares of Class A Common Stock to the Company’s Chief Executive Officer in accordance with his employment agreement, which resulted in compensation expense of approximately $800 for the year ended February 29, 2020 that did not repeat in the current fiscal year. Professional fees also increased by approximately $1,300 as a result of acquisition-related services provided in connection with the Company’s DEI and VSM subsidiaries and insurance expense increased approximately $400 as a result of the deductible related to an IT security incident in the second quarter of the fiscal year, as well as due to the Company’s new VSM, DEI, and 11 Trading Company LLC subsidiaries. As an offset to these general and administrative expense increases were decreases related to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as other factors. Depreciation and amortization expense decreased approximately $1,300, net, for the year ended February 28, 2021 as a result of the impairment of certain definite-lived intangible assets at EyeLock in Fiscal 2020, which reduced the amortizable base of these assets. This was offset by increases in depreciation and amortization expense related to newly acquired
tangible and intangible assets within the VSM and DEI subsidiaries. Bad debt expense decreased approximately $1,100 as a result of the prior year reserves of certain customers who filed bankruptcy, which did not repeat in the current year, as well as due to the recovery of certain balances during the year ended February 28, 2021 that were previously written off. The elimination of all non-essential travel as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in travel and entertainment expense decreases of approximately $900 for the year ended February 28, 2021. Additionally, office and occupancy expenses decreased approximately $700 due to lower overhead, as certain of the Company’s offices were shut down during the first and second quarters of the fiscal year due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and many re-opened offices have remained at a reduced capacity through the remainder of the fiscal year.
Engineering and technical support expenses for the year ended February 28, 2021 declined $705 as compared to the prior year. For the year ended February 28, 2021, furloughs and headcount reductions at many of the Company’s locations related to the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in lower labor expenses of approximately $3,000. The elimination of all non-essential travel as a result of the pandemic also resulted in travel and entertainment expense decreases of approximately $500. These decreases were offset by increases in labor of approximately $2,600 as a result of the Company’s new VSM and DEI subsidiaries established in connection with the Company’s acquisitions in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020 and second quarter of Fiscal 2021, respectively.
In connection with its annual impairment test performed as of the last day of the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021, the Company determined that one of its trademarks in the Consumer Electronics segment was impaired. The impairment was the result of shortfalls in sales due to reduced demand of the product category. As a result, an impairment charge of $1,300 was recorded for the year ended February 28, 2021.
In connection with its annual impairment test performed as of the last day of the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020, the Company determined that several of its indefinite-lived intangible assets within the Consumer Electronics segment, as well as certain indefinite-lived and definite-lived intangible assets within the Biometrics segment were impaired. The impairments within the Consumer Electronics segment were the result of the Company being unable to secure product placement into customer stores, anticipated shortfalls in sales due to economic uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, reduced demand from a large traditional brick-and-mortar customer, along with continued declines in the German economy. The impairments within the Biometrics segment were the result of lack of customer acceptance of the related technology, lower than anticipated results, adjusted expectations for demand, and anticipated delays of product deployment with target customers due to economic uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company recorded total impairment charges of $30,230 for the year ended February 29, 2020 related to these impairments.
Fiscal 2020 compared to Fiscal 2019
The Company experienced an overall decrease in operating expenses of $3,351 for Fiscal 2020 as compared to Fiscal 2019.
Selling expenses have decreased for the year ended February 29, 2020 due to various factors, including headcount reductions related to Fiscal 2019 restructuring activities, lower commissions as a result of the decline in sales for the year, lower trade show expenses due to attending fewer shows, and lower advertising costs and display amortization expense, due to cost cutting measures, as well as the fact that many displays and fixtures are fully amortized or have been removed. These expense decreases were offset by salary increases resulting from transfers of certain employees from general and administrative to selling in conjunction with restructuring activities taking place in Fiscal 2019, and additional hires at the Company’s Klipsch, Oehlbach and Schwaiger subsidiaries, as well as higher web fees as a result of an increase in the Company’s online platform activity and web advertising.
General and administrative expenses increased during the year ended February 29, 2020. During the year ended February 29, 2020, the Company granted 200,000 fully vested common shares to the Company’s Chief Executive Officer, as well as granted additional shares which vest on future dates in accordance with his employment agreement signed in July 2019, resulting in an increase in compensation expense of approximately $1,700 for the year ended February 29, 2020. Additionally, during the year ended February 28, 2019, the Company received reimbursement of approximately $3,000 for certain professional fees and disbursements resulting from the favorable outcome of a lawsuit, which did not occur during the year ended February 29, 2020. Disregarding these specific items, general and administrative expenses would have decreased for the year. General and administrative expenses were also higher during the year ended February 29, 2020 due to higher payroll expenses resulting from increased medical claims as compared to the prior year. Offsetting the increases to general and administrative expenses discussed above were decreases in salary expense during the year ended February 29, 2020 due to reductions in
headcount and the transfer of certain employees to selling in conjunction with Fiscal 2019 restructuring activities, lower executive salaries due to salary and bonus structures under new employment agreements, as well as lower office and equipment rental expenses as a result of cost containment measures and lease expirations that were not renewed.
Engineering and technical support expenses for the year ended February 29, 2020 declined as compared to the prior year. For the year ended February 29, 2020, expenses were down primarily due to headcount reduction at certain of the Company’s subsidiaries, decreased research and development spending related to projects that were completed during the current year period, as well as due to the movement of work related to certain projects utilizing outside contractors to in-house employees at both EyeLock and Invision. These declines were partially offset by an increase in research and development expenses related to the start of new projects and higher certification fees for certain products under development, as well as salary and related expenses resulting from new hires at certain subsidiaries.
In connection with its annual impairment test performed as of the last day of the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2020, the Company determined that several of its indefinite-lived intangible assets within the Consumer Electronics segment, as well as certain indefinite-lived and definite-lived intangible assets within the Biometrics segment were impaired. The impairments within the Consumer Electronics segment were the result of the Company being unable to secure product placement into customer stores, anticipated shortfalls in sales due to economic uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, reduced demand from a large traditional brick-and-mortar customer, along with continued declines in the German economy. The impairments within the Biometrics segment were the result of lack of customer acceptance of the related technology, lower than anticipated results, adjusted expectations for demand, and anticipated delays of product deployment with target customers due to economic uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company recorded total impairment charges of $30,230 for the year ended February 29, 2020 related to these impairments.
Other (Expense)Income
Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020
Interest and bank charges represent expenses for the Company's bank obligations and supply chain financing arrangements, interest related to finance leases, and amortization of deferred financing costs. Interest and bank charges were relatively flat comparing the year ended February 28, 2021 to the prior year. During the second half of Fiscal 2020, the Company repaid the entire outstanding balance of its asset-based lending facility in Germany, thus eliminating the interest expense related to this obligation for the year ended February 28, 2021, which was offset by interest paid on the $20,000 precautionary borrowing from the Company’s Credit Facility in Fiscal 2021, which was outstanding from April 2020 through November 2020.
Equity in income of equity investee represents the Company's share of income from its 50% non-controlling ownership interest in ASA Electronics, LLC ("ASA"). The increase in income for the year ended February 28, 2021 is due to an increase in ASA’s gross profit, lower overhead, and growth in the RV and marine markets.
On September 30, 2019, the Company, through its subsidiary Voxx German Holdings Gmbh (the “Seller”), sold its real property in Pulheim, Germany to CLM S.A. RL (the “Purchaser”) for €10,920. Net proceeds received from the transaction were approximately $9,500 after transactional costs and repayment of the outstanding mortgage. Concurrently with the sale, the Seller entered into an operating lease arrangement with the Purchaser for a small portion of the real property to continue to operate its sales office in Germany. The transaction qualified for sale
leaseback accounting in accordance with ASC 842 and the Company recognized a gain on the execution of the sale transaction for the year ended February 29, 2020.
During Fiscal 2018, the Company sold its investment in RxNetworks, a non-controlled corporation, consisting of shares of the investee’s preferred stock. Voxx recognized a gain during Fiscal 2018 for the sale of this investment; however, a portion of the cash proceeds were subject to a hold-back provision, which was not included in the gain recognized in Fiscal 2018. During the second quarter of Fiscal 2020, the hold-back provision expired, and the Company received additional proceeds from the sale, recording an investment gain of $775 for the year ended February 29, 2020. A final payout of $42 received in November 2020 was recorded as an investment gain for the year ended February 28, 2021. During the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2019, all of the outstanding common stock of Fathom Systems Inc., a non-controlled corporation in which Voxx was invested, were repurchased by the investee for a price per share significantly below the value when issued. This resulted in a loss on Voxx's investment in Fathom of $530 for the year ended February 28, 2019.
Other, net includes net foreign currency gains or losses, interest income, rental income, and other miscellaneous income and expense. Other, net decreased for the year ended February 28, 2021. During the year ended February 28, 2021, interest income decreased $835 primarily as a result of lower interest rates applicable to the Company’s short term money market investments and lower cash balances available for investment during the year. Additionally, the Company had foreign currency losses of $(862) for the year ended February 28, 2021, as compared to foreign currency gains of $405 for the year ended February 29, 2020.
Fiscal 2020 compared to Fiscal 2019
Interest and bank charges represent expenses for the Company's bank obligations and supply chain financing arrangements, interest related to finance leases, and amortization of deferred financing costs. During the second and third quarters of Fiscal 2020, the Company temporarily suspended its domestic supply chain financing, thus resulting in a reduction of the related fees. The Company also repaid two of its outstanding mortgages and the entire outstanding balance of its asset-based lending obligation in Germany during the second half of Fiscal 2020, thus reducing interest expense related to these obligations.
Equity in income of equity investee represents the Company's share of income from its 50% non-controlling ownership interest in ASA Electronics, LLC ("ASA"). The decrease in income for the year ended February 29, 2020 is primarily a result of the impact of tariffs, increase in warranty costs, as well as due to certain product recall expenses incurred during the year ended February 29, 2020 that were not present in the prior year.
On September 30, 2019, the Company, through its subsidiary Voxx German Holdings Gmbh (the “Seller”), sold its real property in Pulheim, Germany to CLM S.A. RL (the “Purchaser”) for €10,920. Net proceeds received from the transaction were approximately $9,500 after transactional costs and repayment of the outstanding mortgage. Concurrently with the sale, the Seller entered into an operating lease arrangement with the Purchaser for a small portion of the real property to continue to operate its sales office in Germany. The transaction qualified for sale leaseback accounting in accordance with ASC 842 and the Company recognized a gain on the execution of the sale transaction for the year ended February 29, 2020.
During Fiscal 2018, the Company sold its investment in RxNetworks, a non-controlled corporation, consisting of shares of the investee’s preferred stock. Voxx recognized a gain of $1,416 during Fiscal 2018 for the sale of this investment; however, a portion of the cash proceeds were subject to a hold-back provision, which was not included in the gain recognized in Fiscal 2018. During the second quarter of Fiscal 2020, the hold-back provision expired, and the Company received the remaining proceeds from the sale, recording an investment gain of $775 for the year ended February 29, 2020. During the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2019, all of the outstanding common stock of Fathom Systems Inc., a non-controlled corporation in which Voxx was invested, were repurchased by the investee for a price per share significantly below the value when issued. This resulted in a loss on Voxx's investment in Fathom of $530 for the year ended February 28, 2019.
Other, net includes net foreign currency gains or losses, interest income, rental income, and other miscellaneous income and expense. Other, net increased for the year ended February 29, 2020. During the year ended February 29, 2020, the Company received the proceeds from a key man life insurance policy in the amount of $1,000, related to a former employee of Klipsch Group, Inc. that Voxx became the beneficiary of in conjunction with the acquisition of Klipsch in Fiscal 2012. As an offset to this income, the Company incurred a charge of $804 during the year ended
February 29, 2020 for a payment made to TE Connectivity Ltd. in final settlement of the working capital calculation related to the Fiscal 2018 sale of Hirschmann Car Communication GmbH.
Income Tax Provision
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Under ASC 740, the effects of changes in tax rates and laws are recognized in the period in which the new legislation is enacted. The CARES Act made various tax law changes including among other things (i) increased the limitation under IRC Section 163(j) for 2019 and 2020 to permit additional expensing of interest; (ii) enacted technical correction so that qualified improvement property can be immediately expensed under IRC Section 168(k) (iii) made modifications to the federal net operating loss rules including permitting federal net operating losses incurred in 2018, 2019, and 2020 to be carried back to the five preceding taxable years in order to generate a refund of previously paid income taxes, and (iv) enhanced recoverability of alternative minimum credit carryforwards. The CARES Act did not have a material impact on the income tax provision.
During Fiscal 2021, the Company recorded an income tax provision of $4,272 related to federal, state, and foreign taxes. The Company's effective tax rate of 15.5% differs from the statutory rate of 21% primarily related to (i) partial release of its valuation allowance as a result of recent profitability for which certain of the Company’s deferred tax assets became realizable on a more-likely-than-not basis; (ii) permanent differences, including the non-controlling interest and a global intangible low tax income (“GILTI”) inclusion; and (iii) state and local taxes. As of February 28, 2021, the Company continued to maintain a valuation allowance against certain U.S. and foreign deferred tax assets as the Company could not conclude that such assets will be realized on a more-likely-than-not basis. Any decline in the valuation allowance could have a favorable impact on our income tax provision and net income in the period in which such determination is made.
The effective tax rate of (2.2)% in Fiscal 2020 differs from the statutory rate of 21% primarily related to (i) current year losses for which limited tax benefit was provided; (ii) permanent differences, including the non-controlling interest and a global intangible low tax income (“GILTI”) inclusion; and (iii) an increase in the valuation allowance recorded against foreign deferred tax assets. During Fiscal 2020, the Company maintained a partial and full valuation allowance against certain U.S. and foreign deferred tax assets as the Company could not conclude that such assets will be realized on a more-likely-than-not basis. Any decline in the valuation allowance could have a favorable impact on our income tax provision and net income in the period in which such determination is made.
The effective tax rate of 10.4% in Fiscal 2019 differs from the statutory rate of 21% primarily related to current year losses for which limited tax benefit was provided. During Fiscal 2019, the Company maintained a partial valuation allowance against certain U.S. and foreign deferred tax assets as the Company could not conclude that such assets will be realized on a more-likely-than-not basis. Any decline in the valuation allowance could have a favorable impact on our income tax provision and net income in the period in which such determination is made.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not financial measures recognized by GAAP. EBITDA represents net income (loss), computed in accordance with GAAP, before interest expense and bank charges, taxes, and depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA represents EBITDA adjusted for stock-based compensation expense, life insurance proceeds, certain settlements, gains and losses, impairment charges, restructuring charges, and environmental remediation charges. Depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation, and impairment charges are non-cash items.
We present EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA in this Form 10-K because we consider them to be useful and appropriate supplemental measures of our performance. Adjusted EBITDA helps us to evaluate our performance without the effects of certain GAAP calculations that may not have a direct cash impact on our current operating performance. In addition, the exclusion of certain costs or gains relating to certain events that occurred during the periods presented allows for a more meaningful comparison of our results from period-to-period. These non-GAAP measures, as we define them, are not necessarily comparable to similarly entitled measures of other companies and may not be an appropriate measure for performance relative to other companies. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be assessed in isolation from, are not intended to represent, and should not be considered to be more meaningful measures than, or alternatives to, measures of operating performance as determined in accordance with GAAP.
Reconciliation of GAAP Net Income Attributable to VOXX International Corporation to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
(1)
For purposes of calculating Adjusted EBITDA for the Company, interest expense, bank charges, depreciation and amortization, and intangible asset impairment charges added back to net income (loss) have been adjusted in order to exclude the minority interest portion of these expenses attributable to EyeLock LLC.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows, Commitments and Obligations
As of February 28, 2021, we had working capital of $172,543 which includes cash and cash equivalents of $59,404 compared with working capital of $146,798 at February 29, 2020, which included cash and cash equivalents of $37,425. We plan to utilize our current cash position as well as collections from accounts receivable, the cash generated from our operations, when applicable, and the income on our investments to fund the current operations of the business. However, we may utilize all or a portion of current capital resources to pursue other business opportunities, including acquisitions, or to further pay down our debt. The following table summarizes our cash flow activity for all periods presented:
Net cash used in/provided by operating activities:
Operating activities provided cash of $36,611 for Fiscal 2021, due to factors including sales increases, as well as increases in accounts payable, accrued expenses, and accrued sales incentives. This was offset by increases in inventory and accounts receivable, which were driven by the increases in sales during the fiscal year, as well as due to losses incurred by EyeLock LLC.
During Fiscal 2020, operating activities used cash of $1,009, due to factors including sales declines and losses incurred by EyeLock LLC, as well as decreases in accounts payable, accrued expenses, and accrued sales incentives. This was offset by decreases in inventory and accounts receivable, which were driven by the decreases in sales.
During Fiscal 2019, operating activities provided cash of $22,562, partially due to a decrease in inventory, as the Company purchases its inventory in line with sales levels, which have declined in the current fiscal year, as well as a decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets. This was offset by lower earnings achieved by the Company in Fiscal 2019, driven in part by sales declines and losses incurred by EyeLock LLC. The Company also had a decrease in accounts receivable, directly resulting from lower sales in the fiscal year.
Net cash used in/provided by investing activities:
Investing activities used cash of $13,865 during Fiscal 2021, primarily due to the acquisition of DEI in July 2020 (see Note 2), as well as capital additions made by the Company.
Investing activities used cash of $6,709 during Fiscal 2020, primarily due to the acquisition of VSM in January 2020 (see Note 2), as well as capital additions made by the Company. This was offset by the proceeds received from the sale of the Company’s real property in Pulheim, Germany (see Note 11).
Investing activities used cash of $11,037 during Fiscal 2019, primarily as a result of the issuance of notes receivable to 360fly, Inc. (see Note 1(f)), as well as capital additions made by the Company.
Net cash used in/provided by financing activities:
Financing activities used cash of $1,940 during Fiscal 2021, primarily due to the repayment of the Company’s precautionary borrowing of $20,000 from the Credit Facility, payments on the Florida Mortgage, repayments of finance leases, and the payment of deferred finance fees related to the amendment of the Credit Facility in Fiscal 2021, offset by the precautionary borrowing of $20,000 made in April 2020.
During Fiscal 2020, financing activities used cash of $12,593, primarily due to the repayment of outstanding bank obligations, including the entire outstanding balance of Voxx Germany’s Euro asset-based lending facility, and the repurchase of shares of the Company’s Class A common stock.
During Fiscal 2019, financing activities used cash of $924 primarily due to the repayment of outstanding bank obligations, which include mortgages, capital leases, and an asset-based lending facility in Germany, offset by borrowings related to the German asset-based lending facility.
The Company has a senior secured credit facility (the "Credit Facility") that provides for a revolving credit facility with committed availability of up to $127,500. The Credit Facility also includes a $30,000 sublimit for letters of credit and a $15,000 sublimit for swingline loans. The availability under the revolving credit line within the Credit Facility is subject to a borrowing base, which is based on eligible accounts receivable, eligible inventory and certain real estate, subject to reserves as determined by the lender, and is also limited by amounts outstanding under the Florida Mortgage (see Note 7(b)). As of February 28, 2021, there was no balance outstanding under the revolving credit facility. The availability under the revolving credit line of the Credit Facility was $96,745 as of February 28, 2021.
All amounts outstanding under the Credit Facility will mature and become due on April 26, 2022; however, it is subject to acceleration upon the occurrence of an Event of Default (as defined in the Credit Agreement). The Company may prepay any amounts outstanding at any time, subject to payment of certain breakage and redeployment costs relating to LIBOR Rate Loans. The commitments under the Credit Facility may be irrevocably reduced at any time, without premium or penalty, as set forth in the Credit Facility.
Generally, the Company may designate specific borrowings under the Credit Facility as either Base Rate Loans or LIBOR Rate Loans, except that swingline loans may only be designated as Base Rate Loans. Loans under the Credit Facility designated as LIBOR Rate Loans shall bear interest at a rate equal to the then-applicable LIBOR Rate plus a range of 2.00% - 2.50%. Loans under the Credit Facility designated as Base Rate Loans shall bear interest at a rate equal to the applicable margin for Base Rate Loans of 1.00% - 1.50%, as defined in the Credit Facility.
Provided that the Company is in a Compliance Period (the period commencing on that day in which Excess Availability is less than 20% of the Maximum Revolver Amount and ending on a day in which Excess Availability is equal to or greater than 20% for any consecutive 30-day period thereafter), the Credit Facility requires compliance with a financial covenant calculated as of the last day of each month, consisting of a Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio. The Credit Facility also contains covenants, subject to defined carveouts, that limit the ability of the loan parties and certain of their subsidiaries which are not loan parties to, among other things: (i) incur additional indebtedness; (ii) incur liens; (iii) merge, consolidate or dispose of a substantial portion of their business; (iv) transfer or dispose of assets; (v) change their name, organizational identification number, state or province of organization or organizational identity; (vi) make any material change in their nature of business; (vii) prepay or otherwise acquire indebtedness; (viii) cause any Change of Control; (ix) make any Restricted Junior Payment; (x) change their fiscal year or method of accounting; (xi) make advances, loans or investments; (xii) enter into or permit any transaction with an Affiliate of any Borrower or any of their Subsidiaries; (xiii) use proceeds for certain items; (xiv) issue or sell any of their stock; or (xv) consign or sell any of their inventory on certain terms. In addition, if excess availability under the Credit Facility were to fall below certain specified levels, as defined in the agreement, the lenders would have the right to assume dominion and control over the Company's cash. As of February 28, 2021, the Company was not in a Compliance Period.
The obligations under the Credit Facility are secured by a general lien on and security interest in substantially all of the assets of the borrowers and certain of the guarantors, including accounts receivable, equipment, real estate, general intangibles, and inventory. The Company has guaranteed the obligations of the borrowers under the Credit Facility.
On April 19, 2021, the Company amended the Credit Facility. Under the amendment, the committed availability of the revolving credit facility was revised to $140,000 and the maturity date of the facility was extended to April 19, 2026 (see Note 17).
The Company has a Euro asset-based loan facility in Germany with a credit limit of €8,000 that expires on July 31, 2023. The Company's subsidiaries Voxx German Holdings GmbH, Oehlbach Kabel GmbH, and Schwaiger GmbH are authorized to borrow funds under this facility for working capital purposes.
The Company also utilizes supply chain financing arrangements and factoring agreements from time to time as a component of its financing for working capital, which accelerates receivable collection and helps to better manage cash flow. Under these agreements, the Company has agreed from time to time to sell certain of its accounts receivable balances to banking institutions who have agreed to advance amounts equal to the net accounts receivable balances due, less a discount as set forth in the respective agreements (see Note 1(h)). The balances under these agreements are accounted for as sales of accounts receivable, as they are sold without recourse. Cash proceeds from these agreements are reflected as operating activities included in the change in accounts receivable in the Company's Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. Fees incurred in connection with the agreements are recorded as interest expense by the Company. During Fiscal 2020, the Company temporarily suspended its domestic supply chain financing activities; however, the Company has resumed its activities under all supply chain financing arrangements during Fiscal 2021 in response to general economic concerns related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
As noted elsewhere in this report, we expect the COVID-19 pandemic may continue to have an adverse effect on our business. Federal, state, and local governments have taken a variety of actions to contain the spread of COVID-19. Many jurisdictions required mandatory business closures or imposed capacity limitations and other restrictions affecting our operations during Fiscal 2021. We have proactively taken steps to increase available cash including, but not limited to, utilizing existing supply chain financing agreements that had previously been suspended during Fiscal 2020 as noted above, and utilizing funds available under our existing Credit Facility. In April 2020, the Company borrowed $20,000 from its available Credit Facility funds, which was subsequently repaid in November 2020. As further noted in Item 7 and elsewhere in this report, the Company also implemented a number of other measures to help preserve liquidity in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Certain contractual cash obligations and other commitments will impact our short and long-term liquidity. At February 28, 2021, such obligations and commitments are as follows:
(1)
Represents total principal payments due under finance and operating lease obligations. Total current balances (included in other current liabilities) due under finance and operating leases are $418 and $1,119, respectively, at February 28, 2021. Total long-term balances due under finance and operating leases are $302 and $3,582, respectively at February 28, 2021.
(2)
Represents amounts outstanding under the Company’s domestic Credit Facility and the VOXX Germany asset-based lending facilities at February 28, 2021.
(3)
We issue standby letters of credit to secure certain purchases and insurance requirements. These letters of credit are issued during the ordinary course of business through major domestic banks as requested by certain suppliers.
(4)
This amount represents the outstanding balance of the mortgage for our manufacturing facility in Florida.
(5)
Represents the liability for an employer defined benefit pension plan covering certain eligible current and former employees of VOXX Germany.
(6)
Open purchase obligations represent inventory commitments. These obligations are not recorded in the consolidated financial statements until commitments are fulfilled and such obligations are subject to change based on negotiations with manufacturers.
We regularly review our cash funding requirements and attempt to meet those requirements through a combination of cash on hand, cash provided by operations, available borrowings under bank lines of credit and possible future public or private debt and/or equity offerings. At times, we evaluate possible acquisitions of, or investments in, businesses that are complementary to ours, which transactions may require the use of cash. We believe that our cash, other liquid assets, operating cash flows, credit arrangements, and access to equity capital markets, taken together, provides adequate resources to fund ongoing operating expenditures for the next twelve months, including the intercompany loan funding we provide to our majority owned subsidiary, EyeLock LLC. In the event that they do not, we may require additional funds in the future to support our working capital requirements, or for other purposes, and may seek to raise such additional funds through the sale of public or private equity and/or debt financings, as well as from other sources. No assurance can be given that additional financing will be available in the future or that if available, such financing will be obtainable on terms favorable when required.
For further information about COVID-19, refer to “Item 1A. Risk Factors,” “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations," and Note 17, “Subsequent Events,” of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in “Item 8. Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not maintain any off-balance sheet arrangements, transactions, obligations, or other relationships with unconsolidated entities that would be expected to have a material current or future effect upon our financial condition or results of operations.
Impact of Inflation and Currency Fluctuation
Inflation did not have a material impact on our operations for the years ended February 28, 2021, February 29, 2020 or February 28, 2019. Severe increases in inflation, however, could affect the global and U.S. economies and could have an adverse impact on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. Discussion of the impact of foreign currency fluctuations is included in