Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
For the purposes of the discussion in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the term Voya Financial, Inc. refers to Voya Financial, Inc. and the terms "Company," "we," "our," and "us" refer to Voya Financial, Inc. and its subsidiaries.
The following discussion and analysis presents a review of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 and financial condition as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. This item should be read in its entirety and in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes contained in Part II, Item 8. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In addition to historical data, this discussion contains forward-looking statements about our business, operations and financial performance based on current expectations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Actual results may differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors. See the "Note Concerning Forward-Looking Statements."
Overview
We provide our principal products and services through three segments: Retirement, Investment Management and Employee Benefits. Corporate includes activities not directly related to our segments and certain run-off activities that are not meaningful to our business strategy.
In general, our primary sources of revenue include fee income from managing investment portfolios for clients as well as asset management and administrative fees from certain insurance and investment products; investment income on our general account and other funds; and from insurance premiums. Our fee income derives from asset- and participant-based advisory and recordkeeping fees on our retirement products, from management and administrative fees we earn from managing client assets, and from the distribution, servicing and management of mutual funds. We generate investment income on the assets in our general account, primarily fixed income assets, that back our liabilities and surplus. We earn premiums on insurance policies, including stop-loss, group life, voluntary and disability products as well as retirement contracts. Our expenses principally consist of general business expenses, commissions and other costs of selling and servicing our products, interest credited on general account liabilities as well as insurance claims and benefits including changes in the reserves we are required to hold for anticipated future insurance benefits.
Because our fee income is generally tied to account values, our profitability is determined in part by the amount of assets we have under management, administration or advisement, which in turn depends on sales volumes to new and existing clients, net deposits from retirement plan participants, and changes in the market value of account assets. Our profitability also depends on the difference between the investment income we earn on our general account assets, or our portfolio yield, and crediting rates on client accounts. Underwriting income, principally dependent on our ability to price our insurance products at a level that enables us to earn a margin over the costs associated with providing benefits and administering those products, and to effectively manage actuarial and policyholder behavior factors, is another component of our profitability.
Profitability also depends on our ability to effectively deploy capital and utilize our tax assets. Furthermore, profitability depends on our ability to manage expenses to acquire new business, such as commissions and distribution expenses, as well as other operating costs.
Business Held for Sale and Discontinued Operations
The Individual Life Transaction
On January 4, 2021, we completed a series of transactions pursuant to a Master Transaction Agreement (the “Resolution MTA”) entered into on December 18, 2019 with Resolution Life U.S. Holdings Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Resolution Life US”), pursuant to which Resolution Life US acquired Security Life of Denver Company ("SLD"), Security Life of Denver International Limited ("SLDI") and Roaring River II, Inc. ("RRII") including several subsidiaries of SLD.
The purchase price we received at the closing was based on estimated amounts and is subject to a post-close true-up mechanism pursuant to which the purchase price will be adjusted based on SLD’s adjusted book value as of the closing date. This true-up is currently expected to be completed in the second half of 2021. In addition to cash consideration, proceeds include an approximately $225 million interest in RLGH and certain other affiliates of Resolution Life US, and $123 million principal amount in surplus notes issued by SLD. In connection with the closing, we agreed to defer receipt of $100 million in cash proceeds for a period of up to 42 months, subject to an adjustment mechanism based on certain financial contingencies affecting SLD over that period. In addition, in connection with the unwind of certain guarantee obligations affecting portions of SLD’s business, in lieu of $60 million of cash proceeds, we has received approximately $60 million in additional preferred equity interests in Resolution Life US affiliates.
We have determined that the legal entities to be sold and the Individual Life and Annuities businesses within these entities meet the criteria to be classified as held for sale and that the sale represents a strategic shift that will have a major effect on our operations. Accordingly, the results of operations of the businesses sold have been presented as discontinued operations, and the assets and liabilities of the related businesses have been classified as held for sale and segregated for all periods presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
As of December 31, 2019, we recorded an estimated loss on sale, net of tax, of $1,150 million to write down the carrying value of the businesses held for sale to estimated fair value, which is based on the estimated sales price of the Individual Life transaction (as defined below) as of December 31, 2019 less cost to sell and other adjustments in accordance with the Resolution MTA. In addition, we are required to remeasure the estimated fair value and loss on sale at the end of each quarter until closing of the Individual Life Transaction. As such, Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax, for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes an additional estimated loss on sale of $316 million, net of tax. The increase in the loss on sale does not impact the amount of excess capital expected to be generated from the sale. The estimated loss on sale, net of tax as of December 31, 2020 of $1,466 million, represents the excess of the estimated carrying value of the businesses held for sale over the estimated purchase price, which approximates fair value, less cost to sell.
Concurrently with the sale, SLD entered into reinsurance agreements with Reliastar Life Insurance Company ("RLI"), ReliaStar Life Insurance Company of New York (“RLNY”), and Voya Retirement Insurance and Annuity Company ("VRIAC"), each of which is a direct or indirect wholly owned subsidiary of the Company. Pursuant to these agreements, RLI and VRIAC will reinsure to SLD a 100% quota share, and RLNY reinsured to SLD a 75% quota share, of their respective individual life insurance and annuities businesses. RLI, RLNY, and VRIAC remain subsidiaries of the Company. These reinsurance transactions were substantially carried out on a coinsurance or modified coinsurance basis, with SLD’s reinsurance obligations collateralized by invested assets placed in a comfort trust. Based on values as of December 31, 2020, U.S. GAAP reserves to be ceded under the Individual Life Transaction (defined below) are expected to be approximately $10.0 billion and are subject to change until closing. The reinsurance agreements along with the sale of the legal entities noted above (referred to as the "Individual Life Transaction") resulted in the disposition of substantially all of our life insurance and legacy non-retirement annuity businesses and related assets. The revenues and net results of the Individual Life and Annuities businesses disposed of via reinsurance are reported in businesses exited or to be exited through reinsurance or divestment which is an adjustment to our U.S. GAAP revenues and earnings measures to calculate Adjusted operating revenues and Adjusted operating earnings before income taxes, respectively.
As a result of the Individual Life Transaction, the net aggregate reduction in Total shareholders' equity, excluding Accumulated other comprehensive income ("AOCI"), would be in the range of $600 million to $800 million. The net aggregate reduction in Total shareholders’ equity, including AOCI, would be in the range of $2.5 billion to $2.7 billion. This includes the impact of the cumulative estimated loss on sale as well as the release of the AOCI related to the sold entities. Furthermore, following the close of the Individual Life Transaction, we expect to have deferred intangibles in the range of $300 million to $700 million, net of tax. The deferred intangibles will consist of (1) existing DAC, VOBA and URR balances on businesses already exited via reinsurance and for the portion of the transaction that involves a sale through reinsurance, (2) existing deferred Cost of reinsurance (“COR”) on businesses already exited via reinsurance and (3) deferred COR to be established in the first quarter of 2021. The aggregate deferred intangibles will be amortized as a charge to earnings over the life of the underlying policies.
Additionally, for the portion of the reinsurance transactions that involve policies that do not meet risk transfer, a deposit asset will be established in the amount of net consideration transferred to SLD, which is expected to be in the range of $1.1 billion to $1.6 billion, net of tax. This compares to liabilities related to Contract owner account balances that currently exist for the related underlying policies. We expect the annual impact of the amortization of the deferred intangibles as well as the deposit asset to be in the range of approximately $125 million to $175 million, net of tax. The amortization of the deferred intangibles and the deposit asset will be classified as a component of Income (loss) related to businesses exited or to be exited via reinsurance which is an adjustment to Income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes to calculate Adjusted operating earnings before taxes and consequently are not included in the adjusted operating results of our segments. Additionally, we would expect the annual impact of the amortization of the deferred intangibles and deposit asset to decline over time.
The following table presents the major components of income and expenses of discontinued operations, net of tax related to the Individual Life Transaction for the periods indicated:
Since the closing of the Individual Life Transaction on January 4, 2021, the Company has continued to make refinements to its estimated loss on sale for that transaction and other related accounting matters. The loss on sale continues to be subject to change until such time as the final true-up procedure prescribed under the MTA governing the Individual Life Transaction has been completed, which is anticipated to occur no later than the end of 2021. Because these accounting procedures have continued subsequent to the issuance of the Company’s February 9, 2021 press release announcing its financial results for the fourth-quarter and full-year 2020, the financial results reported in this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain an estimated loss on sale within Discontinued Operations and Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income within Shareholders’ Equity that differs from such amounts as were reported in such release. These revised amounts do not affect the Company’s earnings from continuing operations for the fourth quarter or full year 2020 as reported in the February 9 release and have no effect on the excess capital reported in such release pro forma for the Individual Life Transaction or on any forward looking guidance the Company has provided with respect to the amount or use of transaction proceeds.
The following table describes the effect of these changes:
The 2018 Transaction
On June 1, 2018, we consummated a series of transactions (collectively, the "2018 Transaction") pursuant to a Master Transaction Agreement dated December 20, 2017 ("2018 MTA") with VA Capital Company LLC ("VA Capital") and Athene Holding Ltd ("Athene"). As part of the 2018 Transaction, Venerable Holdings, Inc. ("Venerable"), a wholly owned subsidiary of VA Capital, acquired two of our subsidiaries, Voya Insurance and Annuity Company ("VIAC") and Directed Services, LLC ("DSL"), and VIAC and other Voya subsidiaries reinsured to Athene substantially all of their fixed and fixed indexed annuities business. The 2018 Transaction resulted in the disposition of substantially all of our Closed Block Variable Annuity ("CBVA") and Annuities businesses.
During 2019, we settled the outstanding purchase price true-up amounts with VA Capital. We do not anticipate further material charges in connection with the 2018 Transaction. Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax for the year ended December 31, 2019 includes a charge of $82 million related to the purchase price true-up settlement in connection with the 2018 Transaction.
Upon execution of the Individual Life Transaction including the reinsurance arrangements disclosed above, we will continue to hold an insignificant number of Individual Life, Annuities and CBVA policies. These policies are referred to in this Annual Report on Form 10-K as "Residual Runoff Business".
The following table summarizes the components of Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax related to the 2018 Transaction for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
(1) Reflects Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax for the five months ended May 31, 2018 (the 2018 Transaction closed on June 1, 2018).
Trends and Uncertainties
Throughout this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A"), we discuss a number of trends and uncertainties that we believe may materially affect our future liquidity, financial condition or results of operations. Where these trends or uncertainties are specific to a particular aspect of our business, we often include such a discussion under the relevant caption of this MD&A, as part of our broader analysis of that area of our business. In addition, the following factors represent some of the key general trends and uncertainties that have influenced the development of our business and our historical financial performance and that we believe will continue to influence our continuing business operations and financial performance in the future.
COVID-19 and its Effect on the Global Economy
COVID-19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, has had a significant adverse effect on the global economy since March of 2020. The disease continues to spread widely across the United States and in many countries throughout the world. The persistence of new infections has slowed the re-opening of the U.S. economy and, even in regions where restrictions have largely been lifted, economic activity has been slow to recover. Longer-term, the economic outlook is uncertain, but may depend in significant part on progress with respect to effective therapies to treat COVID-19 or vaccines. For further information regarding risks associated with COVID-19, see Risk Factors - The COVID-19 pandemic has had, and is likely to continue to have, adverse effects on our financial condition and results of operations in Part I, Item 1A. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Effect on Voya Financial - Financial Condition, Capital and Liquidity
Because both public health and economic circumstances are changing so rapidly at present, it is impossible to predict how COVID-19 will affect Voya Financial’s future financial condition. Absent a further significant and prolonged market shock, however, we do not anticipate a material effect on our balance sheet, statutory capital, or liquidity. Our capital levels remain strong and significantly above our targets.
We also completed repurchases of approximately $526 million of our common shares during 2020, although we paused repurchases for several quarters as a prudent measure in light of current market uncertainties. In January 2021, we increased our common shareholder dividend by 10%.
Effect on Voya Financial - Results of Operations
Predicting with accuracy the future consequences of COVID-19 on our results of operations is impossible. To date, the most significant effects of adverse economic conditions have been on our fee-based income, with net investment income experiencing milder effects. Underwriting income, principally affected by increases to mortality and morbidity due to the disease, has also been negatively affected.
Retirement
In Retirement, we’ve experienced pressure on earnings driven by equity market volatility as well as lower interest rates, with effects weighted more heavily towards our full-service corporate markets business and less on recordkeeping business. Although the impact of COVID-19 is likely to be primarily on fee-based income, we estimate that lower interest rates will continue to contribute to a lower spread-based income. Longer-term effects will depend significantly on equity market performance and prevailing interest rate levels, as well as the magnitude and duration of elevated unemployment levels. We believe that expense reductions and other management actions would be available to offset a portion of any impact.
Investment Management
In Investment Management, fee income was pressured earlier in the year due to the market disruption which resulted in lower valuations and assets under management. The macroeconomic and overall market improvement since that time along with positive net flows contributed to AUM levels, although pockets of economic stress in the economy remain and lingering uncertainty regarding the sustained economic recovery. We believe, in aggregate, that investment capital will be reevaluated higher, however if the economy worsens or credit stresses intensify, investment capital results could decline. In addition, we had seen an elevated level of outflows associated with our retail business at the outset of the pandemic that subsided in the second and third quarters of 2020. While we saw negative flows in the fourth quarter in both institutional and retail, this was largely due to the timing of a few larger client redemptions. The pandemic has made generating new business leads more challenging, resulting in a reduction in sales meetings and activities that could result in a lower level of sales activity in 2021. If the pandemic persists and the economy fails to grow or declines from current levels, asset values could be negatively impacted resulting in lower management fee revenue and/ or investment capital returns.
Employee Benefits
In Employee Benefits, the reduction in premium revenues due to COVID-19 has not been material, though future impacts to premium revenues are still possible in a more severe recession scenario with significant and prolonged unemployment. The effects from COVID-19 have been seen primarily in increased mortality claims on group life policies. We currently do not expect a significant increase in medical stop loss claims, since we believe most COVID-19 related claims are likely to fall below applicable deductibles; our experience to date has been consistent with this expectation.
We expect mortality claims in group life to be elevated into 2021 due to COVID-19 related deaths, with the magnitude of such claims dependent on mortality rates from the disease. We currently estimate that, for every 10,000 incremental deaths in the United States due to COVID-19, operating earnings of our Employee Benefits segment would decline by approximately $1 to $2 million due to increased claims.
Individual Life
As we have executed the Individual Life Transaction on January 4, 2021, we do not expect Individual Life mortality claims related to COVID-19 deaths to have a material impact on our earnings prospectively.
Market Conditions
While extraordinary monetary accommodation has suppressed volatility in rate, credit and domestic equity markets for an extended period, global capital markets are now past peak accommodation as the U.S. Federal Reserve continues its gradual pace of policy normalization. As global monetary policy becomes less accommodating, an increase in market volatility could affect our business, including through effects on the rate and spread component of yields we earn on invested assets, changes in required reserves and capital, and fluctuations in the value of our assets under management ("AUM"), administration or advisement ("AUA"). These effects could be exacerbated by uncertainty about future fiscal policy, changes in tax policy, the scope of potential deregulation, levels of global trade, and geopolitical risk. In the short- to medium-term, the potential for increased volatility, coupled with prevailing interest rates below historical averages, can pressure sales and reduce demand as consumers hesitate to make financial decisions. In addition, this environment could make it difficult to manufacture products that are consistently both attractive to customers and profitable. Financial performance can be adversely affected by market volatility as fees driven by AUM fluctuate, hedging costs increase and revenue declines due to reduced sales and increased outflows. As a company with strong retirement, investment management and insurance capabilities, however, we believe the market conditions noted above may, over the long term, enhance the attractiveness of our broad portfolio of products and services. We will need to continue to monitor the behavior of our customers and other factors, including mortality rates,
morbidity rates, and lapse rates, which adjust in response to changes in market conditions in order to ensure that our products and services remain attractive as well as profitable. For additional information on our sensitivity to interest rates and equity market prices, see Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk in Part II,