ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the results of operations and financial condition of The Glimpse Group, Inc. and its wholly owned subsidiaries (collectively referred to as “Glimpse” or the “Company”) as of and for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020 should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes to those consolidated financial statements that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report. References in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations to “us”, “we”, “our” and similar terms refer to the Company. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains statements that are forward-looking. These statements are based on current expectations and assumptions that are subject to risk, uncertainties and other factors. These statements are often identified by the use of words such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “could,” “estimate,” or “continue,” and similar expressions or variations. Actual results could differ materially because of the factors discussed in “Risk Factors” elsewhere in this Annual Report, and other factors that we may not know.
Overview
The Glimpse Group, Inc. (the “Company”, “we”, “our”) is a Virtual (“VR”) and Augmented (“AR”) Reality platform company, comprised of a diversified group of wholly-owned VR and AR companies, providing enterprise-focused software, services and solutions.
The Company was incorporated as The Glimpse Group, Inc. in the State of Nevada, on June 15, 2016 and is headquartered in New York, NY. Glimpse currently owns and operates ten wholly-owned and operated subsidiary companies (“Subsidiary Companies”, “Subsidiaries”): Adept Reality, LLC (dba Adept XR Learning), Kabaq 3D Technologies, LLC (dba QReal), KreatAR, LLC (dba PostReality), D6 VR, LLC, Immersive Health Group, LLC (dba IHG), Foretell Studios, LLC (dba Foretell Reality), Number 9, LLC (dba Pagoni VR), Early Adopter, LLC; MotionZone, LLC (dba AUGGD), and one subsidiary in Turkey, Glimpse Group Yazilim ve ARGE Ticaret Anonim Sirketi (“Glimpse Turkey”), which primarily develops and creates 3D models for QReal. In addition, we own one non-active subsidiary company, In-It VR, LLC (dba Mezmos), which may be reactivated based on need and market conditions.
Glimpse’s ecosystem of VR/AR subsidiary companies, collaborative environment and diversified business model aim to simplify the challenges faced by entrepreneurs in the emerging VR/AR industry, potentially improving each subsidiary company’s ability to succeed, while simultaneously providing investors an opportunity to invest directly into the emerging VR/AR industry via a diversified platform.
Leveraging its platform, the Company strives to cultivate and manage the business operations of its VR/AR subsidiary companies, with the goal of allowing each underlying company to better focus on mission-critical endeavors, collaborate with the other subsidiary companies, reduce time to market, optimize costs, improve product quality and leverage joint go-to-market strategies. Subject to operational, market and financial developments and conditions, Glimpse intends to carefully add to its current portfolio of subsidiary companies via a combination of organic expansion and/or outside acquisitions.
Glimpse’s subsidiary companies target a wide array of industry verticals, including but not limited to: Corporate Training, Education, Healthcare, Branding & Marketing, Retail, Financial Services, Food & Hospitality, Media & Entertainment and Social VR group meetings. The Company does not target direct-to-consumer (“B2C”) VR/AR software or services, only business-to-business (“B2B”) and business-to-business-to-consumer (“B2B2C”), and we are hardware agnostic.
The Company currently employees approximately 65 full time employees and contractors, primarily software developers, engineers and 3D artists.
Impact of COVID-19
In January 2020, an outbreak of a new strain of coronavirus, COVID-19, was identified in Wuhan, China. Through the first quarter of 2020, the disease became widespread around the world, and on March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared a pandemic. Our business and operations have been adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, as have the markets in which our customers operate. The COVID-19 pandemic has caused and continues to cause significant business and financial markets disruption worldwide and there is significant uncertainty around the duration of this disruption and its ongoing effects on our business. While we demonstrated continued revenue growth in the periods ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020, notwithstanding this growth, management believes growth could have been higher if not for the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we saw the length of our sale cycles generally increase by several months and some of our customers have put purchase decisions on hold, in particular customers in our hospital and education segments. While several of these delays have since materialized into contracts, it is yet to be determined whether outstanding delays are permanent. In other instances, customers have requested payment schedule extensions, but have eventually paid in full. We are encouraged by recent passage of the of various U.S. Government assistance programs (e.g., the CARES Act and American Rescue Plan Act), which may accelerate recovery, especially relating to hospitals and educational institutions. Overall, our accounts receivable loss ratio was, and remains, nominal and revenue collection on signed and executed contracts has not been impacted.
To date, we have not had to reduce headcount as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. This is due to infusion of capital in May 2020 from a Paycheck Protection Program loan (PPP1) of approximately $548,000, an additional Paycheck Protection Program loan (PPP2) of approximately $623,000 in February 2021, and the overall performance of our business. However, early in the pandemic, in order to mitigate some of the pandemic’s potential impact and uncertainties, we temporarily reduced the cash portion of our employees monthly salaries by 10-35% (executives and management on the higher end of the range), totaling approximately $160,000 in aggregate over a three month period. To compensate for the cash reduction, we issued employees Company stock options at 150% of the value of the cash reductions. As the business stabilized and we gained more clarity as to our going-forward prospects, cash salaries were returned to their normal base levels after the three month reduction.
Since March 2020, we have required substantially all of our employees to work remotely to minimize the risk of the virus. While working remotely has proven to be effective to this point, it may eventually inhibit our ability to operate the business effectively. In the summer of 2021, we returned to non-remote, in-person office work, initially several days per week for our New York area based employees.
We continue to closely monitor the situation and the effects on our business and operations. While uncertainty remains, given the current state of the pandemic, our expected revenue growth and current cash balance, we do not expect the impact of COVID-19 on our business and operations to worsen going forward.
The following information should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes contained in this Annual Report.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates and Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Basis of Presentation
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in our financial statements, we believe the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating this management discussion and analysis.
Principles of Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the balances of the Company and its wholly owned subsidiaries. All significant intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.
Use of Accounting Estimates
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the accompanying consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. The principal estimates relate to the valuation of allowance for doubtful accounts, common stock, stock options and cost of goods sold.
Revenue Recognition
The Company adopted the new accounting standard, Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, (“ASC 606”) beginning on July 1, 2020 using the modified retrospective method for all open contracts and related amendments. The adoption did not result in an adjustment to the accumulated deficit as of June 30, 2021. The comparative information was not restated and continued to be reported under the accounting standards in effect for those periods. The adoption of ASC 606 did not have a material impact on reported sales to customers and net earnings (losses).
The Company applies the following steps in order to determine the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as it fulfills its obligations under each of its agreements:
● identify the contract with a customer;
● identify the performance obligations in the contract;
● determine the transaction price;
● allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract; and
● recognize revenue as the performance obligation is satisfied and collection is reasonably assured.
Revenue is recognized when the Company satisfies its performance obligation under the contract by transferring the promised product to its customer that obtains control of the product and collection is reasonably assured. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct product or service to a customer. Most of the Company’s contracts have a single performance obligation, as the promise to transfer products or services is not separately identifiable from other promises in the contract and, therefore, not distinct.
Any unrecognized portion of revenue and any corresponding unrecognized expenses are presented as deferred revenue and deferred costs, respectively, in the accompanying consolidated balance sheet. Deferred costs include cash and equity based payroll costs, and may include payments to vendors.
Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for transferring products or providing services. As such, revenue is recorded net of returns, allowances, customer discounts, and incentives. Sales taxes and other taxes are excluded from revenues.
Significant Judgments
The Company’s customer contracts may include promises to transfer multiple products/services. Determining whether products/services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may require significant judgment. Further, judgment may be required to determine the standalone selling price for each distinct performance obligation.
Disaggregation of Revenue
The Company generates revenue by delivering: (i) Software Services, consisting primarily of VR/AR software projects, solutions and consulting services, and (ii) Software License and SaaS, consisting primarily of VR and AR software licenses or SaaS.
Revenue for Software Services projects and solutions is recognized at the point of time in which the customer obtains control of the project, customer accepts delivery and confirms completion of the project.
Revenue for Software Services consulting services and website maintenance is recognized at the point of time in which the Company performs the services, typically on a monthly retainer basis.
Revenue for Software License and SaaS is recognized at the point of time in which the Company delivers the software and customer accepts delivery. If there are contractually stated ongoing service obligations to be performed during the term of the Software License or SaaS contract, then revenues are recognized ratably over the term of the contract.
The Company currently generates its revenues primarily from customers in the United States.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable consists primarily of amounts due from customers under normal trade terms. Allowances for uncollectible accounts are provided for based upon a variety of factors, including historical amounts written-off, an evaluation of current economic conditions, and assessment of customer collectability. As of June 30, 2021 no allowance for doubtful accounts was recorded as all amounts were considered collectible.
Employee Stock-Based Compensation
The Company recognizes stock-based compensation expense related to grants to employees or service providers based on grant date fair values of common stock or the stock options, which are amortized over the requisite period, as well as forfeitures as they occur.
The Company values the options using the Black-Scholes Merton (“Black Scholes”) method utilizing various inputs such as expected term, expected volatility and the risk-free rate. The expected term reflects the application of the simplified method, which is the weighted average of the contractual term of the grant and the vesting period for each tranche. Expected volatility is derived from a weighted average of volatility inputs for comparable software and technology service companies. The risk-free rate is based on the implied yield of U.S. Treasury notes as of the grant date with a remaining term approximately equal to the expected life of the award.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development expenses are expensed as incurred, and include payroll, employee benefits and stock-based compensation expense. Research and development expenses also include third-party development and programming costs. Given the nascent industry and uncertain market environment the Company operates in, research and development costs are not capitalized.
Recently Issued Pronouncements
Leases
In February 2016, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842). The amendments under this pronouncement will change the way all leases with durations of one year or more are treated. Under this guidance, lessees will be required to capitalize virtually all leases on the balance sheet as a right-of-use asset and an associated financing lease liability or capital lease liability. The right-of-use asset represents the lessee’s right to use, or control the use of, a specified asset for the specified lease term. The lease liability represents the lessee’s obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease, measured on a discounted basis. Based on certain characteristics, leases are classified as financing leases or operating leases. Financing lease liabilities, those that contain provisions similar to capitalized leases, are amortized in the same manner as capital leases are amortized under current accounting rules, as amortization expense and interest expense in the statement of operations. Operating lease liabilities are amortized on a straight-line basis over the life of the lease as lease expense in the statement of operations. The Company does not expect to adopt this standard prior to July 1, 2022. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of this standard on its consolidated financial statements.
Financial Instruments - Credit Losses
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) issued a new standard to replace the incurred loss impairment methodology under current GAAP with a methodology that reflects expected credit losses and requires consideration of a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to inform credit loss estimates (Accounting Standards Codification - “ASC” 326). The Company will be required to use a forward-looking expected credit loss model for accounts receivable, loans, and other financial instruments. Credit losses relating to available-for-sale debt securities, if any, will also be recorded through an allowance for credit losses rather than as a reduction in the amortized cost basis of the securities. As an emerging growth company, the Company does not expect to adopt this standard prior to July 1, 2023.
Income Taxes
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12 to simplify the accounting in ASC 740, Income Taxes. This standard removes certain exceptions related to the approach for intraperiod tax allocation, the methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period, and the recognition of deferred tax liabilities for outside basis differences. This guidance also clarifies and simplifies other areas of ASC 740. The Company does not expect to adopt this standard prior to July 1, 2023. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of this standard on its consolidated financial statements.
Highlights
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS FOR THE YEARS ENDED JUNE 30, 2021 AND 2020
Summary P&L:
Revenue
Total revenue for the year ended June 30, 2021 was approximately $3.42 million compared to approximately $1.95 million for the year ended June 30, 2020, an increase of approximately 75%. This growth was due to the addition of new customers and increased business with some of our existing customers.
We break out our revenues into two main categories - Software Services and Software License.
● Software Services revenues are primarily comprised of VR/AR projects, services related to our software licenses and consulting retainers.
● Software License revenues are comprised of the sale of our internally developed VR/AR software as licenses or as software-as-a-service (“SaaS”).
For the year ended June 30, 2021, Software Services revenue was approximately $3.08 million compared to approximately $1.78 million for the year ended June 30, 2020, an increase of approximately 73%. This growth was due to the addition of new customers and increased business with some of our existing customers.
For the year ended June 30, 2021, Software License revenue was approximately $0.34 million compared to approximately $0.17 for the for the year ended June 30, 2020, an increase of approximately 100%. As the VR and AR industries continue to mature, we expect our Software License revenue to continue to grow on an absolute basis and as an overall percentage of total revenue.
For the year ended June 30, 2021, non-project revenue (i.e. VR/AR software and services revenue only), was approximately $1.73 million compared to approximately $0.51 million for the year ended June 30, 2020, an increase of approximately 239%. For the year ended June 30, 2021, non-project revenue accounted for approximately 50.6% of total revenues compared to approximately 26.1% for the year ended June 30, 2020.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue for the year ended June 30, 2021 was $1.46 million compared to $1.14 million for the year ended June 30, 2020, an increase of approximately 28%. Cost of revenue was driven by the increase in revenue and primarily attributable to internal staffing costs and, to a lesser degree, third-party expenses.
For the year ended June 30, 2021, our gross profit was approximately $1.96 million representing a gross profit margin of approximately 57%, compared to a gross profit of approximately $0.81 million representing a gross profit margin of approximately 42% for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase in gross profit margin was primarily due to an increase in services and Software License revenue, improved project management and higher utilization of internal staff. Our cash-based gross profit margin, excluding stock option based cost of revenue expenses, was approximately 74% for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to approximately 53% for the year ended June 30, 2020.
For the year ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, internal staffing was approximately $1.35 million (92% of total Cost of Revenue) and approximately $1.02 million (89% of total Cost of Revenue), respectively. As we expand our internal headcount of engineers, software developers and 3D artists we have had less of a need for more expensive external staffing - a benefit of increased scale in the business.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 were approximately $6.67 million compared to $5.73 million for the year ended June 30, 2020, an increase of approximately 16%, primarily due to increases in research and development and general and administrative expenses, partially offset by a decrease in sales and marketing expense.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 were approximately $1.27 million compared to $1.46 million for the year ended June 30, 2020, a decrease of approximately 13%. The decrease was primarily due to reduced commission expenses and internal reallocations between operating functions. As our subsidiary companies continue to establish initial market traction and grow their revenue base, we expect to increase our business development and sales expenses.
For the year ended June 30, 2021, non-cash stock option and common stock expenses relating to sales and marketing included approximately $0.57 million of employee, vendor and fee compensation expenses, comprising approximately 45% of total sales and marketing expenses. For the year ended June 30, 2020, non-cash stock option and common stock expenses relating to sales and marketing included approximately $0.35 million of employee, vendor and fee compensation expenses, comprising approximately 24% of total sales and marketing expenses. This non-cash period-to-period increase was primarily due to the hiring of temporary staff, which were compensated with stock options only.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 were approximately $3.18 million compared to $2.43 million for the year ended June 30, 2020, an increase of approximately 31%. Going forward, we expect research and development costs to continue to increase as we continue to develop and commercialize our software products.
For the year ended June 30, 2021, non-cash stock option expenses relating to research and development included approximately $1.38 million of employee compensation expenses, comprising approximately 43% of total research and development expenses. For the year ended June 30, 2020, non-cash stock option expenses relating to research and development included approximately $1.27 million of employee compensation expenses, comprising approximately 52% of total research and development expenses. Over time, we expect non-cash stock options and common stock research and development expenses, as a percentage of the total related expenses, to continue to decrease as we utilize a larger portion of cash in compensation.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 were approximately $2.22 million compared to $1.84 million for the year ended June 30, 2020, an increase of approximately 21%. Increases in cash compensation, headcount and executive bonuses were offset by decreases in non-cash stock and option compensation and goodwill impairment.
For the year ended June 30, 2021, non-cash stock option and common stock expenses relating to general and administrative included approximately $0.70 million of employee, board of directors and other compensation expenses, comprising approximately 31.5% of total general and administrative expenses. For the year ended June 30, 2020, non-cash stock option and common stock expenses relating to general and administrative expenses included approximately $0.92 million of employee, board of directors and other compensation expenses, comprising approximately 50.0% of total general and administrative expenses. Over time, we expect non-cash stock options and common stock general and administrative expenses, as a percentage of the total related expenses, to continue to decrease as we utilize a larger portion of cash in compensation.
Other Income (Expenses)
Other income (expenses), net for the year ended June 30, 2021 consisted of other net expenses of approximately $1.38 million compared to other net expenses of approximately $0.07 million for the year ended June 30, 2020, an increase of greater than 1,000%. The increase was primarily due to non-cash expenses of approximately $1.25 million of accrued expenses relating to past acquisitions, triggered by the Company’s July 1, 2021 IPO, $0.52 million in non- cash expenses due to conversions of unsecured convertible promissory notes, and $0.18 million non-cash interest expense on the Company’s unsecured convertible promissory notes. These expenses were offset by non-cash income of approximately $0.55 million related to the full forgiveness of the Company’s Paycheck Protection Program (PPP1) loan.
Net loss
For the year ended June 30, 2021, we incurred a net loss from operations of approximately $4.71 million compared to a net loss of approximately $4.92 million for the year ended June 30, 2020, an improvement of approximately 4% year-over-year, primarily driven by increases in revenues and profit margins which outpaced an increase in operating expenses.
For the year ended June 30, 2021, we incurred a net loss of approximately $6.09 million compared to a net loss of approximately $4.99 million for the year ended June 30, 2020, a decline of approximately 22% year-over-year, primarily driven by an increase in other expenses which were primarily one time in nature.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The following discussion and analysis includes both financial measures in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, or GAAP, as well as non-GAAP financial measures. Generally, a non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company’s performance, financial position or cash flows that either excludes or includes amounts that are not normally included or excluded in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. Non-GAAP financial measures should be viewed as supplemental to, and should not be considered as alternatives to, net income, operating income, and cash flow from operating activities, liquidity or any other financial measures. They may not be indicative of the historical operating results of the Company nor are they intended to be predictive of potential future results. Investors should not consider non-GAAP financial measures in isolation or as substitutes for performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Our management uses and relies on EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, which are non-GAAP financial measures. We believe that both management and shareholders benefit from referring to the following non-GAAP financial measures in planning, forecasting and analyzing future periods. Our management uses these non-GAAP financial measures in evaluating its financial and operational decision making and as a means to evaluate period-to-period comparisons. Our management recognizes that the non-GAAP financial measures have inherent limitations because of the described excluded items.
The Company defines Adjusted EBITDA as earnings (or loss) from continuing operations before the items in the table below. Adjusted EBITDA is an important measure of our operating performance because it allows management, investors and analysts to evaluate and assess our core operating results from period-to-period after removing the impact of items of a non-operational nature that affect comparability.
We have included a reconciliation of our non-GAAP financial measures to the most comparable financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. We believe that providing the non-GAAP financial measures, together with the reconciliation to GAAP, helps investors make comparisons between the Company and other companies. In making any comparisons to other companies, investors need to be aware that companies use different non-GAAP measures to evaluate their financial performance. Investors should pay close attention to the specific definition being used and to the reconciliation between such measures and the corresponding GAAP measures provided by each company under applicable SEC rules.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020:
Fiscal Year 2021 Adjusted EBITDA loss improved by $0.48 million, or 24%, compared to that of Fiscal Year 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet transactions, arrangements or other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended June 30, 2021 was approximately $1.21 million, compared to approximately $2.02 million for the year ended June 30, 2020, an improvement of approximately 40% driven by increased revenues and cash gross margins, along with increases in non-cash compensation expenses in lieu of cash payments. We expect net cash from operating activities to be negative in the coming periods, however it should continue to improve as our revenue increases and economies of scale improve.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended June 30, 2021 was approximately $28,000 compared to approximately $32,600 for the year ended June 30, 2020. In both periods our investing activities were primarily comprised of purchases of computer equipment.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended June 30, 2021 was approximately $1.97 million, comprised of: issuance of $1.475 million of unsecured Convertible Promissory Notes 2 (the “March 2021 Notes”) as detailed below, a $0.624 million Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP2”) loan and approximately $0.346 million from the issuance of common stock to investors at $4.50 per share. These were partially offset by approximately $0.47 million in financing costs related to the IPO.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended June 30, 2020 was approximately $1.89 million, primarily comprised of the issuance of approximately $1.33 million of unsecured Convertible Promissory Notes 1 (the “December 2019” Notes) and a $0.55 million Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP1”) loan.
In December 2020 and January 2021, approximately $1.22 million of the December 2019 Notes, representing approximately 92% of the aggregate principal value of the December 2019 Notes, converted into shares of the Company’s common stock at a conversion price of $4.00 per /share. In addition, the December 2019 Notes holders received third year interest (10%) as additional consideration, totaling approximately $0.12 million which was paid in the Company’s common stock or approximately 30,000 shares. In the aggregate, a non-cash loss of approximately $0.52 million was recognized in January 2021 upon the conversion. The remaining holders of the December 2019 Notes, representing $0.11 million of principal value, amended the December 2019 Notes to add an automatic conversion provision upon an IPO of the Company, at a fixed price of $4.25 per share.
In February 2021, our PPP1 loan was fully forgiven by the Small Business Administration (“SBA”) and we have no further obligations relating to it.
In February 2021, the Company received a PPP2 loan in the amount of approximately $0.624 million. As with our PPP1 loan, the proceeds of the PPP2 loan will be utilized primarily for payroll expenses and we expect full forgiveness of the PPP2 loan in calendar year 2021 or early 2022.
On March 5, 2021, the Company raised $1.475 million by the issuance of the March 2021 Notes, which convert at a fixed price of $5.00 per share at the option of the holders, with an automatic conversion upon the IPO. The March 2021 Notes paid an interest rate of 10% per annum in common stock of the Company, at a fixed price of $5.00/share. Interest on the March 2021 Notes for the first year was issued in advance upon closing.
On July 1, 2021, as a result of the IPO, both the March 2021 Notes and the residual, non-converted, December 2019 Notes fully converted into approximately 0.324 million common shares. Other than the PPP2 loan which is expected to be fully forgiven, the Company has no outstanding debt, convertible notes or preferred equity.
As a result of the IPO, the Company’s cash position was approximately $13.5 million and contracted revenue backlog to be collected over the short term exceeded $1.5 million. As such, the Company believes that it is sufficiently funded to meet its operational plan and future obligations beyond the 12-month period.
Given the above, doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern was alleviated and the accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern.
While Management believes it will be able to continue to grow the Company’s revenue base, there is no assurance. In parallel, Management continually monitors its capital structure and operating plans and evaluates various potential funding alternatives that may be needed in order to finance the Company’s research and development activities, general and administrative expenses and growth strategy. These alternatives include raising funds through public equity or debt markets. Although there is no assurance that, if needed, the Company will be successful with its fundraising initiatives, the Company has been successful historically in raising equity capital and Management believes that its Nasdaq listing significantly increases its ability to access capital going forward.
Estimated Cash Requirements over the Next Twelve Months
We continue to strive to approach operational cash break-even from our existing operations. Our estimated cash operating expense requirements over the next 12 months for our existing operations is approximately $6.0 million. However, this amount does not take into account any incoming revenue collections or potential proceeds from investment capital, either of which may match or exceed this amount. In addition, our current cash balance significantly exceeds our operational cash requirements over the next 12 months. Lastly, over 80% of our costs are variable (headcount related) and, if needed, we have a high degree of flexibility to reduce costs as needed.
An element in our future growth strategy are potential acquisitions. Historically, the purchase price of our acquisitions was entirely equity based. Going forward, while equity is expected to continue to be a primary source of payment in any acquisition we may make, we may also utilize some portion of cash in an acquisition.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company”, as defined in the JOBS Act, and, for as long as we continue to be an emerging growth company, we may choose to take advantage of exemptions from various reporting requirements applicable to other public companies but not to emerging growth companies, including, but not limited to, not being required to have our independent registered public accounting firm audit our internal control over financial reporting under Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved. As an emerging growth company we can also delay adopting new or revised accounting standards until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We intend to avail ourselves of these options. Once adopted, we must continue to report on that basis until we no longer qualify as an emerging growth company.
We will cease to be an emerging growth company upon the earliest of: (i) the end of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of our initial public offering; (ii) the first fiscal year after our annual gross revenues are $1.07 billion or more; (iii) the date on which we have, during the previous three-year period, issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities; or (iv) the end of any fiscal year in which the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates exceeded $700 million as of the end of the second quarter of that fiscal year. We cannot predict if investors will find our common stock less attractive if we choose to rely on these exemptions. If, as a result of our decision to reduce future disclosure, investors find our common stock less attractive, there may be a less active trading market for our common stock and the price of our common stock may be more volatile.