Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following management’s discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes thereto contained in this Annual Report. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Act, and section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the Exchange Act. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, including those under “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report that could cause actual results or events to differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report.
Unless otherwise indicated, references in this section to “ViewRay,” “we,” “us,” “our,” “the Company” and “our Company” refer to ViewRay, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiary, ViewRay Technologies, Inc.
The following discussion highlights our results of operations and the principal factors that have affected our financial condition as well as our liquidity and capital resources for the periods described, and provides information that management believes is relevant for an assessment and understanding of the statements of financial condition and results of operations presented herein. The following discussion and analysis are based on our consolidated financial statements contained in this Annual Report, which we have prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles. You should read this discussion and analysis together with such consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto.
A comparison of the results for the year ended December 31, 2020 and the results for the year ended December 31, 2019 is provided below. Our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 includes a discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2018 in Part II, Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
Company Overview
We design, manufacture and market the ViewRay MRIdian®. The MRIdian is an innovative system that integrates high quality radiation therapy with simultaneous resonance imaging (MRI). There are two generations of the MRIdian: the first generation MRIdian with Cobalt-60 based radiation beams and the second generation MRIdian Linac, with more advanced linear accelerator or ‘linac’ based radiation beams.
Both generations of the MRIdian have received 510(k) marketing clearance from the FDA and permission to affix the CE mark.
MRIdian is the first radiation therapy system that enables simultaneous radiation treatment delivery and real-time MRI imaging of a patient’s internal anatomy. It generates high-quality images that differentiate between the targeted tumor, surrounding soft tissue and nearby critical organs. MRIdian also records the level of radiation dose that the treatment area has received, enabling physicians to adapt the prescription between treatments, as needed. We believe this improved visualization and accurate dose recording will enable better treatment, improve patient outcomes and reduce side effects. Key benefits to users and patients include: improved imaging and patient alignment; the ability to adapt the patient’s radiation treatments to changes while the patient is still on the treatment table, or “on-table adaptive treatment planning”; MRI-based motion management; and an accurate recording of the delivered radiation dose. Physicians have already used MRIdian to treat a broad spectrum of radiation therapy patients with more than 45 different types of cancer, as well as patients for whom radiation therapy was previously not an option.
At December 31, 2020, a total of 41 MRIdian systems, two MRIdian with Cobalt-60 systems and 39 MRIdian Linac systems, are in operation worldwide (18 in the United States and 23 outside the United States). In addition, six MRIdian Linacs have been delivered to customers that are in varying stages of deployment.
We currently market MRIdian through a direct sales force in the United States. In the rest of the world, we market MRIdian through a hybrid model of both a direct sales force and distribution network. We market MRIdian to a broad range of worldwide customers, including university research and teaching hospitals, community hospitals, private practices, government institutions and freestanding cancer centers. As with the traditional linac market, our sales and revenue cycles vary based on the particular customer and can be lengthy, sometimes lasting up to 18 to 24 months (or more) from initial customer contact to order contract execution. Following execution of an order contract, it generally takes nine to 15 months for a customer to customize an existing facility or construct a new vault. Upon the commencement of installation at a customer’s facility, it typically takes approximately 45 to 75 days for us to install MRIdian and perform on-site testing of the system, including the completion of acceptance test procedures.
We generated product, service and distribution rights revenues of $57.0 million, $87.8 million and $81.0 million, and had net losses of $107.9 million, $120.2 million and $76.4 million during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future. We expect our expenses will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
•
add personnel to support our product development and commercialization efforts;
•
continue our research and development efforts;
•
seek regulatory approval for MRIdian in certain foreign countries; and
•
operate as a public company.
Accordingly, we may seek to fund our operations through public or private equity, debt financings or other sources. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to develop enhancements to and integrate new technologies into MR Image-Guided radiation therapy systems.
January 2021 Public Offering of Common Stock
On January 4, 2021, we entered into an underwriting agreement with Piper Sandler & Co., as representative of the several underwriters named therein, with respect to the issuance and sale of 11,856,500 shares of our common stock, which included the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, at a price to the public of $4.85 per share. We completed the offering on January 7, 2021 and received net proceeds of approximately $53.5 million, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by us.
December 2019 Public Offering of Common Stock
On December 3, 2019, we entered into an underwriting agreement with Piper Jaffray & Co., as representatives of several underwriters, or the December 2019 Underwriters, in connection with the issuance and sale of 41,550,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $3.13 per share, or the December 2019 Public Offering of Common Stock. In addition, we granted the December 2019 Underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up to 6,232,500 additional shares of common stock on the same terms, which the December 2019 Underwriters exercised in full. We completed the offering on December 6, 2019 and received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $138.4 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
August 2018 Public Offering of Common Stock
On August 14, 2018, we entered into an underwriting agreement with Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC and Jefferies LLC, as representatives of several underwriters, or the August 2018 Underwriters, in connection with the issuance and sale of 16,216,217 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $9.25 per share, or the August 2018 Public Offering of Common Stock. In addition, we granted the August 2018 Underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up to 2,432,432 additional shares of common stock on the same terms, which the August 2018 Underwriters exercised in full. We completed the offering on August 17, 2018 and received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $161.9 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
March 2018 Direct Registered Offering
In February 2018, we entered into a securities purchase agreement pursuant to which we sold (i) 4,090,000 shares of our common stock; (ii) 3,000,581 shares of our Series A convertible preferred stock and (iii) warrants to purchase 1,418,116 shares of our common stock, or the 2018 Offering Warrants, for total gross proceeds of $59.1 million, or the March 2018 Direct Registered Offering. We completed the March 2018 Direct Registered Offering on March 5, 2018. The 2018 Offering Warrants have an exercise price of $8.31 per share, became exercisable upon issuance and expire in March 2025. All outstanding shares of Series A convertible preferred stock were converted into common stock at a conversion ratio of 1:1 on April 19, 2018.
2017 Private Placement
In January 2017, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement pursuant to which we sold an aggregate of 10,323,101 shares of common stock consisting of 8,602,589 shares of common stock and warrants to purchase 1,720,512 shares of common stock, or the 2017 Placement Warrants, for total gross proceeds of $26.1 million, or the 2017 Private Placement. We completed the closing of the 2017 Private Placement on January 18, 2017. The 2017 Placement Warrants have a per share exercise price of $3.17 per share, and became exercisable in July 2017 and expire seven years from the date of issuance.
2016 Private Placement
On August 19, 2016, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement pursuant to which we sold an aggregate of 5,983,251 shares of common stock consisting of 4,602,506 shares of common stock and warrants to purchase 1,380,745 shares of common stock, or the
2016 Placement Warrants, for aggregate proceeds of $13.2 million, net of offering cost, or the 2016 Private Placement. We completed the initial closing of the 2016 Private Placement on August 22, 2016 with the final closing on September 9, 2016. The 2016 Placement Warrants have an exercise price of $2.95 per share, are exercisable at any time at the option of the holder and expire seven years from the date of issuance.
SVB Term Loan
In December 2018, we entered into a term loan agreement, or the SVB Term Loan, with Silicon Valley Bank, for a principal amount of $56.0 million. The SVB Term Loan has a maturity date of December 1, 2023 and bears interest at a rate of 6.30% per annum to be paid monthly over the term of the loan. Beginning on December 1, 2020, the Company would have made thirty-six equal monthly payments of principal (or thirty equal payments, if the Company so elects). In addition, upon repayment of the SVB Term Loan in full, the Company will make a final payment equal to 3.15% of the original aggregate principal amount of the SVB Term Loan.
On December 31, 2019, we entered into the First Amendment (the “First Amendment”) to Loan and Security Agreement by and among the Company, ViewRay Technologies, Inc. and SVB dated as of December 28, 2018. The First Amendment, among other things, amended the Loan Agreement to (i) suspend testing of the minimum revenue financial covenant for the fiscal quarter ending December 31, 2019, (ii) provide for the minimum trailing twelve-month revenue thresholds under the minimum revenue financial covenant for periods ending on the last day of fiscal quarters in fiscal years subsequent to 2020 to be determined annually at the greater of (a) a 25% cushion to revenue forecasts provided by the Company to SVB and (b) 10% year-over-year annual growth, unless otherwise agreed, (iii) increase the minimum liquidity ratio financial covenant from 1.50:1.00 to 1.75:1.00 and (iv) increase the prepayment premium from 1.00% to 2.00% for amounts prepaid under the SVB Term Loan for prior to the maturity date thereof, subject to certain exceptions.
On October 30, 2020, we entered into the Second Amendment (the “Second Amendment”) to the SVB Term Loan. The Second Amendment, among other things, amended the SVB Term Loan to (i) increase the term loan agreement principal amount from $56.0 million to $58.0 million, (ii) revise the thirty-six equal monthly payments of principal to begin on November 1, 2022, (iii) revise the maturity date to October 1, 2025, (iv) decrease the interest rate from a fixed rate of 6.3% to a floating rate of 2.4% above the Prime Rate, (v) increase the final payment from 3.15% of the original aggregate principal amount to 3.7% of the revised aggregate principal amount, (vi) revise the minimum trailing twelve-month revenue thresholds under the minimum revenue financial covenant for periods ending on the last day of fiscal quarters in fiscal years subsequent to 2020, (vii) decrease the minimum liquidity ratio financial covenant from 1.75:1.00 to 1.70:1.00, (viii) remove the minimum cash balance as a condition of the minimum revenue financial covenant and the minimum liquidity ratio financial covenant, and (ix) increase the prepayment premium from 2.00% to 3.00% for the first 30 months of the term for amounts prepaid under the SVB Term Loan prior to the maturity date thereof, subject to certain exceptions. In connection with the execution of the Second Amendment, we agreed to pay the earned portion of the final payment, which equated to $0.8 million.
The SVB Term Loan is secured by substantially all our assets, except that the collateral does not include any intellectual property held by us; provided, however, the collateral does include all accounts and proceeds from the sale or license of such intellectual property.
Additional details regarding the SVB Term Loan are included in the section entitled “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - Note 5 - Debt” in the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
At-The-Market Offering of Common Stock
In January and April 2017, we agreed to sell up to a cumulative $50.0 million of our common stock in accordance with the terms of a sales agreement with FBR Capital Markets & Co., or FBR, pursuant to an at-the-market offering program in accordance with Rule 415(a)(4) under the Securities Act under our then-effective shelf registration statement. We sold 33,097 shares of our common stock at an average market price of $8.41 under the at-the-market offering program during fiscal year 2018, resulting in aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $0.3 million.
In January 2019, we filed a registration statement with the SEC which covers the offering, issuance and sale of up to a maximum aggregate offering price of $250.0 million of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, purchase contracts and/or units, including up to $100.0 million of our common shares pursuant to an at-the-market offering program with FBR Capital Markets & Co., now known as B. Riley Securities. There were no sales of our common stock pursuant to our at-the-market offering program during fiscal year 2019 or fiscal year 2020. As of December 31, 2020, there was $100.0 million left of our common shares available under this at-the-market offering program. The consummation of the January 2021 public offering of common stock effectively reduced the common shares available for issuance under the at-the-market offering program to approximately $42.9 million.
New Orders and Backlog
New orders are defined as the sum of gross product orders, representing MRIdian contract price, recorded in backlog during the period. Backlog is the accumulation of all orders for which revenue has not been recognized and which we consider valid. Backlog includes customer deposits or letters of credit, except when the sale is to a customer where a deposit is not deemed necessary or customary. Deposits received are recorded in a customer deposit liability account on the balance sheet. Orders may be revised or
cancelled according to their terms or upon mutual agreement between the parties. Therefore, it is difficult to predict with certainty the amount of backlog that will ultimately result in revenue. The determination of backlog includes objective and subjective judgment about the likelihood of an order contract becoming revenue. We perform a quarterly review of backlog to verify that outstanding orders in backlog remain valid, and based upon this review, orders that are no longer expected to result in revenue are removed from backlog. Among other criteria to consider for a transaction to be in backlog, we must possess both an outstanding and effective written agreement for the delivery of a MRIdian signed by a customer with a minimum customer deposit or a letter of credit requirement except when the sale is to a customer where a deposit is not deemed necessary or customary (i.e. sale to a government entity, a large hospital, group of hospitals or cancer care group that has sufficient credit, sales via tender awards, or indirect channel sales that have signed contracts with end-customers). We decide whether to remove or add back an order from or to our backlog by evaluating the following criteria: changes in customer or distributor plans or financial conditions; the customer’s or distributor’s continued intent and ability to fulfill the order contract; changes to regulatory requirements; the status of regulatory approval required in the customer’s jurisdiction, if any; the length of time the order has been on our backlog; and other reasons for potential cancellation of order contracts.
During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, our new orders were $94.6 million, $118.5 million and $140.7 million, respectively. Based on our assessment, we removed $36.1 million, $21.9 million and $53.5 million from the backlog for fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. At December 31, 2020, we had a backlog with a total value of $241.3 million.
Components of Statements of Operations
Revenue
Product Revenue. Product revenue consists of revenue recognized from sales of MRIdian systems, as well as optional components, such as additional planning workstations and body coils.
Following execution of an order contract, it generally takes nine to 15 months for a customer to customize an existing facility or construct a new vault for the purchased system. Upon the commencement of installation at a customer’s facility, it typically takes approximately 45 to 75 days to complete the installation and on-site testing of the system, including the completion of customer test procedures. On-site training can take up to multiple weeks and can be conducted concurrently with installation and acceptance testing. Order contracts generally include customer deposits upon execution of the agreement, and in certain cases, additional amounts due at shipment or commencement of installation, and final payment due generally upon customer acceptance.
Beginning in the second quarter of 2019, for new contracts in which control of the system transfers upon delivery and inspection, the Company recognizes revenue for the system at the point in time when delivery and inspection has occurred. For these same contracts, the Company recognizes installation revenue over a period of time as control of the installation services is transferred. For all contracts in which control continues to transfer upon post-installation customer acceptance, revenue for the system and installation will continue to be recognized upon customer acceptance. For sales of MRIdian systems for which we are not responsible for installation, revenue is recognized when the entire system is delivered, which is when the control of the system is transferred to the customer.
Service Revenue. Our contracts typically include service warranty at no additional costs for one year. In addition, we offer multi-year, post-installation maintenance and support contracts that provide various levels of service support, which enables our customers to select the level of on-going support services, including parts and labor, which they require. These post-installation contracts are for a period of one to five years and provide services ranging from on-site parts and labor, and preventative maintenance to labor only with a longer response time. We also offer technology upgrades to our MRIdian systems, when and if available, for an additional fee. Service revenue is recognized ratably over the term during which the contracted services are provided.
Distribution Rights Revenue. In December 2014, we entered into a distribution agreement with Itochu Corporation, or Itochu, pursuant to which we appointed Itochu as our exclusive distributor for the promotion, sale and delivery of MRIdian products within Japan. As consideration for the exclusive distribution rights granted, we received $4.0 million, which was recorded as deferred revenue and beginning in August 2016, distribution rights revenue has been recognized ratably over the remaining term of the distribution agreement, which expires in December 2024. A time-elapsed method is used to measure progress because the control is transferred evenly over the contractual period.
Cost of Revenue
Product Cost of Revenue. Product cost of revenue primarily consists of the cost of materials, installation and services associated with the manufacturing and installation of MRIdian systems, and royalty payments to the University of Florida Research Foundation. Product cost of revenue also includes lower of cost or net realizable value inventory, or LCNRV, adjustments if the carrying value of the inventory is greater than its net realizable value. We recorded LCNRV charges of $0.2 million and $0.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2018, respectively. We did not record LCNRV charges for the year ended December 31, 2019.
We expect our materials, installation and service costs to decrease as we continue to scale our operations, improve product designs and work with our third-party suppliers to lower costs. We expect to continue to lower costs and increase sales prices as we transition to MRIdian Linac.
Service Cost of Revenue. Service cost of revenue is comprised primarily of personnel costs, training and travel expenses to service and perform maintenance on installed MRIdian systems. Service cost of revenue also includes the costs of replacement parts under maintenance and support contracts.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of compensation and related costs for personnel, including stock-based compensation, employee benefits and travel expenses. Other significant research and development costs arise from third-party consulting services, laboratory supplies, research materials, medical equipment, computer equipment and licensed technology, and related depreciation and amortization. We expense research and development costs as incurred. As we continue to invest in improving MRIdian and developing new technologies, we expect our research and development expenses to increase.
Selling and Marketing. Selling and marketing expenses consist primarily of compensation and related costs for our direct sales force, sales management, and marketing and customer support personnel, and include stock-based compensation, employee benefits and travel expenses. Selling and marketing expenses also include costs related to trade shows and marketing programs. We expense selling and marketing costs as incurred. We expect selling and marketing expenses to increase in future periods as we expand our sales force and our marketing and customer support organizations and increase our participation in trade shows and marketing programs.
General and Administrative. Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation and related costs for our operations, finance, human resources, regulatory, and other administrative personnel, and include stock-based compensation, employee benefits and travel expenses. In addition, general and administrative expenses include third-party consulting, legal, audit, accounting services, quality and regulatory functions and facilities costs, and gain or loss on the disposal of property and equipment. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase as our business grows and as we invest in the development of our MRIdian Linac.
Interest Income
Interest income consists primarily of interest income received on our cash and cash equivalents.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest and amortization related to our SVB Term Loan. In December 2018, we repaid in full the outstanding obligations under the CRG Term Loan, using the proceeds from the SVB Term Loan and cash on hand.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of changes in the fair value of the 2017 and 2016 Placement Warrants and foreign currency exchange gains and losses. The outstanding 2017 and 2016 Placement Warrants are re-measured to fair value at each balance sheet date with the corresponding gain or loss from the adjustment recorded as a component of other income (expense), net.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented (in thousands):
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Total revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $30.8 million, or 35% compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in product revenue of $36.8 million, slightly offset by an increase in service revenue of $6.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019.
Product Revenue. Product revenue decreased by $36.8 million, or 46%, in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to six fewer MRIdian Linac systems recognized as revenue in fiscal year 2020 as compared to fiscal year 2019.
Service Revenue. Service revenue increased by $6.0 million, or 77%, in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 primarily due to the increase in installed base. Additionally, during 2020 the Company recognized a $0.5 million release in deferred revenue related to a service contract, and $0.5 million in MRIdian Linac software upgrades.
Cost of Revenue
Product Cost of Revenue. Product cost of revenue decreased by $31.1 million, or 39%, in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to six fewer MRIdian Linac systems recognized in fiscal year 2020 as compared to fiscal year 2019. The total cost of revenue in the year ended December 31, 2019 was also impacted by approximately $9.3 million of charges, primarily driven by higher than anticipated installation costs related to historical upgrade commitments. The $9.3 million includes $7.9 million of one-time charges and $1.4 million of expenses.
Service Cost of Revenue. Service cost of revenue decreased by $1.1 million, or 8%, in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019. The decrease in service cost of revenue was primarily due to a decrease in the cost of service-related inventory parts and coronavirus related reductions in travel.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development. Research and development expenses increased by $1.2 million, or 5%, in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019. This increase was primarily attributable to a $1.0 million increase in personnel expense and a $0.9 million increase in depreciation expense, offset by a $1.2 million decrease in travel expense attributable to coronavirus related reductions in travel for our research and development workforce.
Selling and Marketing. Selling and marketing expenses decreased by $10.6 million, or 41%, in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019. This decrease was primarily attributable to a $5.4 million decrease in personnel expense in the form of sales related compensation and the reduction in workforce, a $2.3 million decrease in travel expense primarily driven by coronavirus related reductions in travel for our sales and marketing workforce, a $2.0 million decrease in marketing expense primarily driven by the postponement or cancellation of clinical conferences, and a $0.6 million decrease in professional services.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses decreased by $4.0 million, or 6%, in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019. This decrease was primarily attributable to a $2.5 million decrease in travel expense attributable to coronavirus related reductions in travel for our general and administrative workforce and a $1.1 million decrease in professional services.
Interest Income
Interest income decreased by $0.9 million in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019 due to a strategic shift of invested funds from a high to low yield account and an overall decrease in interest rates during 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $1.0 million in fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019, mainly due to the modification of the SVB Term Loan during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net for fiscal year 2020 consisted primarily of a $0.5 million decrease in the fair value of warrant liabilities related to the 2017 and 2016 Placement Warrants. Other income (expense), net for fiscal year 2019 consisted primarily of a $2.5 million decrease in the fair value of warrant liabilities related to the 2017 and 2016 Placement Warrants as a result in the reduction of the Company’s stock price and the warrants exercised during fiscal year 2019, and $0.9 million of income related to insurance proceeds.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception in 2004, we have incurred significant net losses and negative cash flows from operations. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we had a net loss of $107.9 million, $120.2 million and $76.4 million, respectively. At December 31, 2020 we had an accumulated deficit of $627.1 million.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had cash and cash equivalents of $156.7 million and $226.8 million, respectively. To date, we have financed our operations principally through offerings of our capital stock, issuances of warrants, use of term loans and receipts of customer deposits for new orders and payments from customers for systems installed and delivered. We may, from time to time, seek to raise capital through a variety of sources, including the public equity market, private equity financing, and public or private debt. In March 2018, we issued common stock, Series A convertible preferred stock and warrants to purchase common stock in the March 2018 Direct Registered Offering for gross proceeds of $59.1 million. In May 2018, we raised additional aggregate gross proceeds of $0.3 million through our at-the-market offering program under which we sold 33,097 shares of our common stock at an average sale price of $8.41 per share. In August 2018, we raised aggregate gross proceeds of $172.5 million via a public offering, in which we sold approximately 18.6 million shares of our common stock at a price of $9.25 per share. In December 2018, we entered into the SVB Term Loan for a principal amount of $56.0 million. We used the proceeds from SVB Term Loan and cash on hand to repay in full our obligations under the outstanding CRG Term Loan. In December 2019, we raised aggregate gross proceeds of $149.6 million via a public offering, in which we sold approximately 47.8 million shares of our common stock at a price of $3.13 per share. In October 2020, we amended the SVB Term Loan and expanded the principal amount from $56.0 million to $58.0 million.
In January 2019, we filed a registration statement with the SEC which covers the offering, issuance and sale of up to a maximum aggregate offering price of $250.0 million of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants, purchase contracts and/or units, including up to $100.0 million of our common shares pursuant to an at-the-market offering program with B. Riley Securities. The shares in the December 2019 Public Offering of Common stock were sold pursuant to the January 2019 registration statement and did not impact the $100.0 million of our common shares pursuant to our at-the-market offering program.
In January 2021, we raised aggregate net proceeds of approximately $53.5 million, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses, via a public offering in which we issued and sold 11,856,500 shares of our common stock, which included the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, at a price to the public of $4.85 per share. The consummation of the January 2021 public offering of common stock effectively reduced the common shares available for issuance under the at-the-market offering program to approximately $42.9 million.
We expect that our existing cash and cash equivalents, together with proceeds from the sales of MRIdian systems, will enable us to conduct our planned operations for at least the next 12 months.
We could potentially use our available financial resources sooner than we currently expect, and we may incur additional indebtedness to meet future operating needs. Adequate additional funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. In addition, although we anticipate being able to obtain additional financing, we may be unable to do so. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed could have significant negative consequences for our business, financial condition and results of operations. Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including those set forth in the section titled “Risk Factors.”
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating Activities
We have historically experienced cash outflows as we developed MRIdian with Cobalt-60 and MRIdian Linac and expanded our business. Our primary source of cash flow from operating activities is cash receipts from customers including sales of MRIdian systems and, to a lesser extent, up-front payments from customers. Our primary uses of cash in operating activities are amounts due to vendors for purchased components and employee-related expenditures.
During fiscal year 2020, cash used in operating activities was $63.5 million, resulting from our net loss of $107.9 million, a $16.9 million net change in our working capital, and the aggregate non-cash charges of $27.5 million.
•
Non-cash charges included $22.8 million of stock-based compensation expense, $6.4 million of depreciation and amortization expense, a $0.5 million gain related to the change in fair value of the 2017 and 2016 Placement Warrants, $2.3 million for the release of the product upgrade commitments and $0.7 million of amortization of debt discount and interest accrual related to the SVB Term Loan.
•
The net change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily a result of changes in accounts receivable, inventory, deposits on purchased inventory, prepaid expenses and other assets, accounts payable and customer deposits and deferred revenue. Accounts receivable decreased $5.1 million resulting from the timing of collections. Inventory and deposits on purchased inventory decreased by $8.2 million and $4.4 million, respectively, as a result of shipments and installations of MRIdian systems in the fourth quarter of 2020. Prepaid expenses and other assets increased $1.4 million mainly due to timing of prepayments and deferred sales commissions. Accounts payable decreased $3.4 million resulting from the timing of payments. Customer deposits and deferred revenue increased $4.5 million mainly due to the revenue recognized in fiscal year 2020.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 of $6.2 million and $7.8 million, respectively, primarily resulted from capital expenditures to purchase property and equipment.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2020, financing activities used $0.4 million in cash, which consisted of cash paid for debt issuance costs of $0.8 million and cash used to pay taxes related to net share settlement of equity awards of $1.4 million, partially offset by the proceeds from the SVB loan amendment of $2.0 million.
Contractual Obligations
We are a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act and are not required to provide the information required under this item.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or U.S. GAAP, which requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis.
In addition to the accounting policies that are more fully described in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we consider the critical accounting policies described below to be affected by critical accounting estimates, and those estimates have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. Such accounting policies require us to use judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates and assumptions regarding matters that are inherently uncertain, and actual results could differ from these estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenues are derived primarily from the sale of MRIdian systems and related services as well as support and maintenance services on sold systems. Beginning in the second quarter of 2019, the Company determined that the MRIdian system and installation of the MRIdian system, which had previously been one performance obligation, are now two performance obligations as they are capable of being distinct and are distinct within the context of the system contracts. This change occurred due primarily to changes in facts and circumstances, whereby there are now readily available resources outside the Company that can perform the system installations.
Additionally, certain revenue contracts have terms that result in the control of the system transferring to the customer upon delivery and inspection, as opposed to historically upon customer acceptance. For contracts in which control of the system transfers upon delivery and inspection, the Company recognizes revenue for the systems at the point in time when delivery and inspection by the customer has occurred. For these same contracts, the Company recognizes installation revenue over the period of installation as the installation services are performed and control is transferred to the customer. For all contracts in which control continues to transfer upon post-implementation customer acceptance, revenue for the system and installation will continue to be recognized upon customer acceptance.
Certain customer contracts with distributors do not require ViewRay installation at the ultimate user site, and the distributors may either perform the installation themselves or hire another party to perform the installation. For sales of MRIdian systems for which the Company is not responsible for installation, revenue recognition occurs when the entire system is shipped, which is when the control of the system is transferred to the customer.
For sales of the related support and maintenance services, a time-elapsed method is used to measure progress toward complete satisfaction of performance obligations and service revenue is recognized ratably over the service contract term, which is typically 12 months.
We frequently enter into sales arrangements that contain multiple performance obligations including MRIdian system and product support. Judgments as to the standalone selling price and allocation of consideration from an arrangement to the individual performance obligations, and the appropriate timing of revenue recognition are critical with respect to these arrangements. Changes to the performance obligations can impact the arrangement and amounts allocated to each performance obligation could affect the timing and amount of revenue recognition.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense is measured and recognized in the consolidated financial statements based on the fair value of the awards granted. The fair value of each option award is estimated on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The fair value of restricted stock units, or RSUs, is based on the closing market price of the Company’s common stock on the grant date. Stock-based compensation expense is recognized, net of estimated forfeitures, over the requisite service periods of the awards, which are generally three or four years.
Our use of the Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the options’ expected term and price volatility of the underlying stock. The assumptions used in our option-pricing model represent management’s best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
Common Stock Warrants
We issued the 2017 and 2016 Placement Warrants in connection with the 2017 and 2016 Private Placements. The 2017 and 2016 Placement Warrants were accounted for as a liability with subsequent changes in fair value recorded in other income (expenses), net at each reporting date until the warrants are exercised or expired.
Inventory Valuation
Inventory consists primarily of purchased components for assembling MRIdian systems and other direct costs associated with MRIdian system installation. Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. When the net realizable value of inventory is lower than related costs, we reduce the carrying value of inventory for the difference while recording a corresponding charge to cost of product revenues. The assumptions we used in estimating the net realizable value of the inventory primarily include the total cost to complete the applicable MRIdian system.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States, and we use estimates in determining our provision for income taxes. We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, we calculate deferred tax asset or liability account balances at the balance sheet date using current tax laws and rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to affect our taxable income.
We estimate actual current tax exposure together with assessing temporary differences resulting from differences in accounting for reporting purposes and tax purposes for certain items, such as accruals and allowances not currently deductible for tax purposes. These temporary differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included in our consolidated balance sheets. In general, deferred tax assets represent future tax benefits to be received when certain expenses previously recognized in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss become deductible expenses under applicable income tax laws or when net operating loss or credit carryforwards are utilized. Accordingly, realization of our deferred tax assets is dependent on future taxable income against which these deductions, losses and credit carryforwards can be utilized.
We assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income, and to the extent we believe that recovery is not likely, establish a valuation allowance. At December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we have a full valuation allowance set up for our net deferred tax assets.
Under federal and similar state tax statutes, changes in our ownership, including ownership changes resulting from the Merger, may limit our ability to use our available net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. The annual limitation, as a result of a change of ownership, may result in the expiration of net operating losses and credits before utilization. We performed a Section 382 analysis in February of 2020 and three ownership changes were identified, which had a corresponding limitation of tax attributes. Future owner or equity shifts could result in additional limitations on net operating loss and credit carryforwards.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
We review new accounting standards to determine the expected financial impact, if any, that the adoption of each such standard will have. For the recently issued accounting standards that we believe may have an impact on our consolidated financial statements, see the section entitled “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the consolidated financial statements.