Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As discussed in the section titled "Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements," the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, as well as assumptions that, if they never materialize or prove incorrect, could cause our results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those incorporated by reference into the section titled "Risk Factors" in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Additionally, our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future.
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operation for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 is included under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our prospectus for our Follow-on Public Offering, which was filed with the SEC pursuant to Rule 424(b) on September 11, 2020.
Overview
Vroom is an innovative, end-to-end ecommerce platform that is transforming the used vehicle industry by offering a better way to buy and a better way to sell used vehicles. We are deeply committed to creating an exceptional experience for our customers.
We are driving enduring change in the industry on a national scale. We take a vertically integrated, asset-light approach that is reinventing all phases of the vehicle buying and selling process, from discovery to delivery and everything in between. Our platform encompasses:
•
Ecommerce: We offer an exceptional ecommerce experience for our customers. In contrast to legacy dealerships and the peer-to-peer market, we provide consumers with a personalized and intuitive ecommerce interface to research and select from thousands of fully reconditioned vehicles. Our platform is accessible at any time on any device and provides transparent pricing, real-time financing and nationwide contact-free delivery right to a buyer’s driveway. For consumers looking to sell or trade in their vehicles, we provide attractive market-based pricing, real-time price quotes and convenient, contact-free at-home vehicle pick-up.
•
Vehicle Operations: Our scalable and vertically integrated operations underpin our business model. We strategically source inventory from auctions, consumers, rental car companies, OEMs and dealers. We improve our ability to acquire high-demand vehicles through enhanced supply science across all our sourcing channels and we have expanded our national marketing efforts to drive consumer sourcing. In our reconditioning and logistics operations, we deploy an asset-light strategy that optimizes a combination of ownership and operation of assets by us with strategic third-party partnerships. This hybrid approach provides flexibility, agility and speed without taking on unnecessary risk and capital investment, and drives improved unit economics and operating leverage.
•
Data Science and Experimentation: Data science and experimentation are at the core of everything we do. We rely on data science, machine learning and A/B and multivariate testing to continually drive optimization and operating leverage across our ecommerce and vehicle operations. We leverage data to increase the effectiveness of our national brand and performance marketing, enhance the customer experience, analyze market dynamics at scale, calibrate our vehicle pricing and optimize our overall inventory sales velocity. On the operations side, data science and experimentation enables us to fine tune our supply, sourcing and logistics models and to streamline our reconditioning processes.
In 2019, the U.S. used automotive market is the largest consumer product category, generating approximately $841 billion from sales. Based on data from Cox Automotive, there were an estimated 37.2 million used vehicle transactions in 2020, compared to approximately 40 million transactions in 2019. The U.S. used automotive market is also highly fragmented, with over 42,000 dealers and millions of peer-to-peer transactions across the country. It also is ripe for disruption as an industry that is notorious for consumer dissatisfaction and has one of the lowest levels of ecommerce penetration. Industry reports estimate that ecommerce penetration will grow to as much as half of all used vehicle sales by 2030. Our platform, coupled with our national presence and brand, provides a significant competitive advantage versus local dealerships and regional players that lack nationwide reach and scalable technology, operations and logistics. The traditional auto dealers and peer-to-peer market do not and cannot offer consumers what we offer.
Our Model
We generate revenue through the sale of used vehicles and value-added products. We sell vehicles directly to consumers primarily through our Ecommerce segment. As the largest segment in our business, Ecommerce revenue grew 55.7% from 2019 to 2020, and we expect Ecommerce to continue to outgrow our other segments as it is the core focus of our growth strategy.
We also sell vehicles through wholesale channels, which provide a revenue source for vehicles that do not meet our Vroom retail sales criteria. Additionally, we generate revenue through the retail sale of used vehicles and value-added products at Houston-based Texas Direct Auto, or TDA.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our Ecommerce, Wholesale and TDA segments represented 67.4%, 18.1% and 14.5% of our total revenue, respectively.
Our retail gross profit consists of two components: Vehicle Gross Profit and Product Gross Profit. Vehicle Gross Profit is calculated as the aggregate retail sales price for all vehicles sold to customers along with delivery fee revenue and document fees received from customers, less the aggregate cost to acquire such vehicles, the aggregate cost of inbound transportation for such vehicles to our vehicle reconditioning centers, which we refer to as VRCs, and the aggregate cost of reconditioning such vehicles for sale. Product Gross Profit consists of fees earned on any finance and protection products sold as part of a vehicle sale. Because we are paid fees on the value-added products we sell, our gross profit on such products is equal to the revenue we generate. See “-Key Operating and Financial Metrics.”
Below is an explanation of how we calculate vehicle gross profit per unit and product gross profit per unit:
Our profitability depends primarily on increasing unit sales and operating leverage, as well as improving unit economics. We deploy an asset-light strategy that optimizes a combination of ownership and operation of assets by us with strategic third-party partnerships. Our hybrid approach also applies to the third-party value-added products we sell to customers, which enables us to generate additional revenue streams without taking on the risk associated with underwriting vehicle financing or protection products. As we scale, we expect to benefit from efficiencies and operating leverage across our business, including our marketing and technology investments, and our inventory procurement, logistics, reconditioning and sales processes.
Inventory Sourcing
We source our vehicle inventory from a variety of channels, including auctions, consumers, rental car companies, OEMs and dealers. Because the quality of vehicles and associated gross margin profile vary across each channel, the mix of inventory sources has an impact on our profitability. We continually evaluate the optimal mix of sourcing channels to generate the highest sales margins and shortest inventory turns, both of which contribute to increased gross profit per unit. We generate a vast set of data derived from market demand, pricing dynamics, vehicle acquisitions and subsequent sales, and we leverage that data to optimize future vehicle acquisitions. As we scale, we expect to continue to leverage the data at our disposal to optimize and enhance the volume and selection of vehicles in our inventory and, in turn, drive revenue growth and profitability. We are also exploring third party inventory strategies, which offers the possibility of expanding our sourcing channels through third party sellers while offering us attractive revenue models in an asset light, debt free structure. See “-Key Factors and Trends Affecting our Operating Results-Ability to drive growth by cost effectively increasing the volume and selection of vehicles in our inventory.”
Vehicle Reconditioning
Before a vehicle is listed for retail sale on our platform, it undergoes a thorough reconditioning process in order to meet our Vroom retail sales criteria. The efficiency of this reconditioning process is a key element in our ability to profitably grow. To recondition vehicles, we rely on a combination of our Vroom VRC along with a network of VRCs owned and operated by third parties, and we intend to continue to expand our network of third-party VRCs. Utilizing this hybrid approach, we have increased our total reconditioning capacity to approximately 2,000 units per week as of December 31, 2020, with approximately two-thirds from our eighteen third-party VRCs. As we increase the number of vehicles in our inventory and expand our reconditioning capacity, we expect that reconditioning costs and inbound shipping costs per unit will decrease as we benefit from economies of scale and operating leverage in reconditioning costs. See “-Key Factors and Trends Affecting our Operating Results-Ability to expand and optimize our reconditioning capacity to satisfy increasing demand.”
Logistics Network
For our logistics operations, we primarily have used national third-party carriers, which has allowed us to efficiently deliver vehicles to customers throughout the United States while focusing on expanding other critical components of our business, such as the volume and selection of vehicles in our inventory. We optimized our third-party logistics network nationally through the development of strategic carrier arrangements with national haulers and consolidated our carrier base into dedicated operating regions. This strategy enhanced the flexibility, agility and speed of our growth while reducing the need for additional capital commitments as we scaled our business. Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have experienced a reduced supply of carriers, increased shipping prices and deteriorating service levels. Thus, in response to these disruptions, and to further enhance the quality of our logistics operations and our customer experience, we have been accelerating our strategy to optimize our hybrid approach by expanding our proprietary logistics network. Initially we have been prioritizing investment in our last-mile delivery operations where we can have the greatest impact on the customer experience. We also have invested in short-haul trucks to make regional deliveries from our last mile hubs, and have begun to invest in long-haul vehicles for hub-to-hub shipments. Consistent with our hybrid approach, as we scale our business, we continue to strategically combine the operation of our expanded proprietary fleet with the use of third-party carriers, which we expect will enable us to both accommodate our growth and provide the highest level of customer service. See “-Key Factors and Trends Affecting our Operating Results-Ability to expand and develop our logistics network.”
Value-Added Products
We generate revenue by earning fees for selling value-added products to customers in connection with vehicle sales. Currently, our third-party value-added product offering consists of finance and protection products, including financing from third-party lenders for our customers’ vehicle purchases, as well as sales of vehicle service contracts, GAP protection and tire and wheel coverage. As we scale our business, we intend to introduce additional value-added products that will be attractive to our customers and drive revenue and profitable growth. We expect that both expanded product offerings and increased attachment rates in value-added product sales will have a positive impact on our profitability. See “-Key Factors and Trends Affecting our Operating Results-Ability to increase and better monetize value-added products.”
Our Segments
We manage and report operating results through three reportable segments:
•
Ecommerce (67.4% of 2020 revenue; 49.3% of 2019 revenue): The Ecommerce segment represents retail sales of used vehicles through our ecommerce platform and fees earned on sales of value-added products associated with those vehicle sales.
•
Wholesale (18.1% of 2020 revenue; 17.9% of 2019 revenue): The Wholesale segment represents sales of used vehicles through wholesale channels.
•
TDA (14.5% of 2020 revenue; 32.8% of 2019 revenue): The TDA segment represents retail sales of used vehicles from TDA and fees earned on sales of value-added products associated with those vehicle sales.
Gross profit is defined as revenue less cost of sales for each segment. Reflected below is a summary of reportable segment revenue and reportable segment gross profit for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
Key Operating and Financial Metrics
We regularly review a number of metrics, including the following key operating and financial metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends in our business, prepare financial forecasts and make strategic decisions. We believe these operational measures are useful in evaluating our performance, in addition to our financial results prepared in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, or U.S. GAAP. You should read the key operating and financial metrics in conjunction with the following discussion of our results of operations and together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We focus heavily on metrics related to unit economics as improved gross profit per unit is a key element of our growth and profitability strategies.
The calculation of our key operating and financial metrics is straightforward and does not rely on significant projections, estimates or assumptions. Nevertheless, each of our key operating and financial metrics has limitations because each focuses specifically on only one standard by which to evaluate our business, without taking into account other applicable standards, performance measures or operating trends by which our business could be evaluated. Accordingly, no single metric should be viewed as the bellwether by which our business should be measured. Rather, each key operating and financial metric should be considered in conjunction with other metrics and components of our results of operations, such as each of the other key operating and financial metrics and our revenues, inventory, loss from operations and segment results.
Ecommerce Units Sold
Ecommerce units sold is defined as the number of vehicles sold and shipped to customers through our ecommerce platform, net of returns under our Vroom 7-Day Return Program. Ecommerce units sold excludes sales of vehicles through the TDA and Wholesale segments. As we continue to expand our ecommerce business, we expect that ecommerce units sold will be the primary driver of our revenue growth. Additionally, each vehicle sale through our ecommerce platform also creates the opportunity to leverage such sale to sell value-added products. Continued ecommerce growth will also increase the number of trade-in vehicles acquired from our customers, which we can either recondition and add to our inventory or sell through wholesale channels.
Vehicle Gross Profit per Ecommerce Unit
Vehicle Gross Profit per ecommerce unit, which we refer to as Vehicle GPPU, for a given period is defined as the aggregate retail sales price and delivery charges for all vehicles sold through our Ecommerce segment less the aggregate costs to acquire those vehicles, the aggregate costs of inbound transportation to the VRCs and the aggregate costs of reconditioning those vehicles in that period, divided by the number of ecommerce units sold in that period. As we continue to expand our ecommerce business, we believe Vehicle GPPU will be a key driver of our long-term profitability.
Product Gross Profit per Ecommerce Unit
Product Gross Profit per ecommerce unit, which we refer to as Product GPPU, for a given period is defined as the aggregate fees earned on sales of value-added products in that period, net of the reserves for chargebacks on such products in that period, divided by the number of ecommerce units sold in that period. Because we are paid fees on the value-added products we sell, our gross profit is equal to the revenue we generate from the sale of value-added products. We plan to continue to introduce initiatives to increase the attachment rates of value-added products and expand our offerings of value-added products which will grow our Product GPPU.
Total Gross Profit per Ecommerce Unit
Total Gross Profit per ecommerce unit, which we refer to as Total GPPU, for a given period is calculated as the sum of Vehicle GPPU and Product GPPU. We view Total GPPU as a key metric of the profitability of our Ecommerce segment.
Average Monthly Unique Visitors
Average monthly unique visitors is defined as the average number of individuals who access our ecommerce platform within a calendar month. We calculate the average monthly unique visitors over any period by dividing the aggregate monthly unique visitors during such period by the number of months in that period. We use average monthly unique visitors to measure the quality of our customer experience, the effectiveness of our marketing campaigns and customer acquisition as well as the strength of our brand and market penetration.
Average monthly unique visitors is calculated using data provided by Google Analytics. The computation of average monthly unique visitors excludes individuals who access our platform multiple times within a calendar month, counting such individuals only one time for purposes of the calculation. If an individual accesses our ecommerce platform using different devices or different browsers on the same device within a given month, the first access through each such device or browser is counted as a separate monthly unique visitor.
Listed Vehicles
We define listed vehicles as the aggregate number of vehicles listed on our platform at any given point in time. Listed vehicles includes vehicles that are available for sale, pending sale and “coming soon”. Listed vehicles is a key indicator of our performance because we believe that the number of vehicles listed on our platform is a key driver of vehicle sales and revenue growth. Increasing the number of vehicles listed on our platform results in a greater selection of vehicles for our customers, creating demand and increasing conversion.
Ecommerce Average Days to Sale
We define ecommerce average days to sale as the average number of days between our acquisition of vehicles and the final delivery of such vehicles to customers through our ecommerce platform. We calculate average days to sale for a given period by dividing the aggregate number of days between the acquisition of all vehicles sold through our ecommerce platform during such period and final delivery of such vehicles to customers by the number of ecommerce units sold in that period. Ecommerce average days to sale excludes vehicles sold through the TDA and Wholesale segments.
Ecommerce average days to sale is an important metric because a reduction in the number of days between the acquisition of a vehicle and the delivery of such vehicle typically results in a higher gross profit per unit.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP financial measures are useful in evaluating our operating performance: EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted loss from operations, Non-GAAP net loss, Non-GAAP net loss per share and Non-GAAP net loss per share, as adjusted. These non-GAAP financial measures have limitations as analytical tools in that they do not reflect all of the amounts associated with our results of operations as determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Because of these limitations, these non-GAAP financial measures should be considered along with other operating and financial performance measures presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The presentation of these non-GAAP financial measures is not intended to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or superior to, financial information prepared and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We have reconciled all non-GAAP financial measures with the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures.
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted loss from operations, Non-GAAP net loss, Non-GAAP net loss per share and Non-GAAP net loss per share, as adjusted are supplemental performance measures that our management uses to assess our operating performance and the operating leverage in our business. Because EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted loss from operations, Non-GAAP net loss, Non-GAAP net loss per share and Non-GAAP net loss per share, as adjusted facilitate internal comparisons of our historical operating performance on a more consistent basis, we use these measures for business planning purposes.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
We calculate EBITDA as net loss before interest expense, interest income, income tax expense and depreciation and amortization expense and we calculate Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA adjusted to exclude the one-time, IPO related acceleration of non-cash stock-based compensation expense, the one-time, IPO related non-cash revaluation of a preferred stock warrant, and acquisition related costs. The following table presents a reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, which is the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure:
Adjusted loss from operations
We calculate Adjusted loss from operations as loss from operations adjusted to exclude the one-time, IPO related acceleration of non-cash stock-based compensation expense and acquisition related costs. The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted loss from operations to loss from operations, which is the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure:
Non-GAAP net loss, Non-GAAP net loss per share and Non-GAAP net loss per share, as adjusted
We calculate Non-GAAP net loss as net loss adjusted to exclude the one-time, IPO related acceleration of non-cash stock-based compensation expense, the one-time, IPO related non-cash revaluation of a preferred stock warrant, and acquisition related costs. We calculate Non-GAAP net loss per share as Non-GAAP net loss divided by weighted average number of shares outstanding. The following table presents a reconciliation of Non-GAAP net loss and Non-GAAP net loss per share to net loss and net loss per share, which are the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures:
(a)Non-GAAP net loss per share, as adjusted has been computed to give effect to, as of the beginning of each period presented, (i) the shares of common stock issued in connection with our IPO (ii) the automatic conversion of all outstanding shares of redeemable convertible preferred stock into shares of common stock that occurred upon the consummation of our IPO and (iii) the shares of common stock issued in connection with our follow-on public offering. The computation of Non-GAAP net loss per share, as adjusted is as follows:
Recent Events
Initial Public Offering
On June 11, 2020, we completed an initial public offering, or IPO, in which we sold 24,437,500 shares of common stock, which included 3,187,500 shares sold pursuant to the exercise by the underwriters of an over-allotment option to purchase additional shares, at a public offering price of $22.00 per share. We received proceeds of approximately $504.0 million, net of underwriting discount and before deducting offering expenses of $7.5 million, from sales of our shares in the IPO. Prior to the completion of the IPO, we effected a 2-for-1 forward stock split of all the issued and outstanding shares of our common stock the (“Stock Split”). As a result of the Stock Split and the completion of the IPO, all of our redeemable convertible preferred stock outstanding automatically converted into an aggregate of 85,533,394 shares of our common stock.
Follow-on Public Offering
On September 15, 2020, we closed on our follow-on public offering in which we sold 10,800,000 shares of common stock at the public offering price of $54.50 per share. We received proceeds of approximately $569.5 million from the offering, net of the underwriting discount and before deducting offering expenses of $1.5 million.
Rocket Agreement
On May 15, 2020, we entered into an agreement with Rocket Auto LLC and certain of its affiliates (collectively, “Rocket”) providing for the launch of an ecommerce platform under the “Rocket Auto” brand for the marketing and sale of vehicles directly to consumers (the “RA Agreement”). We will list our used vehicle inventory for sale on the Rocket Auto platform, but all sales of the inventory will be conducted through our platform. Rocket Auto is expected to launch publicly during 2021. During the term of the RA Agreement, Rocket has agreed to ensure that a minimum percentage of all used vehicles sold or leased through the platform on a monthly basis will be Vroom inventory. We issued Rocket 183,870 shares of our common stock upon execution of the RA Agreement. We will pay Rocket a combination of cash and stock for vehicle sales made through the platform. Rocket may earn up to 8,641,914 shares of common stock over a four-year period based upon sales volume of Vroom inventory through the Rocket Auto platform.
CarStory Acquisition
On January 7, 2021, we completed the acquisition of the CarStory business, a leader in AI-powered analytics and digital services for automotive retail, through the acquisition of 100% of Vast Holdings, Inc.
Leveraging its machine learning, informed by more than 7 million listings per day and more than 18 million consumer sessions per month, CarStory brings the industry’s most complete and accurate view of predictive market data to our national ecommerce and vehicle operations platform. As part of Vroom, we expect CarStory to continue to drive automotive retail innovation by aggregating, optimizing and distributing current market data from thousands of automotive sources and offering its digital retailing services to dealers, top automotive financial services companies and household names in automotive industry research and retailing.
Pursuant to the acquisition agreement, the aggregate purchase price was approximately $120.0 million, comprised of cash and shares of our common stock. On the closing date, we paid $77.5 million in cash and issued 1,072,117 shares of our common stock. The purchase price is subject to adjustment for certain working capital adjustments and post-closing indemnities.
Update on the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The results of our operations and overall financial performance were impacted due to the COVID-19 pandemic during the year ended December 31, 2020. After the initial disruption in our ecommerce operations, consumer demand for used vehicles now exceeds pre-COVID-19 levels. Lower foot traffic in the initial phase of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as reduced inventory at the TDA location as the ecommerce business scales, continues to negatively affect our TDA business. Additionally, we experienced disruption across our logistics network, with a reduced number of third-party providers available to deliver our vehicles, which has resulted in a slowdown of inventory being picked up and delivered to our VRCs and in sold units being delivered to customers. Our transportation costs have also increased as the remaining carriers have increased prices.
We expect our operations will continue to be adversely impacted continuing into in 2021, however, the magnitude and duration of the ultimate impact is impossible to predict with certainty due to:
•
uncertainties regarding the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the length of time over which the disruptions caused by COVID-19 will continue, including any potential future waves, the spread of new variants and the success of vaccination programs;
•
the impact of governmental orders and regulations that have been, and may in the future be, imposed in response to the pandemic;
•
the impact of COVID-19 on VRCs, wholesale auctions, state DMV titling and registration services, third party vehicle carriers and other third parties on which we rely;
•
uncertainty as to the impact future increases in transmission could have on our ability to fully staff portions of our business;
•
the deterioration of economic conditions in the United States, as well as high unemployment levels, which could have an adverse impact on discretionary consumer spending; and
•
uncertainty as to whether and to what degree governmental stimulus packages or other economic relief will be provided to soften the negative economic effects of the COVID-19 crisis and the impact of any such relief.
See “Risk Factors-Risk Related to the COVID-19 pandemic-The COVID-19 pandemic has had and is expected to continue to have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.”
Severe Weather Conditions
In February 2021, the state of Texas was hit with record breaking winter weather which resulted in dangerous road conditions, widespread power outages, water outages and contamination of the water supply, which caused significant disruptions to our Houston area operations, including the closure of our offices and Vroom VRC for several days. We immediately focused on the health and wellbeing of our employees, while also working to minimize the impact on our customers. We have resumed full operations and are currently working to address the backlog in certain areas of our business, including our VRC, sales support, and administrative functions. “Risk Factors-General Risk Factors-Our business is subject to the risk of natural disasters, adverse weather events and other catastrophic events, and to interruption by manmade problems such as terrorism.
Other Key Factors and Trends Affecting our Operating Results
Our financial condition and results of operations have been, and will continue to be, affected by a number of factors and trends, including the following:
Ability to utilize data science to drive revenue growth by cost effectively increasing the volume and selection of vehicles in our inventory
Our growth is primarily driven by vehicle sales. Vehicle sales growth, in turn, is largely driven by the volume of inventory and the selection of vehicles listed on our platform. Accordingly, we believe that having the appropriate volume and mix of vehicle inventory is critical to our ability to drive growth.
The continued growth of our vehicle inventory requires a number of important capabilities, including the ability to finance the acquisition of inventory at competitive rates, source high quality vehicles across various acquisition channels nationwide, secure adequate reconditioning capacity and execute effective marketing strategies to increase consumer sourcing. In addition, our ability to accurately forecast pricing and consumer demand for specific types of vehicles is critical to sourcing high quality, high-demand vehicles. This ability is enabled by our data science capabilities that leverage the growing amount of data at our disposal and fine-tune our supply and sourcing models. Our investment in CarStory further enhances our predictive market data capabilities. As we continue to invest in our operational efficiency and data analytics, we expect that we will continue to cost effectively increase the volume and optimize the selection of our ecommerce inventory.
Ability to capitalize on the continued migration of vehicle purchasers to ecommerce platforms through data-driven marketing efforts
While the overall ecommerce penetration rate in used vehicle sales remains low, over the last several years, ecommerce used vehicle sales have experienced significant growth. There has been a shift in consumer buying patterns
towards more convenient, personalized, and on-demand purchases, as well as a demand for ecommerce across more diverse categories, including the used vehicle market. We expect that the ecommerce model for buying and selling used vehicles will continue to grow and such growth may be accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic. Our ability to continue to benefit from this trend will be an important driver of our future performance.
We seek to improve our brand awareness among consumers through national marketing campaigns in order to strengthen our customer acquisition funnel. We also use digital performance marketing such as search engine marketing, automotive aggregator sites and social media to acquire customers more cost effectively. Our aggregate marketing spend has increased over time, with our first national brand marketing campaign commencing in the first quarter of 2019, and we expect to continue to invest in both national brand marketing and performance marketing efforts. As we leverage our national brand, we believe this investment in marketing spend will drive additional demand and sales. We also believe that we have the ability to drive down the cost of acquisition per unit sold by increasing the efficiency of our marketing spend.
Ability to convert visitors to our platform into customers
The quality of the customer experience on our ecommerce platform is critical to our ability to attract new visitors to our platform, convert such visitors into customers and increase repeat customers. Our ability to drive higher customer conversion depends on our ability to make our platform a compelling choice for consumers based on our functionalities and consumer offerings.
Data analytics and experimentation drive decision making across all of our conversion efforts. By analyzing the data generated by the millions of visitors and tens of thousands of transactions on our platform, and continually testing strategies to maximize conversion rates, we form a better understanding of consumer preferences and try to create a more tailored ecommerce experience.
Increased conversion also depends on our ability to provide the necessary customer service and sales support to respond to increased demand. During the fourth quarter, we further expanded our customer experience team as we ramp up our sales support in anticipation of continued sales growth in 2021. We also recently engaged two additional customer service providers to expand our customer service operations as we scale our business. As we continue to invest in our brand and improve the customer experience, we expect that we will attract more visitors, improve conversion and drive greater sales.
Ability to optimize the mix of inventory sources to drive increased gross profit and improvements to our unit economics
We strategically source inventory from auctions, consumers, rental car companies, OEMs and dealers. Auctions, consumers, and rental car companies represent the vast majority of our inventory sources, accounting for approximately 48%, 40%, and 10% of our retail inventory sold for the year ended December 31, 2020, respectively. Because the quality of vehicles and associated gross margin profile vary across each channel, the mix of inventory sources has an impact on our profitability. We continually evaluate the optimal mix of sourcing channels and strive to source vehicles in a way that maximizes our average gross profit per unit and improves our unit economics. For example, purchasing vehicles at third-party auctions is competitive and, consequently, vehicle prices at third-party auctions tend to be higher than vehicle prices for vehicles sourced directly from consumers. Accordingly, as part of our sourcing strategy, we seek to increase the percentage of vehicle sales that we source from consumers.
Our ability to increase the percentage of inventory sourced directly from consumers will depend on the popularity and success of our ecommerce platform. In order to continue to increase the percentage of vehicles that we source directly from consumers, we also have expanded our national marketing efforts that are focused on our Sell Us Your Car® proposition, which we believe will result in more customers gaining familiarity with our platform. We expect that, as consumers experience the convenience of our platform to sell or trade in their used vehicles, the percentage of inventory we source directly from consumers will continue to grow.
We are also exploring third-party inventory strategies, which offers the possibility of expanding our sourcing channels through third party sellers while offering us attractive revenue models in an asset light, debt free structure.
Ability to expand and optimize our reconditioning capacity to satisfy increasing demand
Our ability to recondition purchased vehicles to our quality standards is a critical component of our business. Historically, we have successfully increased our reconditioning capacity as our business has grown, and our future success will depend on our ability to expand and optimize our reconditioning capacity to satisfy increasing customer demand. We employ a hybrid approach that combines the use of our Vroom VRC and third-party VRCs to best meet our reconditioning needs.
In 2019, we significantly increased our reconditioning capacity within our Vroom VRC by overhauling our operations and applying lean manufacturing techniques and other software-enabled technological advances. As we continue to grow our business, we intend to continue to invest in increased reconditioning capacity and operational efficiency through third-party VRC locations. Additionally, our use of third-party VRCs to recondition vehicles allows us to avoid additional capital expenditures, quickly increase capacity, maintain greater operational flexibility and broaden our geographic footprint to drive lower logistics costs. We have continued to expand our third-party VRC operations and, as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, have a total of nineteen VRCs throughout the U.S. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
We leverage our data analytics and deep industry experience to strategically select VRC locations where we believe there is the highest supply and demand for our vehicles. We expect that our continued investment in reconditioning capacity and technology will lower our reconditioning costs per unit and drive greater operational efficiency, higher gross profit per unit and improved unit economics.
Ability to expand and develop our logistics network
We primarily use third-party carriers and have optimized our third-party logistics network nationwide through the development of strategic carrier arrangements with national haulers and the consolidation of our carrier base into dedicated operating regions. We expect that these enhanced logistics operations, combined with the expansion of strategically located VRCs, will drive efficiency in our logistics operations. Our VRCs also serve as pooling points to aggregate acquired vehicles and we are using certain VRCs as hubs for staging vehicles for last-mile delivery to customers, which we expect to provide an improved experience for customers. Recently, as a result of the continued prevalence of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have experienced a reduced supply of carriers, increased shipping prices and deteriorating service levels. Thus, in response to these disruptions, and to further enhance the quality of our logistics operations and our customer experience, we are accelerating our strategy to optimize our hybrid approach by expanding our proprietary logistics network. Currently, we are prioritizing investment in our last-mile delivery operations where we can have the greatest impact on the customer experience. We also have invested in short-haul trucks to make regional deliveries from our last mile hubs, and have begun to invest in long-haul vehicles for hub-to-hub shipments. As we invest in our expanded logistics operations, we expect to incur increased operating expenses and capital expenditures associated with purchasing or leasing fleet vehicles, leasing space for delivery hubs, hiring qualified drivers, and operating and maintaining fleet vehicles, offset in part by reduced third-party logistics expense. Consistent with our hybrid approach, we continue to strategically combine the operation of our expanded proprietary fleet with the use of third-party carriers, which we expect will enable us to both accommodate our growth and provide the highest level of customer service. Over time, as our business scales, we expect that optimizing our logistics network through this hybrid approach will result in improved unit economics, increased profitability and an enhanced customer experience.
Ability to increase and better monetize value-added products
Our offering of value-added products is an integral part of providing a seamless vehicle-buying experience to our customers. These products provide added revenue streams for us as well as offering convenience, assurance and efficiency for our customers. We sell our third-party value-added products through our strategic relationships with multiple lenders and other third parties who bear the incremental risks associated with the underwriting of finance and protection products. We have entered into strategic partnerships with lenders such as Chase and Santander which have contributed to improvements in Product GPPU. Additionally, through our on-going data analytics, experimentation and further development of our ecommerce technology, we expect to increase attachment rates of our existing value-added products while finding new opportunities to include additional finance and protection products, as well as other value-added products. Because we are paid fees on value-added products we sell, our gross profit is equal to the revenue we generate on such sales. As a result, such sales help drive total gross profit per unit. We expect that, as we scale our business, we will increase the breadth and variety of value-added products offered to customers and improve attachment rates to our vehicle sales, which in turn will grow revenue and drive profitability.
Seasonality
Used vehicle sales are seasonal. The used vehicle industry typically experiences an increase in sales early in the calendar year and reaches its highest point late in the first quarter and early in the second quarter. Vehicle sales then level off through the rest of the year, with the lowest level of sales in the fourth quarter. This seasonality has historically corresponded with the timing of income tax refunds, which are an important source of funding for vehicle purchases. Additionally, used vehicles depreciate at a faster rate in the last two quarters of each year and a slower rate in the first two quarters of each year. In line with these macro trends, our gross profit per unit has historically been higher in the first half of the year when compared to the second half of the year. See “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Financial Condition and
Results of Operations-We may experience seasonal and other fluctuations in our quarterly results of operations, which may not fully reflect the underlying performance of our business.”
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Retail vehicle revenue
We sell retail vehicles through both our ecommerce platform and TDA. Revenue from vehicle sales, including any delivery charges, are recognized when vehicles are delivered to the customers or picked up at our TDA retail location, net of a reserve for estimated returns. The number of units sold and the average selling price (“ASP”) per unit are the primary factors impacting our retail revenue stream.
The number of units sold depends on the volume of inventory and the selection of vehicles listed on our ecommerce platform, our ability to attract new customers, our brand awareness and our ability to expand our reconditioning operations and logistics network.
ASP depends primarily on our acquisition and pricing strategies, retail used car market prices, our average days to sale and our reconditioning and logistics costs.
We have begun to strategically take advantage of a broader portion of the used vehicle market by adding more lower priced vehicles to our inventory. As a data-driven company, we acquire inventory based upon demand predicted by our data analytics. Since the COVID-19 pandemic, that data has been moving towards lower-priced inventory, which we expect to continue to result in a lower ASP per unit than historical levels.
Wholesale vehicle revenue
We sell vehicles that do not meet our Vroom retail sales criteria through wholesale channels. Vehicles sold through wholesale channels are acquired from customers who trade-in their vehicles when making a purchase from us, from customers who sell their vehicle to us in direct-buy transactions, and from liquidation of vehicles previously listed for retail sale. The number of wholesale vehicles sold and the ASP per unit are the primary drivers of wholesale revenue. The ASP per unit is affected by the mix of the vehicles we acquire and general supply and demand conditions in the wholesale market.
Product revenue
We generate revenue by earning fees on sales of value-added products to our customers in connection with vehicle sales, including fees earned on customer vehicle financing from third-party lenders and fees earned on sales of other value-added products, such as vehicle service contracts, GAP protection and tire and wheel coverage. We earn fees on these products pursuant to arrangements with the third parties that sell and administer these products. For accounting purposes, we are an agent for these transactions and, as a result, we recognize fees on a net basis when the customer enters into an arrangement to purchase these products or obtain third-party financing, which is typically at the time of a vehicle sale. Our gross profit on product revenue is equal to the revenue we generate.
Product revenue is affected by the number of vehicles sold, the attachment rate of value-added products and the amount of fees we receive on each product. Product revenue also consists of estimated profit-sharing amounts to which we are entitled based on the performance of third-party protection products once a required claims period has passed.
A portion of the fees we receive is subject to chargeback in the event of early termination, default, or prepayment of the contracts by our customers. We recognize product revenue net of reserves for estimated chargebacks.
Other revenue
Other revenue consists of labor and parts revenue earned by us for vehicle repair services at TDA.
See “Note 3-Revenue Recognition” to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cost of sales
Cost of sales primarily includes the costs to acquire vehicles, inbound transportation costs and direct and indirect reconditioning costs associated with preparing vehicles for sale. Costs to acquire vehicles are primarily driven by the inventory source, vehicle mix and general supply and demand conditions of the used vehicle market. Inbound transportation costs include costs to transport the vehicle to our VRCs. Reconditioning costs include parts, labor and third-party reconditioning costs directly attributable to the vehicle and allocated overhead costs. Cost of sales also includes any accounting adjustments to reflect vehicle inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value.
Total gross profit
Total gross profit is defined as total revenue less costs associated with such revenue.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Our selling, general, and administrative expenses, which we refer to as SG&A expenses, consist primarily of advertising and marketing expenses, outbound transportation costs, employee compensation, occupancy costs of our facilities and professional fees for accounting, auditing, tax, legal and consulting services.
We expect that our SG&A expenses will increase in the future as we expand our operations, including our proprietary logistics operations, hire additional employees and continue to increase our marketing spend. In 2020, we further expanded our customer experience team as we ramp up our sales support in anticipation of continued sales growth. We also recently engaged two additional customer service providers to expand our customer service operations as we scale our business. We also will continue to incur increased expenses associated with being a public company, including costs of accounting, audit, legal, regulatory and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with SEC and Nasdaq requirements, director and officer insurance costs, and investor and public relations costs.
Depreciation and amortization
Our depreciation and amortization expense primarily includes: depreciation related to our leasehold improvements and company vehicles; amortization related to intangible assets in acquired businesses; and capitalized internal use software costs incurred in the development of our platform and website applications. Depreciation expense related to our Vroom VRC is included in cost of sales in the consolidated statements of operations.
Interest expense
Our interest expense includes interest expense related to our 2020 Vehicle Floorplan Facility, as discussed below, which is used to finance our inventory, as well as interest expense on our term loan facility, which was repaid in full in December 2019.
Interest Income
Interest income primarily represents interest credits earned on cash deposits maintained in relation to our 2020 Vehicle Floorplan Facility as well as interest earned on cash and cash equivalents.
Results of Operations
The following table presents our consolidated results of operations for the periods indicated:
Segments
We manage and report operating results through three reportable segments:
•
Ecommerce (67.4% of 2020 revenue; 49.3% of 2019 revenue): The Ecommerce segment represents retail sales of used vehicles through our ecommerce platform and fees earned on sales of value-added products associated with those vehicle sales.
•
Wholesale (18.1% of 2020 revenue; 17.9% of 2019 revenue): The Wholesale segment represents sales of used vehicles through wholesale channels.
•
TDA (14.5% of 2020 revenue; 32.8% of 2019 revenue): The TDA segment represents retail sales of used vehicles from TDA and fees earned on sales of value-added products associated with those vehicle sales.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Ecommerce
The following table presents our Ecommerce segment results of operations for the periods indicated:
Ecommerce units
After the initial disruption in our ecommerce operations due to the COVID-19 pandemic, consumer demand for used vehicles has returned to pre-COVID-19 levels and in 2020, we experienced strong consumer demand for our ecommerce solutions and contact-free delivery.
Ecommerce units sold increased 15,543, or 82.0%, from 18,945 in 2019 to 34,488 in 2020. This increase was driven by higher inventory levels, our national advertising campaign which continues to strengthen our national brand awareness as well as greater consumer acceptance of our business model as a result of disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, and process improvements in our ecommerce platform. Average monthly unique visitors to our website grew from 653,216 in 2019 to 969,890 in 2020, representing year over year growth of 48.5%. We expect ecommerce units sold to continue to grow in the future as we increase our inventory selection and marketing efforts as well as improve conversion.
Vehicle Revenue
Ecommerce vehicle revenue increased $307.6 million, or 53.3%, from $577.0 million in 2019 to $884.6 million in 2020. The increase in ecommerce vehicle revenue was primarily attributable to the 15,543 increase in ecommerce units sold, which increased vehicle revenue by $473.4 million, partially offset by a lower ASP per unit, which decreased from $30,456 in 2019 to $25,648 in 2020 and decreased vehicle revenue by $165.8 million. The decrease in ASP per unit was driven by demand predicted by our data analytics and by our ability to source and recondition lower priced vehicles while maintaining target gross profit per units as a result of our expanding VRC network. We expect to continue to sell vehicles with a lower ASP per unit than historical levels and that ecommerce vehicle revenue will continue to grow driven by increases in ecommerce units sold.
Product Revenue
Ecommerce product revenue increased $19.8 million, or 177.9%, from $11.1 million in 2019 to $30.9 million in 2020. The increase in ecommerce product revenue was primarily attributable to a $309 increase in product revenue per unit, which increased product revenue by $10.7 million and the 15,543 increase in ecommerce units sold, which increased product revenue by $9.1 million. The increase in product revenue per unit was primarily due to higher attachment rates, improved financing features in our ecommerce platform as well as our strategic lender partnerships. We expect ecommerce product revenue will continue to grow in the future driven by increases in ecommerce units sold, new product offerings, initiatives to improve product attachment rates and increases in per unit profit.
Vehicle Gross Profit
Ecommerce vehicle gross profit increased $9.0 million, or 42.6%, from $21.0 million in 2019 to $30.0 million in 2020. The increase in vehicle gross profit was primarily attributable to the 15,543 increase in ecommerce units sold, which increased vehicle gross profit by $17.2 million, partially offset by a $240 decrease in vehicle gross profit per unit, which decreased vehicle gross profit by $8.2 million. Vehicle gross profit per unit decreased from $1,109 in 2019 to $869 in 2020, primarily attributable to lower sales margins (sales price less purchase price of vehicles sold), partially offset by improvements in inbound logistics and reconditioning costs.
As we continue to mature our infrastructure, increase and optimize our network of VRCs, we expect ecommerce vehicle gross profit per unit to increase in the future driven by reduced costs across acquisitions, logistics and reconditioning.
Product Gross Profit
Ecommerce product gross profit increased $19.8 million, or 177.9%, from $11.1 million in 2019 to $30.9 million in 2020. The increase in ecommerce product gross profit was primarily attributable to a $309 increase in product gross profit per unit which increased product gross profit by $10.7 million and the 15,543 increase in ecommerce units sold which increased product gross profit by $9.1 million. The increase in product gross profit per unit was primarily attributable to higher attachment rates, improved financing features in our ecommerce platform as well as our strategic lender partnerships. We expect ecommerce product gross profit will continue to grow in the future driven by increases in ecommerce units sold, new product offerings, initiatives to improve product attachment rates and increases in per unit profit.
Wholesale
The following table presents our Wholesale segment results of operations for the periods indicated:
Wholesale Units
Wholesale units sold increased 911, or 4.5%, from 20,197 in 2019 to 21,108 in 2020, primarily driven by the sale of retail quality vehicles through wholesale channels in order to reduce inventory risk during the early days of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as in the fourth quarter of 2020, partially offset by a decrease in trade-in vehicles due to a lower volume of ecommerce units sold during the early days of the pandemic.
Wholesale Revenue
Wholesale revenue increased $32.1 million, or 15.0%, from $213.5 million in 2019 to $245.6 million in 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to a higher ASP per wholesale unit, which increased from $10,569 in 2019 to $11,634 in 2020 and increased wholesale revenue by $22.5 million as well as the 911 increase in wholesale units sold, which increased wholesale revenue by $9.6 million.
Wholesale Gross (Loss) Profit
Wholesale gross profit decreased $1.8 million from gross profit of $0.4 million in 2019 to gross loss of $(1.4) million in 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to a $85 decrease in wholesale gross profit per unit, which decreased primarily as the result of lower sales margin as a result of liquidating aged inventory during the initial phase of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as in the fourth quarter of 2020.
TDA
The following table presents our TDA segment results of operations for the periods indicated:
TDA units
TDA units sold decreased 5,633, or 43.3%, from 13,018 in 2019 to 7,385 in 2020. The decrease was a result of a significant reduction in foot traffic due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, TDA units sold was impacted by reduced inventory at the TDA location as the ecommerce business continues to scale.
Vehicle Revenue
TDA vehicle revenue decreased $187.9 million, or 50.0%, from $375.9 million in 2019 to $188.0 million in 2020. The decrease in TDA vehicle revenue was primarily due to the 5,633 decrease in TDA units sold, which decreased TDA vehicle revenue by $162.7 million and a lower ASP per unit, which decreased from $28,876 in 2019 to $25,456 in 2020 and decreased revenue by $25.2 million.
Product Revenue
TDA product revenue decreased $5.3 million, or 42.0%, from $12.6 million in 2019 to $7.3 million in 2020. The decrease in TDA product revenue was primarily attributable to the 5,633 decrease in TDA units sold, which decreased TDA product revenue by $5.4 million, partially offset by the increase in product revenue per unit which increased revenue by $0.1 million.
Other Revenue
TDA other revenue decreased $0.3 million, or 21.0%, from $1.7 million in 2019 to $1.4 million in 2020.
Vehicle Gross Profit
TDA vehicle gross profit decreased $7.7 million, or 63.8%, from $12.1 million in 2019 to $4.4 million in 2020. The decrease in vehicle gross profit was primarily attributable to the 5,633 decrease in TDA units sold, which decreased TDA vehicle gross profit by $5.2 million and a $335 decrease in TDA vehicle gross profit per unit, which decreased vehicle gross profit by $2.5 million. Vehicle gross profit per unit decreased from $927 in 2019 to $592 in 2020, primarily due to lower sales margin.
Product Gross Profit
TDA product gross profit decreased $5.3 million, or 42.0% from $12.6 million in 2019 to $7.3 million in 2020. The decrease in TDA product gross profit was primarily attributable to the 5,633 decrease in TDA units sold, which decreased TDA product gross profit by $5.4 million, partially offset by the increase in product gross profit per unit which increased gross profit by $0.1 million.
Other gross profit
TDA other gross profit decreased $0.3 million, or 39.9%, from $0.7 million in 2019 to $0.4 million in 2020.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $60.5 million, or 32.7%, from $185.0 million in 2019 to $245.5 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to:
•
a $19.7 million increase in compensation and benefits as a result of an increase in headcount as well as a $10.5 million increase in stock-based compensation from $2.8 million in 2019 to $13.3 million in 2020;
•
a $16.3 million increase in outbound logistics costs attributable to the growth in ecommerce units sold, which increased outbound logistics costs by $11.4 million, and increases in market rates of logistics providers, which increased outbound logistics costs by $4.9 million;
•
a $13.5 million increase in other selling, general, and administrative expenses primarily related to $3.9 million of additional insurance costs associated with being a publicly traded company and volume-based subscription fees as our business continues to scale; and
•
a $12.5 million increase in marketing expense as we expanded our national broad-reach advertising.
These increases were partially offset by a $1.0 million decrease in professional fees due to a reduction in consulting expenses, primarily in the finance and reconditioning departments, as a result of completion of certain process improvement projects and hiring more employees. The decrease in professional fees was partially offset by $2.1 million in costs related to the CarStory acquisition.
We expect selling, general and administrative expenses to increase in the future as we scale our business and sell more ecommerce units. We will also continue to invest in and improve our customer experience and invest in expanding our proprietary logistics network including our last-mile delivery operations.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses decreased $1.4 million, or 23.6%, from $6.0 million in 2019 to $4.6 million in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to reduced amortization expense as certain intangible assets were fully amortized.
Interest expense
Interest expense decreased $4.9 million, or 33.8%, from $14.6 million in 2019 to $9.7 million in 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower interest rates for the 2020 Vehicle Floorplan Facility as a result of decreases in the1-Month LIBOR rate as well as the repayment of our term loan facility in December 2019.
Interest income
Interest income increased $0.3 million, or 5.2%, from $5.6 million in 2019 to $5.9 million in 2020. The increase in interest income was primarily driven by higher cash and cash equivalent balances as a result of the IPO and follow-on public offering, partially offset by lower interest rates.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our operations historically have been financed primarily from the sale of redeemable convertible preferred stock and borrowings under our Vehicle Floorplan Facility. On June 11, 2020, we completed our IPO in which we sold 24,437,500 shares of our common stock, which included 3,187,500 shares sold pursuant to the exercise by the underwriters of an over-allotment option to purchase additional shares, for proceeds of $504.0 million, net of the underwriting discount and before deducting offering expenses of $7.5 million. On September 15, 2020, we completed our follow-on public offering in which we sold 10,800,000 shares of common stock for proceeds of $569.5 million, net of the underwriting discount and before deducting offering expenses of $1.5 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $1,056.2 million.
We anticipate that our existing cash and cash equivalents and the 2020 Vehicle Floorplan Facility will be sufficient to support our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next twelve months from the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had negative cash flow from operations and generated a net loss. We have not been profitable since our inception in 2012. We expect to incur additional losses in the future.
We historically have funded vehicle inventory purchases primarily through our floorplan financing arrangements. Our cash flows from operations may differ substantially from our net loss due to non-cash charges or due to changes in balance sheet accounts. The timing of our cash flows from operating activities can also vary among periods due to the timing of payments made or received. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our rate of revenue growth, our efforts to reduce costs per unit, the expansion of our inventory and sales and marketing activities, investment in our reconditioning, logistics and customer experience operations, enhancements to our ecommerce platform, and increased hiring efforts. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing in the future to fund our operations or to fund our needs for capital expenditures. In the event that additional financing is required, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us, or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations, our business, results of operations and financial condition could be adversely affected.
Vehicle Financing
As of December 31, 2020, we finance our inventory with a vehicle floorplan facility (the “2020 Vehicle Floorplan Facility”) with Ally Bank, which provides a committed credit line of up to $450.0 million.
The amount of credit available to us under the 2020 Vehicle Floorplan Facility is determined on a monthly basis based on a calculation that considers average outstanding borrowings and vehicle units paid off by us within the three immediately preceding months. Approximately $27.7 million was available under this facility as of December 31, 2020. In October 2020, we amended our 2020 Vehicle Floorplan Facility to extend the maturity date to September 30, 2022. The amendment requires us to pay an availability fee on the average unused capacity from the prior quarter if it was greater than 50% of the calculated floorplan allowance, as defined. We are subject to financial covenants that require us to maintain a certain level of equity in the vehicles that are financed, to maintain at least 7.5% of the credit line in cash and cash equivalents and to maintain 10% of the monthly daily floorplan principal balance outstanding on deposit with Ally Bank. We were required to pay an upfront commitment fee upon execution of the amendment.
Outstanding borrowings are due as the vehicles financed are sold, or in any event, on the maturity date. The 2020 Vehicle Floorplan Facility bears interest at a rate equal to the 1-Month LIBOR rate applicable in the immediately preceding month plus a spread of 425 basis points.
Cash Flows from Operating, Investing, and Financing Activities
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
Operating Activities
Net cash flows used in operating activities increased $139.7 million, or 64.8%, from $215.6 million in 2019 to $355.3 million in 2020. The increase is primarily attributable to an increase in working capital, primarily related to higher inventory levels as we continue to scale our business, resulting in an increase in the use of cash of $131.6 million, as well as $27.0 million in incremental net loss after reconciling adjustments in 2020 as compared to 2019.
We finance substantially all our inventories with the Vehicle Floorplan Facility. In accordance with U.S. GAAP relating to the statement of cash flows, we report all cash flows arising in connection with the Vehicle Floorplan Facility, as a financing activity in our statement of cash flows.
Investing Activities
Net cash flows used in investing activities increased $7.8 million, from $3.5 million in 2019 to $11.3 million in 2020, primarily as a result of an increase in capitalization of software development costs and the acquisition of trucks for our proprietary logistics network.
Financing Activities
Net cash flows provided by financing activities increased $961.8 million from $275.2 million in 2019 to $1,237.0 million in 2020. The increase was primarily related to $497.2 million of net proceeds received upon completion of the IPO net of cash paid for offering expenses, $568.0 million of net proceeds received upon completion of the follow-on public offering net of cash paid for offering expenses, a net increase in cash of $74.9 million related to our Vehicle Floorplan Facility, and a net increase in cash related to the $25.7 million repayment of our long-term debt in 2019. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in cash flows provided by financing activities related to the issuance of Series H preferred stock, net of issuance costs paid. Net cash flows provided by financing activities in 2020 included the issuance of $21.7 million of Series H preferred stock, as compared to the issuance of $227.5 million in 2019.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020:
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off balance sheet arrangements, as defined by applicable regulations of the SEC, that are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including, among others, those related to income taxes, the realizability of inventory, stock-based compensation, revenue-related reserves, as well as impairment of goodwill and long-lived assets. We base our estimates on historical experience, market conditions and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Beginning in the first quarter of 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted, and may continue to negatively impact, the macroeconomic environment in the United States and globally, as well as our business, financial condition and results of operations. Due to the evolving and uncertain nature of COVID-19, it is reasonably possible that it could materially impact our estimates, particularly those noted above that require consideration of forecasted financial information, in the near to medium term. The ultimate impact will depend on numerous evolving factors that we may not be able to accurately predict, including the duration and extent of the pandemic, the impact of federal, state, local and foreign governmental actions, consumer behavior in response to the pandemic and other economic and operational conditions that we may face.
We believe that the accounting policies described below involve a significant degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, we believe these are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations. For further information, see “Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” and “Note 3-Revenue Recognition” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
We adopted ASU 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“Topic 606”), as of January 1, 2018 utilizing the modified retrospective approach applied only to contracts not completed as of the date of adoption.
We recognized a net decrease to accumulated deficit of approximately $1.7 million as of January 1, 2018 due to the cumulative effect of adopting Topic 606.
Revenue consists of retail vehicle sales through our ecommerce platform and TDA retail location, wholesale vehicle sales and other revenues. Revenue also includes delivery charges. Our product revenue consists of fees earned on customer vehicle financing from third-party lenders and fees earned on sales of other value-added products, such as vehicle service contracts, GAP protection and tire and wheel coverage.
We recognize revenue upon transfer of control of goods or services to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. We may collect sales taxes and other taxes from customers on behalf of governmental authorities at the time of sale as required. These taxes are accounted for on a net basis and are not included in revenues or cost of sales.
Our revenue is disaggregated within the consolidated statement of operations and is generated from customers throughout the United States.
Retail Vehicle Revenue
We sell vehicles to our retail customers through our Ecommerce segment and our TDA segment. The transaction price for vehicles is a fixed amount as set forth within the customer contract at the time of sale. Customers frequently trade-in their existing vehicle to apply the amount received for such vehicle towards the transaction price of a purchased vehicle. Trade-in vehicles represent noncash consideration, which we measure at an agreed upon price based on fair value, which is based on external and internal market data for each specific vehicle. We generally satisfy our performance obligation and recognize revenue for vehicle sales at a point in time when the vehicles are delivered to the customers for ecommerce sales or picked up by the customer for TDA sales. The revenue recognized by us includes the agreed upon
transaction price, including any delivery charges stated within the customer contract. Revenue excludes any sales taxes, title and registration fees, and other government fees that are collected from customers.
We receive payment for vehicle sales directly from the customer at the time of sale or from third-party financial institutions within a short period of time following the sale if the customer obtains financing. Payments received prior to delivery or pick-up of used vehicles are recorded as “Deferred revenue” within the consolidated balance sheet.
We offer a return program for used vehicle sales and establish a provision for estimated returns based on historical information and current trends. The reserve for estimated returns is presented gross on the consolidated balance sheet, with an asset recorded in “Prepaid expenses and other current assets” and a refund liability recorded in “Other current liabilities.”
Wholesale Vehicle Revenue
We sell vehicles that do not meet our Vroom retail sales criteria primarily through wholesale channels. Vehicles sold through wholesale channels are acquired from customers who trade-in their vehicles when making a purchase from us and also from customers who sell their vehicles to us in direct-buy transactions. The transaction price for a wholesale vehicle is a fixed amount. We satisfy our performance obligation and recognize revenue for wholesale vehicle sales when the vehicle is sold. The transaction price is typically due and collected within a short period of time following the vehicle sales.
Product Revenue
Our product revenue consists of fees earned on customer vehicle financing from third-party lenders and fees earned on sales of other value-added products such as vehicle service contracts, GAP protection and tire and wheel coverage. We sell these products pursuant to arrangements with the third parties that provide these products and are responsible for their fulfilment. We concluded that we are an agent for these transactions because we do not control the products before they are transferred to the customer. As an agent, our performance obligation is to arrange for the third party to provide the products. We recognize product revenues on a net basis when the customer enters into an arrangement for the products, which is typically at the time of a used vehicle sale.
Customers may enter into retail installment sales contracts to finance the purchase of used vehicles. We sell these contracts on a non-recourse basis to various financial institutions. We receive fees from the financial institution based on the difference between the interest rate charged to the customer that purchased the vehicle and the interest rate set by the financial institution. These fees are recognized upon sale and assignment of the installment sales contract to the financial institution.
A portion of the fees earned on these products is subject to chargebacks in the event of early termination, default, or prepayment of the contracts by end-customers. Our exposure for these events is limited to fees that we receive. An estimated refund liability for chargebacks against the revenue recognized from sales of these products is recorded in the period in which the related revenue is recognized and is based primarily on our historical chargeback experience. We update our estimates at each reporting date. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our reserve for chargebacks was approximately $3.8 million and $3.3 million, respectively.
We also are contractually entitled to receive profit-sharing revenues based on the performance of the protection policies once a required claims period has passed. We recognize profit-sharing revenue to the extent it is probable that it will not result in a significant revenue reversal. We estimate the revenue based on historical claims and cancellation data from our customers, as well as other qualitative assumptions. We reassess the estimate at each reporting period with any changes reflected as an adjustment to revenues in the period identified. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had recognized approximately $11.5 million and $6.9 million, respectively, related to cumulative profit-sharing payments to which we expect to be entitled.
Other Revenue
Other revenue primarily consists of labor and parts revenue earned by us for vehicle repair services at TDA.
Inventory
Inventory consists of vehicles and parts and accessories and is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Inventory cost is determined by specific identification and includes acquisition cost, direct and indirect reconditioning costs, and in-bound transportation costs. Net realizable value is the estimated selling price less costs to complete, dispose and
transport the vehicles. We recognize any necessary adjustments to reflect inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value in cost of sales in the consolidated statements of operations.
Shipping and Handling
Our logistics costs relate to transporting vehicle inventory and are primarily third-party transportation fees. The portion of these costs related to inbound transportation from the point of acquisition to the relevant reconditioning facility is included within inventory and reclassified into cost of sales when the related vehicle is sold. Logistics costs related to delivering vehicles sold to customers are accounted for as costs to fulfil contracts with customers and are included in “Selling, general and administrative expenses” in the consolidated statement of operations and were approximately $30.3 million, $14.0 million, and $6.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
Leases
We adopted Topic 842 as of January 1, 2020 using the modified retrospective approach with any cumulative-effect adjustment to opening retained earnings (accumulated deficit) with no restatement of comparative periods. Upon adoption, we recognized $18.4 million of operating lease liabilities and $17.4 million of operating lease right-of-use assets.
The adoption of Topic 842 did not result in a cumulative effect adjustment to accumulated deficit. We elected to utilize the package of practical expedients for transition which permitted us to not reassess our prior conclusions regarding whether a contract is or contains a lease, lease classification and initial direct costs.
We did not elect the hindsight practical expedient to determine lease terms. We elected the short-term lease recognition exemption for all leases that qualify and the practical expedient to not separate lease and non-lease components of leases.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the consideration transferred over the fair value of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combinations. Goodwill is tested for impairment annually as of October 1, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that an impairment may exist.
We have three reporting units: Ecommerce, Wholesale and TDA. In performing our annual goodwill impairment test, we first review qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If, after assessing qualitative factors, we determine that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then performing the quantitative test is unnecessary and our goodwill is not considered to be impaired. However, if based on the qualitative assessment we conclude that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, or if we elect to bypass the optional qualitative assessment as provided for under GAAP, we proceed with performing the quantitative impairment test.
No goodwill impairment was determined to exist for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
In connection with its annual goodwill impairment test as of October 1, 2020, the Company performed impairment assessments for each of its reporting units. The results of the assessments indicated that it was not more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting units were less than the carrying values.
The quantitative goodwill impairment test requires a determination of whether the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. We estimate the fair value of our reporting units using an income valuation approach. The income valuation approach is applied using the discounted cash flow method which requires (1) estimating future cash flows for a discrete projection period (2) estimating the terminal value, which reflects the remaining value that the reporting unit is expected to generate beyond the projection period and (3) discounting those amounts to present value at a discount rate which is based on a weighted average cost of capital that considers the relative risk of the cash flows. The income valuation approach requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions, which include revenue growth rates, future gross profit margins and operating expenses used to calculate projected future cash flows, determination of the weighted average cost of capital, and future economic and market conditions. The terminal value is based on an exit multiple which requires significant assumptions regarding the selection of appropriate multiples that consider relevant market trading data. We base our estimates and assumptions on our knowledge of the automotive and ecommerce industries, our recent performance, our expectations of future performance and other assumptions we believe to be reasonable. Actual future results may differ from those estimates. We also make certain judgments and assumptions in allocating shared assets and liabilities to determine the carrying values for each of our reporting units.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis, as well as for operating loss and tax credit carry forwards. We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which we expect to recover or settle those temporary differences. We recognize the effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities in the results of operations in the period that includes the enactment date. We reduce the measurement of a deferred tax asset, if necessary, by a valuation allowance if it is “more-likely-than-not” that we will not realize some or all of the deferred tax asset. We maintained a full valuation allowance against net deferred tax assets because we determined that is it more likely than not that these assets will not be fully realized based on a current evaluation of expected future taxable income and we are in a cumulative loss position.
We account for uncertain tax positions by recognizing the financial statement effects of a tax position only when, based upon technical merits, it is “more likely than not” that the position will be sustained upon examination. Potential interest and penalties associated with unrecognized tax positions are recognized in income tax expense.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize the cost of employee services received in exchange for stock awards based on the fair value of those awards at the date of grant over the requisite service period. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model, which we refer to as Black Scholes option-pricing model, to determine the fair value of our stock-based awards. Estimating the fair value of stock-based awards requires the input of subjective assumptions, including the estimated fair value of our common stock, the expected life of the options, stock price volatility, the risk-free interest rate and expected dividends. The assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model represent our best estimates and involve a number of variables, uncertainties and assumptions and the application of management’s judgment, as they are inherently subjective.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See “Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion about new accounting pronouncements adopted and not yet adopted as of the date of this report.