Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs, and involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results and the timing of certain events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors, including those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included under Part I, Item 1A and elsewhere in this Annual Report. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report.
COVID-19
In December 2019, COVID-19 was first reported in China; in January 2020, the WHO declared it a Public Health Emergency of International Concern; and in March 2020, the WHO declared it a pandemic. The worldwide spread of the COVID-19 virus has resulted in a global economic slowdown and is expected to continue to disrupt general business operations until the virus is contained. The duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic remain uncertain and difficult to predict. The COVID-19 pandemic and the measures taken by many governments around the world in response could in the future meaningfully impact our business, results of operations, financial condition and stock price.
We believe that the impact of COVID-19 on the way organizations operate and its long lasting effects has increased our long-term opportunity to help our customers protect their data and detect threats, as well as achieve regulatory compliance. Nevertheless, in the early stages of the pandemic, we experienced a negative impact on our results of operations, starting in the last two weeks of the first quarter, as we believe our customers’ focus turned primarily to the safety of their employees and to immediately position themselves to operate under a work-from-home environment. However, since that time, we have seen companies become more focused on the elevated risks associated with having a highly distributed workforce collaborating on multiple platforms. Companies around the world now have the majority of their employees working remotely from potentially vulnerable home networks, accessing critical on-premises data stores and infrastructure through VPNs and in cloud data stores like Office 365 and Microsoft Teams. We believe this trend is likely to continue in the long-term and that we are well positioned to capitalize on the opportunity ahead. Specifically, crises create optimal conditions for cybercrime, and we can help protect data and infrastructure against hackers and rogue employees. As companies understand that a data-centric approach to security is critical and that these elevated risks are here for the long-term, we have seen significant customer engagement and inbound interest, and in the third and fourth quarters of 2020, we continued to see some of this interest convert into new business or the expansion of existing business.
We currently offer more than 25 licenses across our six product families, and since commencing our transition to a subscription model in the beginning of 2019, we have seen a significant increase in the number of licenses purchased by new customers, and in the engagement of our existing customers who are adopting more licenses. As of December 31, 2020, 63% of our customers with 500 employees or more had purchased four or more licenses, compared to 54% a year ago, and 30% purchased six or more licenses, compared to 20% a year ago. We believe the increase in these metrics underscores the logic behind our transition to a subscription model and confirms how we are unleashing the potential of our platform. This is reflected in ARR, which as of December 31, 2020 grew 37% year-over-year to $287.3 million. Additionally, renewal rates of maintenance on perpetual
licenses continued to be over 90% for the year ended December 31, 2020. As a result, the recurring component of our revenue base has significantly increased as we have completed our subscription transition, which now provides more visibility into future revenues and places us in a stronger position. Lastly, our dollar-based net retention rate ("NRR") as of December 31, 2020 was 116%. NRR is calculated as of a period end by starting with the ARR from the cohort of active customers as of the 12 months prior to such period end, or Prior Period ARR. We then calculate the ARR from the same customers as of the current period end, or Current Period ARR. Current Period ARR includes any upsells and is net of contraction or attrition over the trailing 12 months, but excludes subscription revenues from new customers in the current period. We then divide the total Current Period ARR by the total Prior Period ARR to arrive at the dollar-based net retention rate.
The pandemic has forced us to adapt and change the way we have historically operated. At the end of the first quarter of 2020, we closed our offices and instructed employees to work remotely as a precautionary measure intended to minimize the risk of the virus to them, our customers, partners and the communities in which we operate. Since that time, we have complied with local requirements in each jurisdiction and have been opening and closing our offices based on these guidelines and recommendations. As we have always aimed to tie our level of investment in the business to the revenues we plan to achieve, and, due to the revenues shortfall in the first quarter of 2020, we took prompt steps to manage our expenses, including responsible cost cutting measures, implementing a hiring freeze with the exception of key sales positions and reducing our capital expenditures. In order to avoid reducing our global workforce, further actions taken in early April included reducing employee salaries across the organization, with senior management and our highest compensated employees seeing the largest reductions, and reducing the cash retainers for all members of our Board of Directors. At the time, we combined this salary reduction to employees with a one-time equity grant equal to the annualized amount of the salary reduction in order to retain and motivate our employees. As the momentum of the business improved throughout 2020 and based on what we were seeing in the market, we decided to readjust the April reductions to recoup an amount equal to half the original cuts as of July 2020 and also gradually resumed investments in the business. Further, in January 2021, we readjusted the affected salaries back to pre-pandemic levels. In addition, as part of the move to remote work and virtual-only customer experience, we have had to postpone or cancel customer and industry events or conduct them virtually, and we cannot predict with certainty the impact these changes may have on our future sales. However, our risk assessments, a critical part of our sales process, have always been and continue to be conductible remotely.
Overview
Varonis is a pioneer in data security and analytics, fighting a different battle than conventional cybersecurity companies. We are pioneers because over a decade ago, we recognized that enterprise capacity to create and share data far exceeded its capacity to protect it. We believed the vast movement of information from analog to digital mediums combined with increasing information dependence would change both the global economy and the risk profiles of corporations and governments. Since then our focus has been on using innovation to address the cyber-implications of this movement, creating software that provides new ways to track, alert and protect data wherever it is stored.
Data continues to amass in new and existing data stores both on premises and in the cloud, a trend we have seen accelerate as companies around the world embark on a wave of digital transformation initiatives. As these data stores grow, the relationships between the data they hold and the users that collaborate with it grow more complex, making those relationships difficult to visualize, understand and control without automation. Because enterprises now use many different combinations of data stores and require different levels of protection, our offering provides coverage flexibility through software licensing. We aim to keep pace with the relentless growth and complexity of data, starting in 2005 with a single license, offering ten licenses at the time of our initial public offering in 2014, and today offering more than 25 integrated licenses across the most common on premises and cloud data stores. We plan to continue investing in product development to deliver new products in the future.
Our software specializes in data protection, threat detection and response and compliance. Varonis software enables enterprises to protect data stored on premises and in the cloud: sensitive files and emails; confidential personal data belonging to customers, patients and employees; financial records; strategic and product plans; and other intellectual property. Recognizing the complexities of securing data, we have built an integrated platform for security and analytics to simplify and streamline security and data management.
The Varonis Data Security Platform, built on patented technology, helps enterprises protect data against cyberattacks from both internal and external threats. Our products enable enterprises to analyze data, account activity and user behavior to detect attacks. Our Data Security Platform prevents or limits unauthorized use of sensitive information, prevents potential cyberattacks and limits others by automatically locking down data, allowing access to those who need it and automating the removal of stale data when it is no longer useful. Our products efficiently sustain a secure state with automation and address additional important use cases including data protection, data governance, zero trust, compliance, data privacy, classification and threat detection and response. Our Data Security Platform is driven by a proprietary technology, our Metadata Framework, that
extracts critical metadata, or data about data, from an enterprise’s IT infrastructure. Our Data Security Platform uses this contextual information to map functional relationships among employees, data objects, systems, content and usage.
We started operations in 2005 with a vision to make enterprise data more accessible, manageable, secure and actionable. We began offering our flagship product, DatAdvantage, which provides centralized visibility for enterprise data, in 2006. Since then we have continued to invest in innovation and have consistently introduced new products and software features to our customers.
In 2017, we introduced the Automation Engine to allow customers to automatically repair and maintain file systems so that organizations are less vulnerable to attacks and security breaches, more compliant and consistently meeting a least privilege model. We enhanced DatAlert, which was originally introduced in 2013 to monitor and alert on sensitive data and file activity, with DatAlert Analytics Rewind to allow customers to analyze past user and data activity to identify security breaches that may have occurred in the past and pre-emptively tune out false positives. We updated our web UI for DatAlert and added new threat models to detect suspicious mailbox, Exchange and Exchange Online behaviors, password resets and unusual activity from personal devices. We introduced a new security dashboard in DatAlert, along with enhanced behavioral analytics, geolocation and more to make it easier than ever to perform security investigations and forensics. In 2017, we also released GDPR Patterns, part of the Data Classification Engine family, to help enterprises identify data that falls under the EU GDPR and expanded our offerings that can help enterprises meet compliance and regulation requirements.
In 2018, we introduced Varonis Edge to extend our proactive security approach, enabling customers to spot signs of attack at the perimeter by analyzing telemetry from DNS, VPN and web proxy. We introduced Data Classification Labels to integrate with Microsoft Information Protection (MIP) and enable customers to better classify, track and secure files across enterprise data stores. We enhanced DatAnswers, a secure enterprise search solution for enterprise data that delivers highly relevant and secure search results to enterprise employees and which was originally introduced in 2014, to address additional compliance requirements from new data privacy laws and standards. We added classification categories to the Data Classification Engine, to better identify and analyze regulated data like GDPR, PII, PCI and PHI. We updated the DataPrivilege UI for improved usability and added classification categories making it easier to see who can access regulated data. We updated our web UI and introduced new features to DatAlert, including new threat models to combat cyberattacks, support for more data stores and optimizations to make DatAlert faster and more intuitive for security investigations.
In 2019, we introduced updates to our existing products to include new dashboards to highlight cloud, Active Directory and GDPR security risks so that customers can more easily identify critical risk in their hybrid environments, including vulnerable user accounts, at-risk cloud data and potential compliance violations. We extended our cloud support to include Box, added threat intelligence to our security insights, built incident response playbooks directly into the UI, and made usability and performance improvements. We also added classification functionality to help enterprises automatically discover and classify data that falls under data covered by the CCPA.
In the second quarter of 2020, we introduced an update to our platform to increase visibility into potential security issues related to remote work. Our “Remote Work Update” included a new dashboard to help customers spot unusual VPN, DNS and web activity, built-in threat hunting queries to accelerate investigations, deeper visibility into Microsoft Teams, and additional threat models for Office 365. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we completed the acquisition of Polyrize, a software provider that maps and analyzes the relationships between users and data across a number of cloud applications and services, including Google Drive, Salesforce, Okta, GitHub, Slack, AWS, Jira and others, making it simple for security teams to control access to cloud data and infrastructure and analyze cloud activity.
In 2020, we successfully completed the strategic shift to a subscription-based business model, which allows our customers to better unleash the power of our platform through faster adoption of our integrated products. We currently have six product families, consisting of DatAdvantage, DatAlert, Data Classification Engine, DataPrivilege, Data Transport Engine and DatAnswers with over twenty-five licenses under these product families. As of December 31, 2020, 63% of our customers with 500 employees or more had purchased four or more licenses, compared to 54% a year ago, and 30% purchased six or more licenses, compared to 20% a year ago. Additionally, as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, 100.0% of our customers had purchased DatAdvantage; 57.8%, 54.5% and 50.4% of our customers, respectively, had purchased DatAlert; 57.2%, 53.8% and 49.3% of our customers, respectively, had purchased Data Classification Engine; 15.6%, 15.6% and 15.4% of our customers, respectively, had purchased DataPrivilege; 10.2%, 8.9% and 7.7% of our customers, respectively, had purchased Data Transport Engine; and 3.2%, 2.5% and 1.8% of our customers, respectively, had purchased DatAnswers. As of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, 22.0%. 24.1% and 27.0% of our customers, respectively, made standalone purchases of DatAdvantage. No other product families outside of DatAdvantage can be sold on a standalone basis. As of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, approximately 78%, 76% and 73% of our customers, respectively, had purchased products in two or more families, one of which was DatAdvantage for all of these customers. As of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, approximately 49%, 45%
and 40% of our customers, respectively, had purchased products in three or more families. Our perpetual license maintenance renewal rate for each of the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 continued to be over 90%. Our key strategies to ensure and maintain a high subscription and maintenance renewal rate include focusing on the quality and reliability of our customer service and support to ensure our customers receive value from our products and providing software upgrades and enhancements when and if they are available.
We sell substantially all of our products and services to channel partners, including distributors and resellers, which sell to end-user customers, which we refer to in this report as our customers. We believe that our sales model, which combines the leverage of a channel sales model with our highly trained and professional sales force, has and will continue to play a major role in our ability to grow and to successfully deliver our unique value proposition for enterprise data. While our products serve customers of all sizes, in all industries and all geographies, the marketing focus and majority of our sales focus is on targeting organizations with 1,000 users or more who can make larger initial purchases with us and, over time, have a greater potential lifetime value. Our customers span leading firms in the financial services, public, healthcare, industrial, insurance, energy and utilities, technology, consumer and retail, media and entertainment and education sectors. We believe our existing customer base serves as a strong source of incremental revenues given our broad platform of products, their growing volumes and complexity of enterprise data and associated security concerns. We will continue our focus on targeting organizations with 1,000 users or more who can make larger purchases with us initially and over time.
We believe there is a significant long-term growth opportunity in both domestic and foreign markets, which could include any organization that uses file shares, intranets and email for collaboration, regardless of region. For the year ended December 31, 2020, 71% of our revenues were derived from North America, while EMEA accounted for approximately 26% of our revenues and Rest of World (“ROW”) accounted for approximately 3% of our revenues. Additionally, even with our subscription mix increasing from 65% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 99% for the year ended December 31, 2020, we still had revenue growth of approximately 15% worldwide. We believe the transition from a perpetual-based model to a subscription-based model has positioned us well for the future, and, although revenues are still front-end loaded, they are more predictable and recurring in nature. We continue to expect sales growth in North America and international expansion to be key components of our long-term growth strategy.
Despite the challenges currently resulting from COVID-19, we continue to expand our domestic and international operations as part of our long-term growth strategy. While the expansion of our domestic operations is focused primarily on our under penetrated territories, the expansion of our international operations depends in particular on our ability to hire, integrate and retain local sales personnel in these international markets, acquire new channel partners and implement an effective marketing strategy. Given the nominal amount of our ROW revenues, our ROW revenue growth rates have fluctuated in the past and may fluctuate in the future based on the timing of deal closures. In addition, the further expansion of our international operations will increase our sales and marketing and general and administrative expenses and will subject us to a variety of risks and challenges, including those related to economic and political conditions in each region, compliance with foreign laws and regulations, and compliance with domestic laws and regulations applicable to our international operations.
We derive almost all of our revenues from subscription sales and renewals of maintenance contracts and, to a lesser extent, from professional services and perpetual license sales of our products. Subscription revenues are comprised of time-based licenses whereby new and existing customers use our software with related maintenance for a specified period. Perpetual license revenues consist of the revenues recognized from sales of perpetual licenses to new and existing customers. While prior to 2019 fees from subscription licenses comprised an insignificant amount of our revenues, as we transitioned to a subscription-based business in 2019, subscription licenses became a significantly larger portion of our total revenues. Subscription licenses accounted for 55%, 30% and 3% of our total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Perpetual license sales accounted for less than 1%, 17% and 52% of our total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Subscription licenses accounted for 99%, 65% and 6% of our license revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
We have achieved significant revenue growth and scale since inception under a perpetual business model. We have continued to grow our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 despite our transition to a subscription-based business model, and headwinds caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, subscription revenues were $161.2 million, $76.7 million, and $8.8 million, respectively, representing year-over-year growth of 110% and 777%. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, our total revenues were $292.7 million, $254.2 million and $270.3 million, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we had operating losses of $78.4 million, $76.0 million and $29.1 million and net losses of $94.0 million, $78.8 million and $28.6 million, respectively.
Key Performance Indicators and Recent Business Highlights
Annual Recurring Revenues
Annual recurring revenues is a key performance indicator defined as the annualized value of active term-based subscription license contracts and maintenance contracts related to perpetual licenses in effect at the end of that period. Subscription license contracts and maintenance for perpetual license contracts are annualized by dividing the total contract value by the number of days in the term and multiplying the result by 365. As of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, ARR was $287.3 million, $210.5 million and $130.3 million, respectively, an increase of 37% and 62% period over period. The annualized value of contracts is a legal and contractual determination made by assessing the contractual terms with our customers. The annualized value of maintenance contracts is not determined by reference to historical revenues, deferred revenues or any other GAAP financial measure over any period. ARR is not a forecast of future revenues and can be impacted by contract start and end dates and renewal rates. We expect ARR to continue to increase in absolute dollars.
Dollar-Based Net Retention Rate
Our dollar-based net retention rate as of December 31, 2020 was 116%. NRR is calculated as of a period end by starting with the ARR from the cohort of active customers as of the 12 months prior to such period end, or Prior Period ARR. We then calculate the ARR from the same customers as of the current period end, or Current Period ARR. Current Period ARR includes any upsells and is net of contraction or attrition over the trailing 12 months, but excludes subscription revenues from new customers in the current period. We then divide the total Current Period ARR by the total Prior Period ARR to arrive at the dollar-based net retention rate.
Business Combination
On October 29, 2020, we completed the acquisition of Polyrize, a private company which develops software that maps and analyzes the relationships between users and data across a number of cloud applications and services.
Components of Operating Results
Revenues
Our revenues consist of licenses and maintenance and services revenues.
Subscription Revenues. Subscription revenues are comprised of time-based licenses whereby customers use our software with related maintenance for a specified period. Subscription licenses are sold on premises and are recognized from sales of subscription licenses (including the associated maintenance) to existing and new customers. Similar to perpetual license revenues, subscription license revenues are recognized at the point of time when the software license has been delivered and the benefit of the asset has transferred. Maintenance associated with subscription licenses is recognized ratably over the term of the agreement and is included as part of the subscription revenues line item. We continue to expect revenues from subscription licenses to become an even more significant portion of our total revenues in the future, resulting in revenues that are expected to be more recurring and predictable. Due to the timing of the renewals and the subscription renewal rates, we could produce significant variation in the revenues we recognize in a given period. We are focused on acquiring new subscription customers and increasing subscription revenues from our existing customers.
Perpetual License Revenues. Perpetual license revenues reflect the revenues recognized from sales of perpetual licenses to new customers and sales of additional perpetual licenses to existing customers who can purchase additional users for existing licenses or purchase new licenses. Our perpetual license revenues consist of revenues from perpetual licenses, under which we generally recognize the license fee portion of the arrangement upon delivery as the benefit of the asset has transferred. Perpetual licenses have the same functionality as subscriptions. Due to the transition to a subscription-based business model, perpetual license revenues have meaningfully decreased and represent an insignificant percentage of our total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Maintenance and Services Revenues. Maintenance and services revenues consist of revenues from maintenance agreements of perpetual license sales and, to a lesser extent, professional services. When purchasing a perpetual license, a customer also typically purchases a one-year maintenance contract for which we charge a percentage of the license fee. Customers may renew, and generally have renewed, their maintenance agreements for a fee that is based upon a percentage of the initial perpetual license fee paid. Customers with maintenance agreements are entitled to receive support and unspecified upgrades and enhancements when and if they become available during the maintenance period. We recognize the revenues
associated with maintenance ratably, on a straight-line basis, over the associated maintenance period. We measure the perpetual license maintenance renewal rate for our customers over a 12-month period, based on a dollar maintenance renewal rate for contracts expiring during that time period. Our perpetual license maintenance renewal rate for each of the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 continued to be over 90%. We have historically experienced growth in maintenance revenues primarily due to increased perpetual license sales to new and existing customers and high renewal rates. However, due to our transition to a subscription-based model, we have seen and expect to continue to see insignificant perpetual license revenues in the future and, therefore, less associated maintenance revenues. We also offer professional services focused on training our customers in the use of our products, providing advice on deployment planning, network design, remediation, product configuration and implementation, automating and customizing reports and tuning policies and configuration. We recognize the revenues associated with these professional services, which are generally provided on a time and materials basis, as we deliver the services, provide the training or when the service term has expired. Although professional services have always been a small percentage of our total revenues, we have recently seen, and expect to continue to see, that percentage decline as many of our newer licenses can provide remediation in a more automated way and our planned long-term strategy to allow our channel partners to take on more professional services work. As such, our overall maintenance and services revenues is also expected to continue to decline.
The following table sets forth the percentage of our revenues that have been derived from licenses and maintenance and services revenues for the periods presented.
Our products are used by a wide range of enterprises, including Fortune 500 corporations and small and medium-sized businesses. Our customers span a broad array of industries and are located in over 85 countries.
Cost of Revenues, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Our cost of revenues consists of cost of maintenance and services revenues. Cost of maintenance and services revenues consist primarily of salaries (including payroll tax expense related to stock-based compensation), employee benefits (including commissions and bonuses) and stock-based compensation for our maintenance and services employees; travel expenses; and allocated overhead costs for facilities, IT and depreciation. We recognize expenses related to maintenance and services as they are incurred. We expect that our cost of maintenance and services revenues will increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest in our customer success and professional services teams and programs that support our subscription-based business model and our overall renewals. This spending increased sequentially in each quarter of 2020 and, given our results and the opportunities we see ahead, our incremental increase in investments was larger in the second half of the year. We expect to continue to increase our investments in the business in the future.
Gross profit is total revenues less total cost of revenues. Gross margin is gross profit expressed as a percentage of total revenues. As the majority of our expenses are relatively fixed quarter over quarter and due to the seasonality of our business, the first quarter typically results in the lowest gross margin as our first quarter revenues have historically been the lowest for the
year. Conversely, the fourth quarter typically results in the highest gross margin as our fourth quarter revenues have historically been the highest for the year.
Operating Costs and Expenses
Our operating costs and expenses are classified into three categories: research and development, sales and marketing and general and administrative. For each category, the largest component is personnel costs, which consists of salaries (including payroll tax expense related to stock-based compensation), employee benefits (including commissions and bonuses) and stock-based compensation. Operating costs and expenses also include allocated overhead costs for facilities, IT and depreciation. Allocated costs for facilities primarily consist of rent and office maintenance. Operating costs and expenses are generally recognized as incurred. As a company, we have always aimed to tie our level of investment in the business to the revenues we expect to achieve and we actively manage expenses across the business. While at the end of the first quarter of 2020 we took prompt cost cutting measures to manage our expenses in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, given our results over the last three quarters of the year and the interest we continue to see in the market, we have resumed investments in the business, including in research and development and sales and marketing. We expect personnel costs to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to grow our business in the long-term.
Research and Development. Research and development expenses primarily consist of personnel costs attributable to our research and development personnel, as well as allocated overhead costs. We expense research and development costs as incurred. We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase in absolute dollars as we further strengthen our technology platform and invest in the development of both existing and new products through the hiring of talented and capable employees. This spending increased sequentially in each quarter of 2020 and, given our results and the opportunities we see ahead, our incremental increase in investments was larger in the fourth quarter. We expect to continue to increase our investments in the business in the future.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses are the largest component of our operating costs and expenses and consist primarily of personnel costs, as well as marketing and business development costs, travel expenses, training and education and allocated overhead costs. We expect that sales and marketing expenses will continue to increase in absolute dollars in the long-term, as we plan to expand our sales and marketing efforts, both domestically and internationally. This spending increased sequentially in each quarter of 2020 and, given our results and the opportunities we see ahead, our incremental increase in investments was larger in the second half of the year. We expect to continue to increase our investments in the business in the future. We expect sales and marketing expenses to continue to be our largest category of operating costs and expenses.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses mostly consist of personnel and facility-related costs for our executive, finance, legal, human resources and administrative personnel. Other expenses are comprised of legal, accounting and other consultant fees and other corporate expenses and allocated overhead. We expect that general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars in the long-term as we expand our operations. This spending declined in the second quarter of 2020 compared to the prior quarter but, given our results and the opportunities we see ahead, our investments increased in the second half of the year which results in increased general and administrative allocated overhead expenses.
Financial Income (Expenses), Net
Financial income (expenses), net consist primarily of foreign exchange gains or losses, amortization of debt discount and issuance costs, interest expense and interest income. Foreign exchange gains or losses relate to our business activities in foreign countries with different operational reporting currencies. As a result of our business activities in foreign countries, we expect that foreign exchange gains or losses will continue to occur due to fluctuations in exchange rates in the countries where we do business. Other factors such as the COVID-19 pandemic and the United Kingdom’s exit from the EU, commonly referred to as “Brexit," as well as other member countries' public discussions about the possibility of withdrawing from the EU, could also contribute to instability and volatility in the global financial and foreign exchange markets, including volatility in the value of Pounds Sterling, Euros and other currencies. Amortization of debt discount and issuance costs relate to the 2025 Notes we issued in May 2020 and the Credit Facility we entered into August 2020. Interest expense consists of the contractual interest expenses associated with the 2025 Notes. Interest income represents interest received on our cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities and short-term deposits.
Income Taxes
We operate in several tax jurisdictions and are subject to taxes in each country or jurisdiction in which we conduct business. Earnings from our non-U.S. activities are subject to local country income tax and may be subject to U.S. income tax. To date, on a consolidated basis, we have incurred accumulated net losses and have not recorded any U.S. federal tax provisions.
Because of our history of U.S. net operating losses, we have established a full valuation allowance against potential future benefits for deferred tax assets, including loss carryforwards, in that jurisdiction; however, we have recorded a net deferred tax asset of $1.1 million as of December 31, 2020 for foreign jurisdictions. Our income tax provision could be significantly impacted by estimates surrounding our uncertain tax positions and changes to our valuation allowance in future periods. We reevaluate the judgments surrounding our estimates and make adjustments as appropriate each reporting period.
In addition, we are subject to the regular examinations of our income tax returns by different tax authorities. For example, we are currently subject to tax audits in Israel. We regularly assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes.
The U.S. Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was signed into law on March 27, 2020. As of December 31, 2020 we had $1.9 million in deferred payroll taxes under the CARES Act which allows employers to defer certain employer payroll taxes. These deferred payroll taxes are included in accrued expenses and other short-term liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets. We are also monitoring for other similar tax relief programs provided by the governments of our non-US subsidiaries.
For 2020, we incurred a one-time tax expense related to the acquisition of Polyrize which caused our tax expense to increase significantly compared to prior years.
Results of Operations
The following tables are a summary of our consolidated statements of operations in dollars and as a percentage of our total revenues.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
Subscription revenues increased 110% from $76.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $161.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in subscription revenues was driven by our customers’ demand for a higher number of licenses than the number that we historically sold with perpetual license sales and our high subscription renewal rate. Despite the revenue headwinds associated with the transition to a subscription-based model and the impact of COVID-19, total revenues increased approximately 15% for the year ended December 31, 2020. ARR was $287.3 million and $210.5 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing an increase of 37%. The anticipated decrease in maintenance and services revenues was primarily due to our accelerated transition to a subscription business, together with a reduction in our services revenues due to newer licenses providing remediation in a more automated way and the long-term strategic shift of having our channel partners take on more professional services work. In each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our perpetual license maintenance renewal rate continued to be over 90%. As of December 31, 2020, 63% of our customers with 500 employees or more had purchased four or more licenses, compared to 54% a year ago, and 30% purchased six or more licenses, compared to 20% a year ago. Additionally, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, 78% and 76% of our customers, respectively, had purchased products in two or more families and 49% and 45% of our customers, respectively, purchased products in three or more families.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin
The increase in cost of revenues was primarily related to an increase of $7.4 million in salaries and benefits and stock-based compensation expense due to increased headcount for customer success and support personnel to ensure high customer satisfaction and maintain our strong renewal rates. The increase was also due to a $2.7 million increase in facilities and allocated overhead costs and amortization of acquired intangible assets which was partially offset by a $1.0 million decrease in expenses related to COVID-19, including reductions in travel.
Operating Costs and Expenses
The increase in research and development expenses was primarily related to an increase of $18.0 million in salaries and benefits and stock-based compensation expense resulting from increased headcount as part of our focus on enhancing and developing our existing and new products and a $1.1 million increase in facilities and allocated overhead costs. This was partially offset by a $0.5 million decrease in expenses related to COVID-19, including reductions in travel.
The increase in sales and marketing expenses was primarily related to a $16.4 million increase in salaries and benefits and stock-based compensation expense and a $3.0 million increase related to facilities and allocated overhead costs. This was partially offset by a $9.4 million decrease in expenses related to COVID-19, including reductions in travel and overall marketing expenses primarily due to fewer in person events.
The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily related to an increase of $2.6 million in salaries and benefits and stock-based compensation expense primarily due to increased headcount to support the overall growth of our business and $1.8 million in other expenses predominately relating to rent and facilities. This was partially offset by a $1.2 million decrease in general company expenses predominately related to COVID-19.
Financial Expenses, Net
Financial expenses, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the amortization of debt issuance costs, interest expenses on our convertible senior notes and revolving credit facility and foreign currency losses. Financial expenses, net for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to foreign currency losses.
Income Taxes
Income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 were comprised primarily of a one-time tax expense related to our acquisition, foreign income taxes and state taxes. Income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2019 were comprised primarily of foreign income taxes and state taxes.
Inflation
We do not believe that current inflation rates had a material effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations in the last three fiscal years. If our costs were to become subject to significant inflationary pressures, we may not be able to fully offset such higher costs through price increases. Our inability or failure to do so could harm our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
For a comparison of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 11, 2020, which comparative information is herein incorporated by reference.
Quarterly Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our unaudited quarterly consolidated statement of operations data for each of the eight quarters ended December 31, 2020. The data presented below has been prepared on the same basis as the audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report and, in the opinion of management, reflects all adjustments, consisting only of normal recurring adjustments, necessary for a fair presentation of this data. This information should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. The results of historical periods are not necessarily indicative of the results of operations for a full year or any future period.
(1)Includes non-cash stock-based compensation expense and payroll tax expense related to stock-based compensation as follows:
Seasonality and Quarterly Trends
Our quarterly results reflect seasonality in the sale of our products and services. Historically, we have experienced a pattern of increased sales in the fourth quarter. This trend makes it difficult to achieve sequential revenue growth in the first quarter of the following year. Because of purchasing trends, demand for our products and services is typically slowest in the first quarter resulting in a decrease in quarterly revenues from the fourth quarter to the first quarter of the subsequent fiscal year. We expect these seasonal patterns to continue in the future. Our gross margins and operating loss have been affected by these historical trends because the majority of our expenses are relatively fixed quarter over quarter. Our expenses, which do not vary directly with revenues, and the seasonal pattern described above have an impact on the cost of revenues, research and development expenses, sales and marketing expenses and general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues in each calendar quarter during the year. The majority of our expenses are personnel-related costs, which consists of salaries (including payroll tax expense related to stock-based compensation), employee benefits (including commissions and bonuses) and stock-based compensation. As a result, we have not experienced significant seasonal fluctuations in the timing of expenses from period to period. Although these seasonal factors are common in the technology industry, historical patterns should not be considered a reliable indicator of our future sales activity or performance.
In the first quarter of 2019, we announced our transition to a subscription-based business model, and, due to the associated revenue headwinds, have experienced deviations from our historical pattern of having revenues increase each quarter as compared with the same quarter in the prior year. In the first quarter of 2020, that deviation continued but the revenues shortfall was primarily attributed to the impact of COVID-19. In subsequent quarters in 2020, our revenues once again increased compared with the same quarter in the prior year as the associated revenue headwind from the subscription transition was less pronounced and we were able to successfully execute on our strategy despite the impact of COVID-19.
Cost of revenues has increased in each quarter as compared with the same quarter in the prior year primarily due to the increased cost of providing maintenance and services to our expanding customer base and continuing to invest in our customer success team to support our subscription-based business.
Total operating costs and expenses increased in each quarter as compared with the same quarter in the prior year, primarily due to the addition of personnel in connection with the expansion of our business. In the second quarter of 2020, we experienced only a slight increase in expenses as compared with the same quarter in the prior year as we took prompt steps to manage our expenses in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, including responsible cost cutting measures, implementing a hiring freeze with the exception of key sales positions and reducing our capital expenditures. In order to avoid reducing our global workforce, further actions taken in early April included reducing employee salaries across the organization, with senior management and our highest compensated employees seeing the largest reductions, and reducing the cash retainers for all members of our Board of Directors. At the time, we combined this salary reduction to employees with a one-time equity grant equal to the annualized amount of the salary reduction. As the momentum of the business improved throughout 2020 and based on the interest we continued to see in the market, we decided to readjust the reductions to recoup an amount equal to half the original cuts as of July 2020 and also gradually resumed investments in the business. Further, in January 2021, we readjusted the affected salaries back to pre-pandemic levels.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table shows our liquidity and capital resources as of and our cash flows from operating activities, investing activities and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. For a discussion of our liquidity and capital resources as of and our cash flow activities for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 11, 2020, which discussion is herein incorporated by reference.
On December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities and short-term deposits of $298.3 million were held for working capital purposes and were invested primarily in short-term deposits. We believe that our existing cash
and cash equivalents, marketable securities, short-term deposits and cash flow from operations will be sufficient to fund our operations and capital expenditures for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our rate of revenue growth, timing of renewals and subscription renewal rates, the expansion of our sales and marketing activities, the timing and extent of spending to support product development efforts and expansion into new geographic locations, the timing of introductions of new software products and enhancements to existing software products, the continuing market acceptance of our software offerings and our use of cash to pay for acquisitions, if any.
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities is driven by sales of our products less costs and expenses, primarily payroll and related expenses, and adjusted for certain non-cash items, mainly depreciation, stock-based compensation, amortization of deferred commissions, noncash operating lease costs and amortization of debt discount and issuance costs, and changes in operating assets and liabilities. Changes in operating assets and liabilities are driven mainly by collection of accounts receivable from the sales of our software products and deferred revenues which represents unearned amounts billed to our channel partners, related to these sales.
For 2020, cash outflows from operating activities were $5.8 million. We have observed two historical seasonal patterns that impact our net cash provided by operating activities that continued this year. First, the majority of our sales are made during the last three weeks of the quarter. Second, the highest dollar amount of sales of our products and services occurs in the fourth quarter. Consequently, we end the fourth quarter with our highest accounts receivable balance of any quarter which in turn generates the greatest amount of collections in the following quarter. In addition, there is negative sequential revenue growth in the first quarter, which was more pronounced in 2020 due primarily to the impact of COVID-19, which resulted in a relatively lower amount collected during the second quarter. These seasonal trends also impact our operating loss because the majority of our expenses are relatively fixed in the short term. For 2020, sources of cash outflows were from changes in working capital, including a $19.7 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets (including deferred commissions) and a $19.1 million increase in accounts receivable. Our days’ sales outstanding (“DSO”) for the three months and year ended December 31, 2020 was 77 and 76, respectively. Additional sources of cash outflows were from a $0.3 million decrease in trade payables and a $0.2 million decrease in deferred revenues. This was partially offset by $10.4 million from our net loss excluding non-cash charges, a $16.1 million increase in accrued expenses and other liabilities, a $5.5 million increase in other long-term liabilities and a $1.4 million decrease in other long-term assets.
For 2019, cash outflows from operating activities were $10.7 million. For 2019, net cash outflows from operating activities reflect our net loss excluding non-cash charges of $3.6 million driven primarily by increased headcount for customer success personnel related to the transition to a subscription-based business and research and development personnel. Additional sources of cash outflows were from changes in working capital, including a $20.4 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets (including deferred commissions), a $1.6 million decrease in accounts payable due to timing of payments and a $0.9 million decrease in accrued expenses and other short-term liabilities. This was partially offset by a decrease of $8.2 million in accounts receivable, a $7.2 million increase in deferred revenues and an increase of $0.3 million in other long-term liabilities. Our DSO for both the three months and year ended December 31, 2019 was 75 days.
Investing Activities
Our investing activities consist primarily of capital expenditures to purchase property and equipment, leasehold improvements, sales and purchases of short-term deposits and changes in our restricted cash. In the future, we expect to continue to incur capital expenditures to support our expanding operations.
During 2020, net cash used in investing activities of $54.7 million was attributable to $29.4 million of cash paid for an acquisition, a $22.7 million increase in short-term and long-term deposits and $10.1 million in capital expenditures to support our growth during the period including hardware, software, office equipment and leasehold improvements mainly in connection with new office space that we entered into prior to the outbreak of the pandemic. This was partially offset by a $7.4 million decrease in marketable securities.
During 2019, net cash provided by investing activities of $33.3 million was attributable to a $60.5 million decrease in deposits partially offset by a $1.8 million increase in marketable securities and $25.4 million in capital expenditures to support our growth including hardware, software, office equipment and leasehold improvements mainly in connection with new office space.
Financing Activities
In 2020, net cash provided by financing activities of $225.8 million was attributable to $245.3 million of net proceeds from the issuance of convertible senior notes and $9.8 million of net proceeds from employee stock plans. This was partially offset by $29.3 million related to purchases of capped calls associated with the convertible senior notes.
In 2019, net cash used in financing activities of $2.4 million was attributable to net withholdings from employee stock plans.
Revolving Credit Facility
On August 21, 2020, we entered into a Credit and Security Agreement, for a three-year secured revolving credit facility of $70.0 million, with a letter of credit sublimit of $15.0 million and an accordion feature under which we can increase the credit facility to up to $90.0 million. Borrowings and repayments under the Credit Facility may occur from time to time in our ordinary course of business through the maturity date, which is the earlier of August 21, 2023 or 90 days prior to the scheduled maturity of any Convertible Debt Securities (including the 2025 Notes), at which time any amounts outstanding are to be paid in full. The fees incurred in connection with entering into the Credit and Security Agreement were recorded in prepaid expenses and other current assets on the consolidated balance sheet and are amortized on a straight-line basis over the contractual term of the arrangement. Ongoing fees and interest paid on the used and unused portions of the Credit Facility are expensed as incurred and included within financial income (expenses), net on the consolidated statement of operations. The Credit Facility is secured by a first priority perfected security interest in substantially all our tangible and intangible assets (excluding real property and other customary exceptions) and a first priority perfected lien on the capital stock of our domestic entities, and 65% of the voting capital stock of our foreign subsidiaries. The Credit and Security Agreement contains customary covenants, including a requirement of quarterly minimum recurring revenues and a minimum available liquidity of at least $25.0 million at all times, and customary events of default provisions.
We may borrow under the Credit and Security Agreement at an interest rate equal to the London Interbank Offered Rate (subject to a 1.00% floor), plus an applicable margin equal to 3.00% per annum or the alternate base rate plus an applicable margin equal to 0.5% per annum.
As of December 31, 2020, we had no balance outstanding on the Credit Facility and we were in compliance with all financial covenants and non-financial covenants.
Convertible Notes
We have proactively taken steps to increase available cash, including, but not limited to, issuing $253.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2025 Notes. The net proceeds from the offering, after deducting initial purchaser discount and issuance costs, were approximately $245.2 million. In connection with the issuance of the 2025 Notes, we entered into Capped Call Transactions. We used $29.3 million of the net proceeds from the 2025 Notes to purchase the Capped Call Transactions, as further discussed in Note 7.
Common Stock Split
On February 8, 2021, we announced a three-for-one split of our common stock to stockholders of record as of the close of business on March 12, 2021. Trading of our common stock will begin on a split-adjusted basis on March 15, 2021. Common stock and per share data in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have not been adjusted for the impact of the split.
Contractual Payment Obligations
Our principal commitments primarily consist of obligations under leases for office space and motor vehicles. Aggregate minimum rental commitments under non-cancelable leases as of December 31, 2020 for the upcoming years were as follows:
We have obligations related to unrecognized tax benefit liabilities totaling $4.4 million and others related to severance pay, which have been excluded from the table above as we do not believe it is practicable to make reliable estimates of the periods in which payments for these obligations will be made.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of consolidated financial statements also requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by our management. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates. Critical accounting policies and estimates are those that we consider the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations because they require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of the matters that are inherently uncertain.
Revenue Recognition:
We generate revenues in the form of software license fees and related maintenance and services fees. Subscription revenues are comprised of time-based licenses whereby customers use our software with related maintenance (including support and unspecified upgrades and enhancements when and if they are available) for a specified period. Subscriptions are sold on premises and are recognized from sales of subscription licenses to new and existing customers. When products are purchased as a subscription, the associated maintenance is included as part of the subscription revenues. Perpetual licenses have the same functionality as subscriptions and perpetual license revenues consist of the revenues recognized from sales of perpetual licenses to new and existing customers. Maintenance and services primarily consist of fees for maintenance services of perpetual license sales (including support and unspecified upgrades and enhancements when and if they are available) and to a lesser extent professional services which focus on both operationalizing the software and training our customers to fully leverage the use of our products although the user can benefit from the software without our assistance. We sell our products worldwide directly to a network of distributors and VARs, and payment is typically due within 30 to 60 calendar days of the invoice date.
We recognize revenues in accordance with ASC No. 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers.” As such, we identify a contract with a customer, identify the performance obligations in the contract, determine the transaction price, allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation in the contract and recognize revenues when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation.
Subscription software and perpetual license revenues are recognized at the point of time when the software license has been delivered and the benefit of the asset has transferred. Maintenance associated with subscription licenses is recognized ratably over the term of the agreement and is included as part of the subscription revenues line item.
We recognize revenues from maintenance of perpetual license sales ratably over the term of the underlying maintenance contract. The term of the maintenance contract is usually one year. Renewals of maintenance contracts create new performance obligations that are satisfied over the new term with the revenues recognized ratably over the period.
Revenues from professional services consist mostly of time and material services. The performance obligations are satisfied, and revenues are recognized, when the services are provided or once the service term has expired.
We enter into contracts that can include combinations of products and services, which are generally capable of being distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations. The license is distinct upon delivery as the customer can derive the economic benefit of the software without any professional services, updates or technical support. We allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation based on our relative standalone selling price out of the total consideration of the contract. For maintenance, we determine the standalone selling prices based on the price at which we separately sell a renewal contract. For professional services, we determine the standalone selling prices based on the price at which we separately sell those
services. For software licenses, we use the residual approach to determine the standalone selling prices due to the lack of history of selling software license on a standalone basis and the highly variable sales price.
Trade and other receivables are primarily comprised of trade receivables that are recorded at the invoice amount mostly for a one year period, net of an allowance for doubtful accounts.
Deferred revenues represent mostly unrecognized fees billed or collected for maintenance and professional services. Deferred revenues are recognized as (or when) we perform under the contract. Pursuant to these contracts, customers are not invoiced for subsequent years until the annual renewal occurs. The amount of revenues recognized in the period that was included in the opening deferred revenues balance was $96.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
We do not grant a right of return to our customers, except for one of our resellers. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, there were no returns from this reseller.
For information regarding disaggregated revenues, please refer to Note 14 to our consolidated financial statements.
Contract Costs:
We pay sales commissions to sales and marketing and certain management personnel based on their attainment of certain predetermined sales goals. Sales commissions earned by our employees are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a contract with a customer. Sales commissions paid for initial contracts, which are not commensurate with sales commissions paid for renewal contracts, are capitalized and amortized over an expected period of benefit. Based on our technology, customer contracts and other factors, we have determined the expected period of benefit to be approximately four years. Sales commissions for renewal contracts are capitalized and then amortized on a straight-line basis. Amortization expenses related to these costs are mostly included in sales and marketing expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation:
We account for stock-based compensation in accordance with ASC No. 718, “Compensation-Stock Compensation.” ASC No. 718 requires companies to estimate the fair value of equity-based payment awards on the date of grant using an Option-Pricing Model. We recognize compensation expenses for the value of our equity awards granted based on the straight-line method over the requisite service period of each of the awards. Effective as of January 1, 2017, we adopted Accounting Standards Update 2016-09, “Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718)” (“ASU 2016-09”) on a modified, retrospective basis. Upon adoption of ASU 2016-09, we elected to change our accounting policy to account for forfeitures as they occur.
Business Combinations:
We account for our business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires, among other things, allocation of the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their estimated fair values on the acquisition date. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. When determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, we make estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. During the measurement period, not to exceed one year from the date of acquisition, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with a corresponding offset to goodwill if new information is obtained related to facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date. After the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are reflected in the consolidated statements of operations. Acquisition costs, such as legal and consulting fees, are expensed as incurred.
Convertible Senior Notes:
We account for our convertible senior notes in accordance with ASC 470-20 "Debt with Conversion and Other Options" and separated the Notes into liability and equity components. The carrying amounts of the liability component of the Notes were calculated by measuring the fair value of similar debt instruments that do not have an associated convertible feature. The carrying amounts of the equity components, representing the conversion option, were determined by deducting the fair value of the liability components from the par value of the 2025 Notes. This difference represents the debt discount that is amortized to interest expense over the terms of the 2025 Notes using the effective interest rate method. The carrying amount of the equity
components representing the conversion option was approximately $31.8 million for the 2025 Notes and is recorded in additional paid-in capital and are not remeasured as long as they continue to meet the conditions for equity classification.
The Company allocates transaction costs related to the issuance of the 2025 Notes to the liability and equity components using the same proportions as the initial carrying value of the Notes. Transaction costs attributable to the liability component were approximately $6.9 million and are being amortized to interest expense at an effective interest method rate of 4.51% over the term of the 2025 Notes. Transaction costs attributable to the equity component were approximately $1.0 million and are netted with the equity component of the 2025 Notes in additional paid-in capital.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-15, “Intangibles-Goodwill and Other-Internal-Use Software (Subtopic 350-40): Customer’s Accounting for Implementation Costs Incurred in a Cloud Computing Arrangement That Is a Service Contract,” which aligns the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred in a hosting arrangement that is a service contract with the requirements for capitalizing implementation costs incurred to develop or obtain internal-use software. The new standard requires capitalized costs to be amortized on a straight-line basis generally over the term of the arrangement, and the financial statement presentation for these capitalized costs would be the same as that of the fees related to the hosting arrangements. The new standard was adopted for interim and annual periods beginning January 1, 2020 using the prospective adoption approach. Adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In January 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, “Financial Instruments - Credit Losses on Financial Instruments”, which requires that expected credit losses relating to financial assets measured on an amortized cost basis and available for sale debt securities be recorded through an allowance for credit losses. This standard requires entities to estimate an expected lifetime credit loss on financial assets ranging from short-term trade accounts receivable to long-term financings and report credit losses using an expected losses model rather than the incurred losses model that was previously used, and establishes additional disclosures related to credit risks. For available for sale debt securities with unrealized losses, the standard eliminates the concept of other-than-temporary impairments and requires allowances to be recorded instead of reducing the amortized cost of the investment. ASU 2016-13 also limits the amount of credit losses to be recognized for available for sale debt securities to the amount by which carrying value exceeds fair value and also requires the reversal of previously recognized credit losses if fair value increases. The new standard was adopted for interim and annual periods beginning after January 1, 2020. Adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, ASC Subtopic 470-20 “Debt-Debt with “Conversion and Other Options” and ASC subtopic 815-40 “Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity”. The standard reduced the number of accounting models for convertible debt instruments and convertible preferred stock. Convertible instruments that continue to be subject to separation models are (1) those with embedded conversion features that are not clearly and closely related to the host contract, that meet the definition of a derivative, and that do not qualify for a scope exception from derivative accounting and (2) convertible debt instruments issued with substantial premiums for which the premiums are recorded as paid-in capital. The amendments in this update are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. We are currently assessing the impact of the adoption of this standard on our consolidated financial statements.