Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with “Business” under Item 1, and our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included under Item 8 of this report. This discussion contains a number of forward-looking statements, all of which are based on our current expectations and all of which could be affected by uncertainties and risks. Our actual results may differ materially from the results contemplated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors including, but not limited to, those described in “Risk Factors” under Part I, Item 1A of this report.
Overview
Recent Developments
Separation of Businesses
On February 1, 2021, we completed the previously announced spin-off (the “Spin-Off”) of Cognyte Software Ltd. (“Cognyte”), a company limited by shares incorporated under the laws of the State of Israel whose business and operations consist of our former Cyber Intelligence Solutions business (the “Cognyte Business”). The Spin-Off was completed by way of a pro rata distribution on February 1, 2021 of all of the then-issued and outstanding ordinary shares, no par value, of Cognyte to holders of record of our common stock as of the close of business on January 25, 2021. After the distribution, we do not beneficially own any ordinary shares of Cognyte and will no longer consolidate Cognyte into our financial results for periods ending after January 31, 2021.
We have incurred significant costs in connection with the Spin-Off. The costs include developing stand-alone information systems and related IT costs for Cognyte, third-party advisory, consulting, legal and professional services, as well as other items that are incremental and one-time in nature that are related to the Spin-Off. We capitalized $8.8 million of these costs and expensed $47.7 million during the year ended January 31, 2021. We have capitalized $12.8 million and expensed $53.0 million of separation related costs since commencing in the year ended January 31, 2020. The expense portion is primarily reflected in selling, general and administrative expenses.
In connection with the Spin-Off, we entered into a limited duration Transition Services Agreement under which we and Cognyte will provide and/or make available various administrative services and assets to each other for a given period based on each individual service. In no case will services be provided for more than 24 months after the Spin-Off. Services to be provided include certain services related to finance, accounting, business technology, human resources, information systems, facilities, document management and record retention and technical support. In consideration for such services, we and Cognyte will each pay fees to the other for the services provided, and those fees will generally be in amounts intended to allow the party providing services to recover all of its direct and indirect costs incurred in providing those services, plus a standard markup.
Apax Investment
On December 4, 2019, we announced that Valor Parent LP, an affiliate of Apax Partners, would make an investment in us in an amount of up to $400.0 million. Under the terms of the Investment Agreement, on May 7, 2020, the Apax Investor initially purchased $200.0 million of our Series A convertible preferred stock (“Series A Preferred Stock”). Further discussion regarding the Apax investment and the initial closing appears in the “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Overview” section below. In connection with the completion of the Spin-Off on February 1, 2021, we expect to complete the second tranche of the investment through the issuance of $200.0 million of Series B convertible preferred stock (“Series B Preferred Stock”) during our first fiscal quarter ending April 30, 2021.
COVID-19 Pandemic
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a global pandemic. The outbreak has reached all of the regions in which we do business, and governmental authorities around the world have implemented numerous measures attempting to contain and mitigate the effects of the virus, including travel bans and restrictions, border closings, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, shutdowns, limitations or closures of non-essential businesses, and social distancing requirements. Companies around the world, including us, our customers, partners, and vendors, have implemented actions in response, including among others, office closings, site restrictions, and employee travel restrictions. Notwithstanding the loosening of these restrictions in certain countries in certain periods since the onset of the pandemic, the global spread of COVID-19 and actions taken in response have negatively affected us, our customers, partners, and vendors and caused significant economic and business disruption the extent and duration of which is not currently known. In response to these
challenges, we quickly adjusted our operations to work from home and we believe our business continuity plan is working well. We are monitoring and assessing the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including recommendations and orders issued by government and public health authorities in countries where we operate. We continue to work to help our customers during this difficult time and are managing our operations with a view to resuming normal business activity as soon as possible.
We saw an improvement in the business environment during the second half of 2020 after an initial downturn early in the year; however, during the year ended January 31, 2021, revenue in both of our operating segments was negatively impacted by delays and reduced spending attributed to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our customers’ operational priorities and as a result of cost containment measures they have implemented. Due to the pandemic, we saw a reduction or delay in certain large customer contracts, particularly on-premises arrangements, and we have generally been unable to conduct face-to-face meetings with existing or prospective customers and partners, present in-person demonstrations of our solutions, or host or attend in-person trade shows and conferences. Limitations on access to the facilities of our customers have also impacted our ability to deliver some of our products, complete certain implementations, and provide in-person consulting and training services, negatively impacting our ability to recognize revenue. We continued to experience high recurring revenue renewal rates and witnessed a steady pick up in demand for our cloud-based solutions during this fiscal year. Notwithstanding our strong recurring renewal rates and the recovery in the business environment during the second half of 2020, our ability to predict how the pandemic will impact our results in future periods is limited.
In light of the adverse impact of COVID-19 on global economic conditions and our revenue, along with the uncertainty associated with the extent and timing of a potential recovery, during the first half of the year ended January 31, 2021, we implemented certain cost-reduction actions of varying durations. Such actions included, but were not limited to, reducing our discretionary spending, decreasing capital expenditures, reconsidering the optimal uses of our cash and other capital resources, including with respect to our stock repurchases, and reducing workforce-related costs. Based on the improved business environment and our financial performance during the second half of the year, we have in many cases resumed investments and other spending; however, these actions may need to be reassessed depending on how the facts and circumstances surrounding the pandemic evolve and we continue to evaluate and may decide to implement further cost control strategies to help us mitigate the impact of the pandemic, if required. Any such actions may have an adverse impact on us, particularly if they remain in place for an extended period.
The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the effects of the operational alterations we have made in response on our business, financial condition, liquidity, and financial results cannot be predicted at this time.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act was enacted and signed into U.S. law to provide economic relief to individuals and businesses facing economic hardship as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial condition or results of operations as of and for the year ended January 31, 2021. However, we have deferred the timing of employer payroll taxes and accelerated the refund of AMT credits as permitted by the CARES Act.
Our Business
Verint helps brands provide Boundless Customer Engagement™. For more than two decades, the world’s most iconic brands - including more than 85 of the Fortune 100 companies - have trusted Verint to provide the technology and domain expertise they require to effectively build enduring customer relationships.
Brands today are challenged by new workforce dynamics, ever-expanding customer engagement channels and exponentially more consumer interactions - often while facing limited budgets and resources. As a result, brands are finding it more challenging to deliver the desired customer experience. This creates an Engagement Capacity Gap™, which is widening as the digital transformation continues. Organizations are increasingly seeking technology to close this gap, solutions that are based on AI and analytics to automate workflows across enterprise silos to optimize the workforce expense and to drive an elevated consumer experience.
Verint is uniquely positioned to help organizations close the capacity gap with our differentiated Verint Cloud Platform.
For all historical periods included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we reported our business in two operating segments: Customer Engagement and Cyber Intelligence. For each of the years ended January 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, our Customer Engagement segment represented approximately 65% of our total revenue, while for each of those same years, our Cyber Intelligence segment represented approximately 35% of our total revenue.
Key Trends and Factors That May Impact our Performance
In addition to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic discussed above, we see the following business trends and factors which may impact our performance:
•Digital Transformation is Accelerating. Long gone are the days when customer journeys were limited to phone calls into a contact center. Today, customer journeys take place across many touchpoints in the enterprise and across many communication and collaboration platforms, with digital leading the way. Customer touchpoints take place in contact centers, in back-office and branch operations, in ecommerce, in digital marketing, in self-service, and in customer experience departments. The breadth of customer touchpoints, the rapid growth in digital interactions, and the emergence of the new workforce - with humans and bots working together - are creating demand for new solutions.
•The Engagement Capacity Gap is Widening. Brands are seeking to differentiate themselves by providing consumers with a strong brand experience. But they cannot afford to do so by hiring more people. With the exponential growth in digital journeys and more demanding consumer expectations, organizations require more resources, but hiring more knowledge workers and further increasing workforce expenses is often not a sustainable solution. This creates an Engagement Capacity Gap, and as the digital transformation accelerates, the gap is widening. Brands are looking for new technology and solutions to help close the Engagement Capacity Gap.
•The Market is Shifting Rapidly to Cloud-Based, AI-Driven Solutions. To effectively address the Engagement Capacity Gap, brands are seeking open, cloud-based solutions to break down silos and facilitate the sharing of data across enterprise functions. Brand are also seeking to leverage AI and other advanced data analytic tools to reduce manual work, increase workforce efficiency, and manage the new workforce of humans and bots.
Cyber Intelligence Solutions Business (Cognyte Business)
As noted above, on February 1, 2021, we completed the Spin-Off of our former Cyber Intelligence Solutions business (also known as the Cognyte Business) into an independent, publicly traded company called Cognyte Software Ltd. (“Cognyte”). Cognyte is a global leader in security analytics software that empowers governments and enterprises with Actionable Intelligence® for a safer world. Cognyte’s open software fuses, analyzes and visualizes disparate data sets at scale to help security organizations find the needles in the haystacks. Over 1,000 government and enterprise customers in more than 100 countries rely on Cognyte’s solutions to accelerate security investigations and connect the dots to successfully identify, neutralize, and prevent national security, personal safety, business continuity and cyber threats. Cognyte’s government customers consist of governments around the world, including national, regional, and local government agencies. Cognyte’s enterprise customers consist of commercial customers and physical security customers.
See Item 1, “Business”, of this report for more information on key trends that we believe are driving demand for our solutions and “Risk Factors” under Item 1A of this report for a more complete description of risks that may impact future revenue and profitability. As discussed above, the current COVID-19 pandemic is also a material factor that may negatively impact us and demand for our solutions.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
An appreciation of our critical accounting policies is necessary to understand our financial results. The accounting policies outlined below are considered to be critical because they can materially affect our operating results and financial condition, as these policies may require us to make difficult and subjective judgments regarding uncertainties. The accuracy of these estimates and the likelihood of future changes depend on a range of possible outcomes and a number of underlying variables, many of which are beyond our control, and there can be no assurance that our estimates are accurate.
Revenue Recognition
We derive and report our revenue in two categories: (a) product revenue, including licensing of software products, unbundled SaaS and the sale of hardware products (which include software that works together with the hardware to deliver the product’s essential functionality), and (b) service and support revenue, including revenue from cloud deployments, bundled SaaS, hosting services, optional managed services, installation services, initial and renewal support, project management, product warranties, and business advisory consulting and training services. We account for a contract with a customer when it has written approval, the contract is committed, the rights of the parties, including payment terms, are identified, the contract has commercial substance and consideration is probable of collection. We recognize revenue when control of the promised goods or services is
transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. Products sold by us are delivered electronically, shipped from our facilities, or drop-shipped directly from the vendor. We generate all of our revenue from contracts with customers. We generally invoice a customer upon delivery, or in accordance with specific contractual provisions. Payments are due as per contract terms and do not contain a significant financing component.
We account for revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606). Our revenue recognition policies require us to make significant judgments and estimates. In applying our revenue recognition policy, we must determine which portions of our revenue are recognized at a point in time (generally product revenue) and which portions must be deferred and recognized over time (generally services and support revenue). We analyze various factors including, but not limited to, the selling price of undelivered services when sold on a stand-alone basis, our pricing policies, the creditworthiness of our customers, and contractual terms and conditions in helping us to make such judgments about revenue recognition. Changes in judgment on any of these factors could materially impact the timing and amount of revenue recognized in a given period.
Our contracts with customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services to a customer. In contracts with multiple performance obligations, we identify each performance obligation and evaluate whether the performance obligations are distinct within the context of the contract at contract inception. Performance obligations that are not distinct at contract inception are combined. Implementation, support, and other services are typically considered distinct performance obligations when sold with a software license unless these services are determined to significantly modify the software. For bundled SaaS arrangements, we determine whether the services performed during the initial phases of an arrangement, such as setup activities, are distinct. In most cases, we consider our bundled SaaS arrangements to represent a single performance obligation comprised of a series of distinct services that are substantially the same and that have the same pattern of transfer (i.e., distinct days of service). We record deferred revenue attributable to certain process transition, setup activities where such activities do not represent separate performance obligations. The transaction price is generally in the form of a fixed fee at contract inception, and excludes taxes assessed by a governmental authority that are both imposed on and concurrent with a specific revenue-producing transaction, that are collected by us from a customer.
We allocate the transaction price to each distinct performance obligation based on the estimated standalone selling price (“SSP”) for each performance obligation. Judgment is required to determine the SSP for each distinct performance obligation. In instances where SSP is not directly observable, such as when we do not sell the product or service separately, we estimate the SSP of each performance obligation based on either a cost-plus-margin approach or an adjusted market assessment approach. We may have more than one SSP for individual products and services due to the stratification of those products and services by customers and circumstances. In these instances, we may use information such as the size of the customer and geographic region in determining the SSP.
We then look to how control transfers to the customer in order to determine the timing of revenue recognition. Software license revenue is typically recognized when the software is delivered and/or made available for download as this is the point the user of the software can direct the use of and obtain substantially all of the remaining benefits from the functional intellectual property. We do not recognize software revenue related to the renewal of software licenses earlier than the beginning of the renewal period. In situations where arrangements include customer acceptance provisions, revenue is recognized when we can objectively verify the software complies with the specifications underlying acceptance and the customer has control of the software. We recognize support revenue, which includes software updates on a when-and-if-available basis, telephone support, and bug fixes or patches, over the term of the customer support agreement, which is typically one year. Revenue related to bundled SaaS, professional services and customer education services is typically recognized over time as the services are performed.
Some of our customer contracts require significant customization of the software to meet the particular requirements specified by each customer. The contract pricing is stated as a fixed amount and generally results in the transfer of control of the applicable performance obligation over time. We recognize revenue based on the proportion of labor hours expended to the total hours expected to complete the performance obligation. The determination of the total labor hours expected to complete the performance obligation on fixed fee contracts involves significant judgment. We incorporate revisions to hour and cost estimates when the causal facts become known. We measure our estimate of completion on fixed-price contracts, which in turn determines the amount of revenue we recognize, based primarily on actual hours incurred to date and our estimate of remaining hours necessary to complete the contract.
Our products are generally not sold with a right of return and credits and incentives granted have been minimal in both amount and frequency. Shipping and handling activities that are billed to customers and occur after control over a product has
transferred to a customer are accounted for as fulfillment costs and are included in cost of revenue. Historically, these expenses have not been material.
Accounting for Business Combinations
We allocate the purchase price of acquired companies to the tangible and intangible assets acquired, including in-process research and development assets, and liabilities assumed, based upon their estimated fair values at the acquisition date. These fair values are typically estimated with assistance from independent valuation specialists. The purchase price allocation process requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date with respect to intangible assets, contractual support obligations assumed, contingent consideration arrangements, and pre-acquisition contingencies.
Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain.
Examples of critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired or may acquire in the future include but are not limited to:
•future expected cash flows from software license sales, SaaS and support agreements, consulting contracts, other customer contracts, and acquired developed technologies;
•expected costs to develop in-process research and development into commercially viable products and estimated cash flows from the projects when completed;
•the acquired company’s brand and competitive position, as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired brand will continue to be used in the combined company’s product portfolio;
•cost of capital and discount rates; and
•estimating the useful lives of acquired assets as well as the pattern or manner in which the assets will amortize.
In connection with the purchase price allocations for applicable acquisitions, we estimate the fair value of the contractual SaaS and support obligations we are assuming from the acquired business. The estimated fair value of the SaaS and support obligations is determined utilizing a cost build-up approach, which determines fair value by estimating the costs related to fulfilling the obligations plus a reasonable profit margin. The estimated costs to fulfill the SaaS and support obligations are based on the historical direct costs related to providing the services. The sum of these costs and operating profit represents an approximation of the amount that we would be required to pay a third party to assume these obligations.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
We test goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level, which can be an operating segment or one level below an operating segment, on an annual basis as of November 1, or more frequently if changes in facts and circumstances indicate that impairment in the value of goodwill may exist. As of January 31, 2021, our reporting units were Customer Engagement, Cyber Intelligence (excluding situational intelligence solutions), and Situational Intelligence, a component of our Cyber Intelligence operating segment.
In testing for goodwill impairment, we may elect to utilize a qualitative assessment to evaluate whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If we elect to bypass a qualitative assessment, or if our qualitative assessment indicates that goodwill impairment is more likely than not, we perform quantitative impairment testing. If our quantitative testing determines that the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, goodwill impairment is recognized in an amount equal to that excess, limited to the total goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
For reporting units where we decide to perform a qualitative assessment, we assess and make judgments regarding a variety of factors which potentially impact the fair value of a reporting unit, including general economic conditions, industry and market-specific conditions, customer behavior, cost factors, our financial performance and trends, our strategies and business plans, capital requirements, management and personnel issues, and our stock price, among others. We then consider the totality of these and other factors, placing more weight on the events and circumstances that are judged to most affect a reporting unit’s fair value or the carrying amount of its net assets, to reach a qualitative conclusion regarding whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount.
For reporting units where we perform quantitative impairment testing, we utilize one or more of three primary approaches to assess fair value: (a) an income-based approach, using projected discounted cash flows, (b) a market-based approach, using valuation multiples of comparable companies, and (c) a transaction-based approach, using valuation multiples for recent acquisitions of similar businesses made in the marketplace.
Our estimate of fair value of each reporting unit is based on a number of subjective factors, including: (a) appropriate consideration of valuation approaches (income approach, comparable public company approach, and comparable transaction approach), (b) estimates of future growth rates, (c) estimates of our future cost structure, (d) discount rates for our estimated cash flows, (e) selection of peer group companies for the comparable public company and the comparable transaction approaches, (f) required levels of working capital, (g) assumed terminal value, and (h) time horizon of cash flow forecasts.
The determination of reporting units also requires judgment. We assess whether a reporting unit exists within a reportable segment by identifying the unit, determining whether the unit qualifies as a business under GAAP, and assessing the availability and regular review by segment management of discrete financial information for the unit.
We review intangible assets that have finite useful lives and other long-lived assets when an event occurs indicating the potential for impairment. If any indicators are present, we perform a recoverability test by comparing the sum of the estimated undiscounted future cash flows attributable to the assets in question to their carrying amounts. If the undiscounted cash flows used in the test for recoverability are less than the long-lived assets carrying amount, we determine the fair value of the long-lived asset and recognize an impairment loss if the carrying amount of the long-lived asset exceeds its fair value. The impairment loss recognized is the amount by which the carrying amount of the long-lived asset exceeds its fair value.
For all our goodwill and other intangible asset impairment reviews, the assumptions and estimates used in the process are complex and often subjective. They can be affected by a variety of factors, including external factors such as industry and economic trends, and internal factors such as changes in our business strategy or our internal forecasts. Although we believe the assumptions, judgments, and estimates we have used in our assessments are reasonable and appropriate, a material change in any of our assumptions or external factors could lead to future goodwill or other intangible asset impairment charges.
Based upon our November 1, 2020 quantitative goodwill impairment review of each reporting unit, we concluded that the estimated fair values of our Customer Engagement, Cyber Intelligence, and Situational Intelligence reporting units significantly exceeded their carrying values. Our Customer Engagement, Cyber Intelligence, and Situational Intelligence reporting units carried goodwill of $1.3 billion, $135.7 million, and $22.5 million, respectively, at January 31, 2021.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which includes the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in our consolidated financial statements. Under this approach, deferred taxes are recorded for the future tax consequences expected to occur when the reported amounts of assets and liabilities are recovered or paid. The provision for income taxes represents income taxes paid or payable for the current year plus deferred taxes. Deferred taxes result from differences between the financial statement and tax bases of our assets and liabilities, and are adjusted for changes in tax rates and tax laws when changes are enacted. The effects of future changes in income tax laws or rates are not anticipated.
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. The calculation of our income tax provision involves the application of complex tax laws and requires significant judgment and estimates.
We evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets for each jurisdiction in which we operate at each reporting date, and we establish a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of our deferred tax assets will not be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income of the same character and in the same jurisdiction. We consider all available positive and negative evidence in making this assessment, including, but not limited to, the scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, and tax planning strategies. In circumstances where there is sufficient negative evidence indicating that our deferred tax assets are not more likely than not realizable, we establish a valuation allowance.
We use a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return by assessing whether they are more likely than not sustainable, based solely on their technical merits, upon examination, and including resolution of any related appeals or litigation process. The second step is to measure the associated tax benefit of each position as the largest amount that we believe is more likely than not realizable.
Differences between the amount of tax benefits taken or expected to be taken in our income tax returns and the amount of tax benefits recognized in our financial statements represent our unrecognized income tax benefits, which we either record as a liability or as a reduction of deferred tax assets. Our policy is to include interest (expense and/or income) and penalties related to unrecognized income tax benefits as a component of the provision for income taxes.
Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize the cost of employee services received in exchange for awards of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of the award.
During the three-year period ended January 31, 2021, restricted stock units were our predominant stock-based payment award. The fair value of these awards is equivalent to the market value of our common stock on the grant date.
We periodically award restricted stock units to executive officers and certain employees that vest upon the achievement of specified performance goals or market conditions. The recognition of the compensation costs of the performance-based awards with performance goals requires an assessment of the probability that the specified performance criteria will be achieved. At each reporting date, we update our assessment of the probability that the specified performance criteria will be achieved and adjust our estimate of the fair value of the award, if necessary. For the performance-based awards with market conditions, the condition is incorporated into the grant date fair value valuation of the award and compensation costs are recognized even if the market condition is not satisfied.
Changes in assumptions can materially affect the estimate of fair value of stock-based compensation and, consequently, the related expense recognized. The assumptions we use in calculating the fair value of stock-based payment awards represent our best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
Results of Operations
The following discussion includes a comparison of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources for the years ended January 31, 2021 and 2020. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended January 31, 2020 compared to the year ended January 31, 2019 can be found under Item 7 in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 31, 2020, which is hereby incorporated by reference herein and considered part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K only to the extent referenced and is available free of charge on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and our website at www.verint.com/investor-relations.
Seasonality and Cyclicality
As is typical for many software and technology companies, our business is subject to seasonal and cyclical factors. In most years, our revenue and operating income are typically highest in the fourth quarter and lowest in the first quarter (prior to the impact of unusual or nonrecurring items). Moreover, revenue and operating income in the first quarter of a new year may be lower than in the fourth quarter of the preceding year, in some years, by a significant margin. In addition, we generally receive a higher volume of orders in the last month of a quarter, with orders concentrated in the later part of that month. We believe that these seasonal and cyclical factors primarily reflect customer spending patterns and budget cycles, as well as the impact of incentive compensation plans for our sales personnel. While seasonal and cyclical factors such as these are common in the software and technology industry, this pattern should not be considered a reliable indicator of our future revenue or financial performance. Many other factors, including general economic conditions, may also have an impact on our business and financial results.
Overview of Operating Results
The following table sets forth a summary of certain key financial information for the years ended January 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Our revenue decreased approximately $29.9 million, or 2%, from $1,303.6 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to $1,273.7 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. The decrease consisted of a $48.6 million decrease in product revenue, partially offset by an $18.7 million increase in service and support revenue. In our Customer Engagement segment, revenue decreased approximately $16.3 million, or 2%, from $846.5 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to $830.2 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. The decrease consisted of a $24.0 million decrease in product revenue, partially offset by a $7.7 million increase in service and support revenue. In our Cyber Intelligence segment, revenue decreased approximately $13.6 million, or 3%, from $457.1 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to $443.5 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. The decrease consisted of a $24.6 million decrease in product revenue, partially offset by an $11.0 million increase in service and support revenue. For additional details on our revenue by segment, see “-Revenue by Operating Segment”. Revenue in the Americas, EMEA, and APAC represented approximately 52%, 28%, and 20% of our total revenue, respectively, in the year ended January 31, 2021, compared to approximately 52%, 29%, and 19%, respectively, in the year ended January 31, 2020. Further details of changes in revenue are provided below.
Operating income was $108.7 million in the year ended January 31, 2021 compared to $87.9 million in the year ended January 31, 2020. This increase in operating income was primarily due to a $18.2 million increase in gross profit, primarily reflecting increased gross profit in our Cyber Intelligence segment and a decrease in amortization of acquired technology intangible assets, and a $2.6 million decrease in operating expenses. The decrease in operating expenses consisted of a $10.6 million decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses and a $0.5 million decrease in amortization of other acquired intangible assets, partially offset by a $8.5 million increase in net research and development expenses. Further details of changes in operating income are provided below.
Net loss attributable to Verint Systems Inc. common shares was $14.9 million and net loss per common share was $0.23 in the year ended January 31, 2021, compared to net income attributable to Verint Systems Inc. common shares of $28.7 million and diluted net income per common share of $0.43 in the year ended January 31, 2020. The decrease in net income attributable to Verint Systems Inc. per common share and diluted net income per common share in the year ended January 31, 2021 was primarily due to a $57.9 million increase in total other expense, net primarily due to the change in fair value of the Future Tranche Right issued in connection with our preferred stock, a $7.7 million increase in dividends on preferred stock, and a $0.2 million increase in net income attributable to our noncontrolling interests, partially offset by a $20.8 million increase in operating income, as described above, and a $1.3 million decrease in our provision for income taxes. Further details of these changes are provided below.
A portion of our business is conducted in currencies other than the U.S. dollar, and therefore our revenue and operating expenses are affected by fluctuations in applicable foreign currency exchange rates. When comparing average exchange rates for the year ended January 31, 2021 to average exchange rates for the year ended January 31, 2020, the U.S. dollar strengthened relative to the Brazilian real, Singapore dollar, and Indian rupee and weakened against the euro, British pound sterling, and our Israeli shekel rate (hedged and unhedged), resulting in an overall increase in our revenue and operating expenses and a slight decrease in our cost of revenue on a U.S. dollar-denominated basis. For the year ended January 31, 2021, had foreign exchange rates remained unchanged from rates in effect for the year ended January 31, 2020, our revenue would have been approximately $0.5 million lower and our cost of revenue and operating expenses on a combined basis would have been approximately $5.0 million lower, which would have resulted in a $4.5 million increase in operating income.
As of January 31, 2021, we employed approximately 6,300 professionals, including part-time employees and certain contractors, compared to approximately 6,500 at January 31, 2020. In connection with the Spin-Off, approximately 2,000 professionals, including certain contractors, became part of Cognyte.
Revenue by Operating Segment
The following table sets forth revenue for each of our operating segments for the years ended January 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Customer Engagement Segment
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Customer Engagement revenue decreased approximately $16.3 million, or 2%, from $846.5 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to $830.2 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. The decrease consisted of a $24.0 million decrease in product revenue, partially offset by a $7.7 million increase in service and support revenue. The decrease in product revenue was primarily driven by delayed purchasing decisions on large contracts, particularly on-premises arrangements, and reduced product spending by customers, both due to COVID-19, and a shift in spending by our customers towards our cloud solutions. Our product revenue can fluctuate from period to period as some large contracts can represent a significant share of our product revenue for a given period. The increase in service and support revenue was primarily driven by growth in recurring revenue as we continue to see positive demand from customers across our portfolio of cloud-based solutions, partially offset by a decrease in implementation revenue due to COVID-19 and related containment measures, including customer facility closures and travel restrictions. We expect our revenue mix to continue to shift to recurring sources, which is consistent with our cloud-first strategy and a general market shift from on-premises to cloud solutions.
Cyber Intelligence Segment
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Cyber Intelligence revenue decreased approximately $13.6 million, or 3%, from $457.1 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to $443.5 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. The decrease consisted of a $24.6 million decrease in product revenue, partially offset by an $11.0 million increase in service and support revenue. The decrease in product revenue was primarily due to a decrease in product deliveries due to delays attributed to the impact of COVID-19, as our customers shifted their attention to addressing operational challenges associated with the pandemic, a reduction in the amount of pass-through hardware reselling activity as we transitioned more of our business to a software model, and a decrease in progress realized during the current period on long-term projects for which revenue is recognized over time using the percentage-of-completion (“POC”) method. The increase in service and support revenue was primarily attributable to an increase in support revenue from existing customers and an increase in SaaS revenue, partially offset by a decrease in progress realized during the current year on long-term projects for which revenue is recognized over time using the POC method, and to a lesser extent a decrease in deployment services due to COVID-19 restrictions.
Product Revenue and Service and Support Revenue
We derive and report our revenue in two categories: (a) product revenue, including licensing of software products, unbundled SaaS, and the sale of hardware products (which include software that works together with the hardware to deliver the product’s essential functionality), and (b) service and support revenue, including revenue from cloud deployments, bundled SaaS, hosting services, optional managed services, installation services, initial and renewal support, project management, product warranties, and business advisory consulting and training services.
The following table sets forth product revenue and service and support revenue for the years ended January 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Product Revenue
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Product revenue decreased approximately $48.6 million, from $454.9 million for the year ended January 31, 2020 to $406.3 million for the year ended January 31, 2021, resulting from a $24.6 million decrease in our Cyber Intelligence segment and a $24.0 million decrease in our Customer Engagement segment.
For additional information see “-Revenue by Operating Segment”.
Service and Support Revenue
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Service and support revenue increased approximately $18.7 million, or 2%, from $848.8 million for the year ended January 31, 2020 to $867.5 million for the year ended January 31, 2021, resulting from a $11.0 million increase in our Cyber Intelligence segment and a $7.7 million increase in our Customer Engagement segment.
For additional information see “- Revenue by Operating Segment”.
Cost of Revenue
The following table sets forth cost of revenue by product and service and support, as well as amortization of acquired technology for the years ended January 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
We exclude certain costs of both product revenue and service and support revenue, including shared support costs, stock-based compensation, and asset impairment charges, among others, when calculating our operating segment gross margins.
Cost of Product Revenue
Cost of product revenue primarily consists of hardware material costs and royalties due to third parties for software components that are embedded in our software solutions. Cost of product revenue also includes amortization of capitalized software development costs, employee compensation and related expenses associated with our global operations, facility costs, and other allocated overhead expenses. In our Cyber Intelligence segment, cost of product revenue also includes employee compensation and related expenses, contractor and consulting expenses, and travel expenses, in each case for resources dedicated to project management and associated product delivery.
As with many other technology companies, our software products tend to have higher gross margins than our hardware products, so the mix of products we sell in a particular period can have a significant impact on our gross margins in that period.
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Cost of product revenue decreased approximately $31.0 million, or 24%, from $127.2 million for the year ended January 31, 2020 to $96.2 million for the year ended January 31, 2021, primarily due to decreased cost of product revenue in our Cyber Intelligence segment, driven primarily by a corresponding decrease in product revenue as discussed above, cost reduction initiatives we implemented related to COVID-19, including reducing employee costs and travel expenses, and a decrease in subcontractor costs resulting from prior investments to further productize our Cyber Intelligence portfolio. Our overall product gross margins increased from 72% in the year ended January 31, 2020 to 76% in the year ended January 31, 2021. Product gross margins in our Cyber Intelligence segment increased from 64% in the year ended January 31, 2020 to 73% in the year ended January 31, 2021 primarily due to a favorable change in product mix, as a result of an increase in software transactions during the current year, temporary cost reduction initiatives we implemented related to COVID-19, and a decrease in product customization work that is not considered a separate performance obligation driven by recent and ongoing investments to productize our Cyber Intelligence portfolio. Cyber Intelligence product margins are subject to considerable fluctuation from period to period based on the product mix sold. Product gross margins in our Customer Engagement segment decreased from 84% in the year ended January 31, 2020 to 83%
in the year ended January 31, 2021, primarily due to lower sales volume due to COVID-19, which resulted in revenue decreasing at a faster rate than product costs, including software amortization costs.
Cost of Service and Support Revenue
Cost of service and support revenue primarily consists of employee compensation and related expenses, contractor costs, hosting infrastructure costs, and travel expenses relating to installation, training, consulting, and maintenance services. Cost of service and support revenue also includes certain stock-based compensation expenses, facility costs, and other overhead expenses. In accordance with GAAP and our accounting policy, the cost of service and support revenue is generally expensed as incurred in the period in which the services are performed.
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Cost of service and support revenue decreased approximately $12.1 million, or 4%, from $312.6 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to $300.5 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in travel costs and employee compensation expenses as a result of cost reduction initiatives related to COVID-19, partially offset by an increase in data center and cloud costs associated with the increase in cloud revenue. Our overall service and support gross margin increased from 63% in the year ended January 31, 2020 to 65% in the year ended January 31, 2021, primarily due to temporary COVID-19 cost containment measures that we implemented.
Amortization of Acquired Technology
Amortization of acquired technology consists of amortization of technology assets acquired in connection with business combinations.
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Amortization of acquired technology decreased approximately $5.1 million, or 21%, from $24.0 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to $18.9 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. The decrease was attributable to acquired technology intangible assets from historical business combinations becoming fully amortized during the year ended January 31, 2021, partially offset by amortization expense of acquired technology intangible assets associated with business combinations that closed during the prior year, for which a full year of amortization expense is reflected in the current year.
Further discussion regarding our business combinations appears in Note 5, “Business Combinations and Divestitures” to our consolidated financial statements included under Item 8 of this report.
Research and Development, Net
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel and subcontracting expenses, facility costs, and other allocated overhead, net of certain software development costs that are capitalized, as well as reimbursements under government programs. Software development costs are capitalized upon the establishment of technological feasibility and continue to be capitalized through the general release of the related software product.
The following table sets forth research and development, net for the years ended January 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Research and development, net increased approximately $8.5 million, or 4%, from $231.7 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to $240.2 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. The increase was primarily due to a $9.3 million increase in employee compensation and related expenses, excluding stock-based compensation, which largely reflected further investment to productize our Cyber Intelligence portfolio during its ongoing software model transition. In addition, costs related to the purchase of third-party software components to accelerate development increased $4.3 million and capitalized software development costs were lower by $2.6 million in the year ended January 31, 2021 compared to the year ended January 31, 2020. These increases to R&D expense were partially offset by a $3.9 million decrease in stock-based compensation as a result of a change in R&D employee bonus payment structure and cost reduction initiatives we implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in a $2.5 million decrease in travel related expenses, a $0.9 million decrease in contractor costs, and a $0.5 million decrease in R&D
office expenses. Certain R&D costs that were temporarily reduced due to COVID-19 cost-saving initiatives were restored in the latter part of our fiscal second quarter.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs and related expenses, professional fees, changes in the fair values of our obligations under contingent consideration arrangements, sales and marketing expenses, including travel costs, sales commissions and sales referral fees, facility costs, communication expenses, and other administrative expenses.
The following table sets forth selling, general and administrative expenses for the years ended January 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased approximately $10.7 million, or 2%, from $488.9 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to $478.2 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. This decrease was primarily attributable to cost reduction initiatives we implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in a $20.0 million decrease in travel related costs, a $7.5 million decrease in contractors used for corporate support activities, and a $7.0 million decrease in marketing related expenses due to the cancellation of certain sales and marketing events and trade shows. Certain selling, general and administrative costs that were temporarily reduced due to COVID-19 cost-saving initiatives were restored in the latter part of our fiscal second quarter. Additionally, stock-based compensation decreased by $13.6 million primarily due to a change in employee bonus payment structure and professional fees decreased by $7.9 million due to a shareholder proxy contest that impacted the year ended January 31, 2020. Selling, general, and administrative expenses were also impacted by a $4.0 million decrease due to the change in the fair value of our obligations under contingent consideration arrangements, from a net benefit of $0.5 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to a net benefit of $4.5 million during the year ended January 31, 2021, as a result of revised outlooks for achieving the performance targets under several unrelated contingent consideration arrangements. These decreases were partially offset by a $41.9 million increase in expenses related to the Spin-Off, a $4.7 million increase in depreciation expense on fixed assets used for general administration purposes, and a $3.1 million increase in employee compensation and related expenses, excluding stock-based compensation.
The impact of contingent consideration arrangements on our operating results can vary over time as we revise our outlook for achieving the performance targets underlying the arrangements. This impact on our operating results may be more significant in some periods than in others, depending on a number of factors, including the magnitude of the change in the outlook for each arrangement separately as well as the number of contingent consideration arrangements in place, the liabilities requiring adjustment in that period, and the net effect of those adjustments.
Amortization of Other Acquired Intangible Assets
Amortization of other acquired intangible assets consists of amortization of certain intangible assets acquired in connection with business combinations, including customer relationships, distribution networks, trade names and non-compete agreements.
The following table sets forth amortization of other acquired intangible assets for the years ended January 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Amortization of other acquired intangible assets decreased approximately $0.5 million, or 1%, from $31.5 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to $31.0 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. The decrease was attributable to acquired customer-related intangible assets from historical business combinations becoming fully amortized during the year ended January 31, 2021, partially offset by amortization
expense associated with acquired intangible assets from business combinations that closed during the prior year, for which a full year of amortization expense is reflected in the current year.
Further discussion regarding our business combinations appears in Note 5, “Business Combinations and Divestitures” to our consolidated financial statements included under Item 8 of this report.
Other Expense, Net
The following table sets forth total other expense, net for the years ended January 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
* Percentage is not meaningful.
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Total other expense, net, increased by $57.9 million from $34.6 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to $92.5 million in the year ended January 31, 2021.
Interest income decreased from $5.6 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 to $2.8 million in the year ended January 31, 2021 due to a decrease in average interest rates, partially offset by interest earned on higher cash balances.
Interest expense decreased to $40.0 million in the year ended January 31, 2021 from $40.4 million in the year ended January 31, 2020 primarily due to lower interest rates on outstanding borrowings discussed in Note 7, “Long-term Debt” to our consolidated financial statements included under Item 8 of this report.
We recorded $0.1 million of net foreign currency gains in the year ended January 31, 2021 compared to $0.1 million of net foreign currency losses in the year ended January 31, 2020. Our foreign currency gains and losses are primarily the result of the fluctuation of the value of the U.S. dollar relative to other foreign currencies, mainly the euro, Israeli shekel, Brazilian real and British pound sterling.
In the year ended January 31, 2021, there were net losses on derivative financial instruments (not designated as hedging instruments) of $1.4 million, compared to $0.6 million of net gains on such instruments for the year ended January 31, 2020. The net losses in the current period are primarily the result of an unrealized loss associated with our interest rate swap contract, and to a lesser extent losses on contracts executed to hedge movements in the exchange rate between the U.S. dollar and the Singapore dollar.
In the year ended January 31, 2021, we recorded a non-cash Future Tranche Right revaluation loss of $56.1 million. This non-cash charge for the period relates to the mark-to-market adjustment of the Future Tranche Right (right of the Apax Investor to purchase Series B Preferred Stock at a future date), issued in connection with the closing of the Series A Preferred Stock on May 7, 2020. The change in fair value was primarily due to a significant increase in our stock price during the period, which increased the estimated fair value of the Future Tranche Right. Our diluted net income per common share for the year ended January 31, 2021 would have been $0.85 higher without this non-cash charge. The Future Tranche Right will be remeasured at each reporting period until the redemption feature is exercised in connection with the sale and issuance of the Series B Preferred Stock, which is expected to occur during our first fiscal quarter ending April 30, 2021. Following the closing of the Series B Preferred Stock issuance, the Future Tranche Right will cease to exist, and no further charges (or benefits) will be recorded. Please refer to Note 9, “Convertible Preferred Stock” and Note 13, “Fair Value Measurements” to our consolidated financial statements included under Item 8 of this report for additional information regarding the Future Tranche Right.
We recorded $2.1 million of other, net income in the year ended January 31, 2021 compared to $0.3 million of other, net expenses in the year ended January 31, 2020. The other, net income in the current period is due primarily to a $3.2 million unrealized gain from a fair value adjustment to a noncontrolling equity investment related to an observable price change in the period and a $0.6 million realized gain recognized upon the receipt of proceeds related to the partial sale of the same equity investment during the period, partially offset by fees in connection with our second amendment to the 2017 Credit Agreement. Further discussion of the second amendment to the 2017 Credit Agreement appears in Note 7, “Long-Term Debt” to our consolidated financial statements included under Item 8 of this report.
Provision for Income Taxes
The following table sets forth our provision for income taxes for the years ended January 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Year Ended January 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended January 31, 2020. Our effective income tax rate was 100.7% for the year ended January 31, 2021, compared to an effective income tax rate of 33.1% for the year ended January 31, 2020. For the year ended January 31, 2021, our effective income tax rate was higher than the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate of 21.0% primarily due to a non-deductible expense for the change in fair value of the Future Tranche Right of $11.8 million and the impact of U.S. taxation of certain foreign activities of $4.5 million. The effective tax rate is further impacted by the mix and levels of income and losses among taxing jurisdictions, changes in valuation allowances, and changes in unrecognized income tax benefits.
For the year ended January 31, 2020, our effective income tax rate was higher than the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate of 21.0% primarily due to the impact of U.S. taxation of certain foreign activities of $12.0 million, offset by a net tax benefit of $6.7 million recorded in relation to changes in unrecognized income tax benefits and other items as a result of an audit settlement in a foreign jurisdiction, the mix and levels of income and losses among taxing jurisdictions, and other changes in unrecognized income tax benefits.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary recurring source of cash is the collection of proceeds from the sale of products and services to our customers, including cash periodically collected in advance of delivery or performance.
On December 4, 2019, we announced that Valor Parent LP (the “Apax Investor”), an affiliate of Apax Partners (“Apax”) would make an investment in us in an amount of up to $400.0 million. Under the terms of the Investment Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2019, the Apax Investor initially purchased $200.0 million of our Series A Preferred Stock, which closed on May 7, 2020, with an initial conversion price of $53.50 per share. The initial conversion price represented a conversion premium of 17.1% over the volume-weighted average price per share of our common stock over the 45 consecutive trading days immediately prior to the signing date. Following the closing of the Series A Preferred Stock investment, Apax’s ownership in us on an as-converted basis was approximately 5.5% as of January 31, 2021. In accordance with the Investment Agreement, the Series A Preferred Stock did not participate in the Spin-Off distribution of the Cognyte shares described above and the Series A conversion price was instead adjusted to $36.38 per share based on the ratio of the relative trading prices of Verint and Cognyte following the Spin-Off. Based on the adjusted conversion price, Apax’s ownership in us on an as-converted basis is currently approximately 7.5%. In connection with the completion of the Spin-Off, the Apax Investor will purchase, subject to certain conditions, $200.0 million of Series B Preferred Stock in Verint, which is expected to occur during our first fiscal quarter ending April 30, 2021. The Series B Preferred Stock will be convertible at a conversion price of $50.25, based in part on our trading price over the 20 trading day period following the Spin-Off. Following the issuance of the Series B Preferred Stock, Apax’s ownership in us on an as-converted basis is expected to be between 12% and 13%.
Each series of convertible preferred stock will pay dividends at an annual rate of 5.2% until the 48-month anniversary of the closing of the Series A Preferred Stock investment, and thereafter at a rate of 4.0%, subject to adjustment under certain circumstances. Dividends will be cumulative and payable semiannually in arrears in cash. All dividends that are not paid in cash will remain accumulated dividends with respect to each share of convertible preferred stock. During the year ended January 31,
2021, we used the proceeds from the initial Apax investment to repay outstanding indebtedness, including borrowings under our revolving credit facility, that were used to fund a portion of our stock repurchase program (as described below under “Liquidity and Capital Resources Requirements”), and/or for general corporate purposes. We plan to use the proceeds from the Series B Preferred Stock investment to repay outstanding indebtedness and/or for general corporate purposes. Refer to Note 9, “Convertible Preferred Stock”, to our consolidated financial statement included under Part II, Item 8 of this report for more information regarding the Apax convertible preferred stock investment.
Our primary recurring use of cash is payment of our operating costs, which consist primarily of employee-related expenses, such as compensation and benefits, as well as general operating expenses for marketing, facilities and overhead costs, and capital expenditures. We also utilize cash for debt service, stock repurchases, to pay dividends on the convertible preferred stock, and periodically for business acquisitions. Cash generated from operations, along with our existing cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments, are our primary sources of operating liquidity, and we believe that our operating liquidity is currently sufficient to support our business operations, including debt service, capital expenditure requirements, and the payment of dividends on the convertible preferred stock.
On June 29, 2017, we entered into the 2017 Credit Agreement with certain lenders, and terminated a prior credit agreement. The 2017 Credit Agreement was amended on January 31, 2018 (the “2018 Amendment”), and again on June 8, 2020 (the “2020 Amendment”). Pursuant to the 2020 Amendment, we were permitted to effect the Spin-Off within the parameters set forth in the 2017 Credit Agreement, as amended, and our Notes are not deemed to be outstanding if such Notes are cash collateralized in accordance with the 2017 Credit Agreement, as amended, for purposes of the determination of the maturity dates of the 2017 Term Loan and the 2017 Revolving Credit Facility. On February 26, 2021, we deposited approximately $390.0 million of cash, representing the full principal amount of the Notes then outstanding as well as the final interest payment on the Notes due at maturity, into an escrow account maintained by JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as escrow agent, in satisfaction of the cash collateralization provisions of the 2020 Amendment. Further discussion of our 2017 Credit Agreement as amended, appears below, under “Financing Arrangements”.
We have historically expanded our business in part by investing in strategic growth initiatives, including acquisitions of products, technologies, and businesses. We may finance such acquisitions using cash, debt, stock, or a combination of the foregoing, however, we have used cash as consideration for substantially all of our historical business acquisitions, including approximately $74.1 million of net cash expended for business acquisitions during the year ended January 31, 2020. There were no business acquisitions during the year ended January 31, 2021.
We continually examine our options with respect to terms and sources of existing and future short-term and long-term capital resources to enhance our operating results and to ensure that we retain financial flexibility, and may from time to time elect to raise capital through the issuance of additional equity or the incurrence of additional debt.
A considerable portion of our operating income is earned outside the United States. Cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments, and restricted cash, cash equivalents, and bank time deposits (excluding any long-term portions) held by our subsidiaries outside of the United States were $348.1 million and $426.6 million as of January 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and are generally used to fund the subsidiaries’ operating requirements and to invest in growth initiatives, including business acquisitions. These subsidiaries also held long-term restricted cash and cash equivalents, and restricted bank time deposits of $15.7 million and $26.3 million, at January 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We currently intend to continue to indefinitely reinvest a portion of the earnings of our foreign subsidiaries, which, as a result of the 2017 Tax Act, may now be repatriated without incurring additional U.S. federal income taxes.
Should other circumstances arise whereby we require more capital in the United States than is generated by our domestic operations, or should we otherwise consider it in our best interests, we could repatriate future earnings from foreign jurisdictions, which could result in higher effective tax rates. As noted above, we currently intend to indefinitely reinvest a portion of the earnings of our foreign subsidiaries to finance foreign activities. Except to the extent of the U.S. tax provided on earnings of our foreign subsidiaries as of January 31, 2021, and withholding taxes of approximately $16.2 million accrued as of January 31, 2021, with respect to certain identified cash that may be repatriated to the United States, we have not provided tax on the outside basis difference of foreign subsidiaries nor have we provided for any additional withholding or other tax that may be applicable should a future distribution be made from any unremitted earnings of foreign subsidiaries. Due to complexities in the laws of the foreign jurisdictions and the assumptions that would have to be made, it is not practicable to estimate the total amount of income and withholding taxes that would have to be provided on such earnings.
The following table summarizes our total cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash, cash equivalents, and bank time deposits, and short-term investments, as well as our total debt, as of January 31, 2021 and 2020:
Capital Allocation Framework
As noted above, after cash utilization required for working capital, capital expenditures, required debt service, and the payment of dividends on the convertible preferred stock, we expect that our primary usage of cash will be for business combinations, the repayment of outstanding indebtedness, and to repurchase shares of common stock under our new stock repurchase program (subject to the terms of our 2017 Credit Agreement). Further discussion regarding this new stock repurchase program appears in the “Liquidity and Capital Resources Requirements” section below.
Consolidated Cash Flow Activity
The following table summarizes selected items from our consolidated statements of cash flows for the years ended January 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Our operating activities generated $253.8 million of cash during the year ended January 31, 2021, which was supplemented by $71.9 million of net cash provided by financing activities, and partially offset by $37.2 million of net cash used in investing activities during this period. Further discussion of these items appears below.
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities is driven primarily by our net income or loss, as adjusted for non-cash items, and working capital changes. Operating activities generated $253.8 million of net cash during the year ended January 31, 2021, compared to $237.9 million generated during the year ended January 31, 2020. Our improved operating cash flow in the current year was primarily due to a $2.7 million decrease in the non-financing portion of payments under contingent consideration arrangements, a favorable impact on operating cash flow from changes in operating assets and liabilities and the net effect of non-cash items, as compared to the prior period, partially offset by $8.9 million of higher combined interest and net income tax payments and a net loss for the year ended January 31, 2021 as compared to net income in the prior year.
Our cash flow from operating activities can fluctuate from period to period due to several factors, including the timing of our billings and collections, the timing and amounts of interest, income tax and other payments, and our operating results.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
During the year ended January 31, 2021, our investing activities used $37.2 million of net cash, including $40.3 million of payments for property, equipment, and capitalized software development and $30.2 million of net purchases of short-term investments, partially offset by a $31.2 million decrease in restricted bank time deposits during the period. Restricted bank time deposits are typically deposits, which do not qualify as cash equivalents, used to secure bank guarantees in connection with sales contracts, the amounts of which will fluctuate from period to period.
During the year ended January 31, 2020, our investing activities used $125.8 million of net cash, including $74.1 million of net cash utilized for business acquisitions, $52.3 million of payments for property, equipment, and capitalized software development costs, of which $4.0 million relates to the separation of our businesses as described above, and a $14.2 million increase in restricted bank time deposits during the period. Restricted bank time deposits are typically deposits, which do not qualify as cash equivalents, used to secure bank guarantees in connection with sales contracts, the amounts of which will fluctuate from period to period. The cash used by these investing activities was partially offset by $11.9 million of net maturities and sales of short-term investments and proceeds from settlements of our derivative financial instruments not designated as hedges.
We had no significant commitments for capital expenditures at January 31, 2021.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities
For the year ended January 31, 2021, our financing activities generated $71.9 million of net cash primarily due to $197.3 million of net proceeds from the issuance of preferred stock and $155.0 million of proceeds from borrowings under our revolving credit facility used to fund our stock repurchase program, partially offset by $207.2 million for repayments of borrowings and other financing obligations, $36.8 million of payments for share repurchases, $14.1 million for the financing portion of payments under contingent consideration arrangements related to prior business combinations, $13.0 million of payments to repurchase $13.1 million principal amount of our convertible notes, $5.4 million of distributions and dividends to the noncontrolling shareholders of two of our subsidiaries, $2.3 million of payments for debt-related costs, and $1.6 million of payments of Series A Preferred Stock dividends.
For the year ended January 31, 2020, our financing activities used $111.3 million of net cash, the most significant portions of which were $113.7 million of payments for share repurchases, $24.5 million for the financing portion of payments under contingent consideration arrangements related to prior business combinations, payments of $6.0 million related to deferred purchase price of a prior period business combination, $6.5 million for repayments of borrowings and other financing obligations, and $5.5 million of distributions and dividends to the noncontrolling shareholders of two of our subsidiaries. The cash used by these financing activities was partially offset by $45.0 million of proceeds from borrowings under our revolving credit facility used to fund our stock repurchase program.
Liquidity and Capital Resources Requirements
Based on past performance and current expectations, we believe that our cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to meet anticipated operating costs, required payments of principal and interest, dividends on convertible preferred stock, working capital needs, ordinary course capital expenditures, research and development spending, and other commitments for at least the next 12 months. Currently, we have no plans to pay any cash dividends on our common stock, which are subject to certain restrictions under our 2017 Credit Agreement.
Our liquidity could be negatively impacted by a decrease in demand for our products and service and support, including the impact of changes in customer buying behavior due to circumstances over which we have no control, including, but not limited to, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. If we determine to make additional business acquisitions or otherwise require additional funds, we may need to raise additional capital, which could involve the issuance of additional equity or debt securities or increase our borrowings under our credit facility.
On December 4, 2019, we announced that our board of directors had authorized a stock repurchase program whereby we were authorized to repurchase up to $300.0 million of common stock over the period ending on February 1, 2021. During the year ended January 31, 2021, we acquired approximately 613,000 shares of our common stock at a cost of $34.0 million under this program. During the year ended January 31, 2020, we acquired approximately 2,119,000 shares of our common stock at a cost of $116.1 million under this program, of which $2.8 million was settled in cash in February 2020. Total repurchases under the program, which expired on February 1, 2021, were $150.1 million.
On March 31, 2021, we announced that our board of directors had authorized a new stock repurchase program whereby we may repurchase up to a number of shares of common stock approximately equal to the number of shares to be issued as equity compensation during the fiscal year ending January 31, 2022. Repurchases are expected to be financed with available cash of up to 60% of our free cash flow during such period (as determined by management), subject to compliance with applicable laws, rules and regulations. Please refer to Note 19, “Subsequent Events”, for more information regarding this stock repurchase program.
Financing Arrangements
1.50% Convertible Senior Notes
On June 18, 2014, we issued $400.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 1.50% convertible senior notes due June 1, 2021 (“Notes”), unless earlier converted by the holders pursuant to their terms. Net proceeds from the Notes after underwriting discounts were $391.9 million. The Notes pay interest in cash semiannually in arrears at a rate of 1.50% per annum.
The Notes were issued concurrently with our public issuance of 5,750,000 shares of common stock, the majority of the combined net proceeds of which were used to partially repay certain indebtedness under a prior credit agreement.
The Notes are unsecured and are convertible into cash for the principal amount outstanding, with the incremental conversion value settled in shares. On February 26, 2021, we deposited approximately $390.0 million of cash, representing the full principal amount of the Notes then outstanding as well as the final interest payment on the Notes due at maturity, into an escrow account to cash collateralize the Notes. We currently expect to retire the Notes at or prior to maturity using our existing cash (including the amounts in escrow) and/or with proceeds from the issuance of new equity or debt.
As of January 31, 2021, the Notes had a conversion rate of 15.5129 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of Notes, which represented an effective conversion price of approximately $64.46 per share of common stock and would have resulted in the issuance of approximately 6,002,000 shares if all of the Notes were converted. Based on the closing market price of our common stock on January 31, 2021, the if-converted value of the Notes was approximately $56.2 million greater than the aggregate principal amount of the Notes. As a result of the Spin-Off, the conversion rate was adjusted to 24.6622 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount of Notes, which represents an effective conversion price of $40.55 per share of common stock and would result in the issuance of approximately 9,541,000 shares if all of the Notes were converted. Upon adjustment of the conversion ratio on the date of Spin-Off, the if-converted value of the Notes continued to be greater than the aggregate principal amount of the Notes.
During the year ended January 31, 2021, we repurchased $13.1 million principal amount of our Notes in open market transactions for an aggregate of $13.0 million in cash. As of January 31, 2021, the outstanding principal of the Notes was $386.9 million, which is classified within current maturities of long-term debt on our consolidated balance sheet as the Notes are due June 1, 2021.
Note Hedges and Warrants
Concurrently with the issuance of the Notes, we entered into convertible note hedge transactions (the “Note Hedges”) and sold warrants (the “Warrants”). Prior to the Spin-Off, the combination of the Note Hedges and the Warrants served to increase the effective initial conversion price for the Notes to $75.00 per share. Subsequent to the Spin-Off, as a result of the conversion rate adjustments, the Note Hedges and the Warrants will serve to increase the effective conversion price for the Notes to $47.18 per share. The Note Hedges and Warrants are each separate instruments from the Notes.
Note Hedges
Pursuant to the Note Hedges, we purchased call options on our common stock, under which we have the right to acquire from the counterparties up to approximately 6,205,000 shares of our common stock, subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments, at a price of $64.46, which equaled the initial conversion price of the Notes. As a result of the Spin-Off, on February 1, 2021, the call options on our stock were adjusted to allow us to purchase up to 9,541,000 shares of our common stock at a price of $40.55, which is equal to the adjusted conversion price of the Notes. Our exercise rights under the Note Hedges generally trigger upon conversion of the Notes and the Note Hedges terminate upon maturity of the Notes, or the first day the Notes are no longer outstanding. The Note Hedges may be settled in cash, shares of our common stock, or a combination thereof, at our option, and are intended to reduce our exposure to potential dilution upon conversion of the Notes. As we intend to settle the principal amount of the Notes in cash, the Note Hedges will be used to offset any potential dilution resulting from conversion if the market value per share of our common stock, as measured under the terms of the Note Hedges, is greater than the strike price of the Note Hedges. We paid $60.8 million for the Note Hedges, which was recorded as a reduction to additional paid-in capital. As of January 31, 2021, we had not purchased any shares of our common stock under the Note Hedges.
The Note repurchases executed during the year ended January 31, 2021 described above did not change the number of common shares subject to the Note Hedges. However, since a Note conversion is a prerequisite to exercising the call right under the Note Hedges, the number of common shares subject to call under the Note Hedges was effectively reduced since the repurchased Notes can no longer be converted.
Warrants
We sold the Warrants to several counterparties. The Warrants initially provided the counterparties rights to acquire from us up to approximately 6,205,000 shares of our common stock at a price of $75.00 per share. As a result of the Spin-Off, the Warrants now provide the counterparties rights to acquire from us up to approximately 9,541,000 shares of our common stock at a price of $47.18 per share. The Warrants expire incrementally on a series of expiration dates beginning in August 2021. At expiration, if the market price per share of our common stock exceeds the strike price of the Warrants, we will be obligated to issue shares of our common stock having a value equal to such excess. The Warrants could have a dilutive effect on net income per share to the extent that the market value of our common stock exceeds the strike price of the Warrants. Proceeds from the sale of the Warrants were $45.2 million and were recorded as additional paid-in capital. As of January 31, 2021, no Warrants had been exercised and all Warrants remained outstanding.
Credit Agreements
On June 29, 2017, we entered into the 2017 Credit Agreement with certain lenders, and terminated a prior credit agreement.
The 2017 Credit Agreement provides for $725.0 million of senior secured credit facilities, comprised of a $425.0 million term loan maturing on June 29, 2024 (the “2017 Term Loan”) and a $300.0 million revolving credit facility maturing on June 29, 2022 (the “2017 Revolving Credit Facility”), subject to increase and reduction from time to time according to the terms of the 2017 Credit Agreement. The majority of the proceeds from the 2017 Term Loan were used to repay all outstanding term loans under our prior credit agreement.
The maturity dates of the 2017 Term Loan and 2017 Revolving Credit Facility will be accelerated to March 1, 2021 if on such date any Notes remain outstanding, unless such outstanding Notes are cash collateralized pursuant to the 2020 Amendment to the 2017 Credit Agreement, as further described below.
The 2017 Term Loan was subject to an original issuance discount of approximately $0.5 million. This discount is being amortized as interest expense over the term of the 2017 Term Loan using the effective interest method.
Interest rates on loans under the 2017 Credit Agreement are periodically reset, at our option, at either a Eurodollar Rate or an ABR rate (each as defined in the 2017 Credit Agreement), plus in each case a margin.
We are required to pay a commitment fee with respect to unused availability under the 2017 Revolving Credit Facility at a rate per annum determined by reference to our Consolidated Total Debt to Consolidated EBITDA (each as defined in the 2017 Credit Agreement) leverage ratio (the “Leverage Ratio”).
The 2017 Term Loan requires quarterly principal payments of approximately $1.1 million, which commenced on August 1, 2017, with the remaining balance due on June 29, 2024. Optional prepayments of loans under the 2017 Credit Agreement are generally permitted without premium or penalty.
On January 31, 2018, we entered into the 2018 Amendment to our 2017 Credit Agreement, providing for, among other things, a reduction of the interest rate margins on the 2017 Term Loan from 2.25% to 2.00% for Eurodollar loans, and from 1.25% to 1.00% for ABR loans. The vast majority of the impact of the 2018 Amendment was accounted for as a debt modification. For the portion of the 2017 Term Loan which was considered extinguished and replaced by new loans, we wrote off $0.2 million of unamortized deferred debt issuance costs as a loss on early retirement of debt during the three months ended January 31, 2018. The remaining unamortized deferred debt issuance costs and discount are being amortized over the remaining term of the 2017 Term Loan.
On June 8, 2020, we entered into a second amendment to the 2017 Credit Agreement (the “2020 Amendment”). Pursuant to the 2020 Amendment, we were permitted to effect the previously announced Spin-Off of our Cyber Intelligence Solutions business within the parameters set forth in the 2017 Credit Agreement, as amended, and our Notes will not be deemed to be outstanding if such Notes are cash collateralized in accordance with the 2017 Credit Agreement, as amended, for purposes of the determination of the maturity dates of the 2017 Term Loan and the 2017 Revolving Credit Facility discussed above. On February 26, 2021, we deposited approximately $390 million of cash, representing the full principal amount of the Notes then outstanding as well as the final interest payment on the Notes due at maturity, into an escrow account in satisfaction of the cash collateralization provisions of the 2020 Amendment. Accordingly, the maturity dates of the term loan and revolving credit facility will not be accelerated to March 1, 2021 as a result of any Convertible Notes remaining outstanding on or after that date. Refer to Note 19, “Subsequent Events” to our consolidated financial statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this report for more information regarding the cash collateralization of our Notes.
We currently expect to retire the Notes at or prior to maturity using our existing cash (including the amounts in escrow) and/or with proceeds from the issuance of new equity or debt.
For loans under the 2017 Revolving Credit Facility, the margin is determined by reference to our Leverage Ratio. During the six months ended July 31, 2020, we increased borrowings under our revolving credit facility by $155.0 million to a total of $200.0 million, the proceeds of which were used to fund a portion of our stock repurchase program and for general corporate purposes. During the three months ended October 31, 2020, we repaid the $200.0 million of borrowings in full using cash on hand.
As of January 31, 2021, the interest rate on the 2017 Term Loan was 2.14%. Taking into account the impact of the original issuance discount and related deferred debt issuance costs, the effective interest rate on the 2017 Term Loan was approximately 2.34% at January 31, 2021. As of January 31, 2020, the interest rate on the 2017 Term Loan was 3.85%.
In February 2016, we executed a pay-fixed, receive-variable interest rate swap agreement with a multinational financial institution to partially mitigate risks associated with the variable interest rate on the term loans under our prior credit agreement, under which we paid interest at a fixed rate of 4.143% and received variable interest of three-month LIBOR (subject to a minimum of 0.75%), plus a spread of 2.75%, on a notional amount of $200.0 million (the “2016 Swap”). Although the prior credit agreement was terminated on June 29, 2017, the 2016 Swap remained in effect until September 6, 2019, and served as an economic hedge to partially mitigate the risk of higher borrowing costs under the 2017 Credit Agreement resulting from increases in market interest rates. Effective June 29, 2017, concurrent with the execution of the 2017 Credit Agreement and termination of the prior credit agreement, the 2016 Swap was no longer formally designated as a cash flow hedge for accounting purposes, and therefore subsequent settlements were reported within other income (expense), net on the consolidated statement of operations, not within interest expense. The 2016 Swap matured on September 6, 2019.
In April 2018, we executed a pay-fixed, receive-variable interest rate swap agreement with a multinational financial institution to partially mitigate risks associated with the variable interest rate on our 2017 Term Loan for periods following the termination of the 2016 Swap, under which we pay interest at a fixed rate of 2.949% and receive variable interest of three-month LIBOR (subject to a minimum of 0.00%), on a notional amount of $200.0 million (the “2018 Swap”). The effective date of the 2018 Swap was September 6, 2019, and settlements with the counterparty began on November 1, 2019 and occur on a quarterly basis. The 2018 Swap will terminate on June 29, 2024.
Prior to May 1, 2020, the 2018 Swap was designated as a cash flow hedge for accounting purposes and as such, changes in its fair value were recognized in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) in the consolidated balance sheet and were reclassified into the consolidated statement of operations within interest expense in the periods in which the hedged transactions affected earnings.
On May 1, 2020, which was an interest rate reset date on our 2017 Term Loan, we selected an interest rate other than three-month LIBOR. As a result, the 2018 Swap, which was designated specifically to hedge three-month LIBOR interest payments, no longer qualified as a cash flow hedge. Subsequent to May 1, 2020, changes in fair value of the 2018 Swap are being accounted for as a component of other income (expense), net. Accumulated deferred losses on the 2018 Swap of $20.4 million, or $16.0 million after tax, at May 1, 2020 that were previously recorded as a component of accumulated other comprehensive loss, will be amortized to interest expense in the statement of operations over the remaining term of the 2018 Swap, as the hedged interest payments occur.
Our obligations under the 2017 Credit Agreement are guaranteed by each of our direct and indirect existing and future material domestic wholly owned restricted subsidiaries, and are secured by a security interest in substantially all of our assets and the assets of the guarantor subsidiaries, subject to certain exceptions.
The 2017 Credit Agreement contains certain customary affirmative and negative covenants for credit facilities of this type. The 2017 Credit Agreement also contains a financial covenant that, solely with respect to the 2017 Revolving Credit Facility, requires us to maintain a Leverage Ratio of no greater than 4.50 to 1. At January 31, 2021, our Leverage Ratio was approximately 2.0 to 1. The limitations imposed by the covenants are subject to certain exceptions as detailed in the 2017 Credit Agreement.
The 2017 Credit Agreement provides for events of default with corresponding grace periods that we believe are customary for credit facilities of this type. Upon an event of default, all of our obligations owed under the 2017 Credit Agreement may be declared immediately due and payable, and the lenders’ commitments to make loans under the 2017 Credit Agreement may be terminated.
Contractual Obligations
Our principal commitments primarily consist of long-term debt, leases for office space and open non-cancellable purchase orders. We disclose our long-term debt in Note 7, “Long Term Debt,” our lease obligations in Note 16, “Leases,” and our unconditional purchase obligations in Note 17, “Commitments and Contingencies” to our consolidated financial statements included under Item 8 of this report. We have no current plans to lease significant additional office space and many of our existing lease agreements provide us with the option to renew.
As of January 31, 2021, our unconditional purchase obligations totaled approximately $203.8 million. Our purchase obligations are primarily commitments to vendors for the procurement of goods and services in the ordinary course of business, commitments with contract manufacturers, and data center hosting services. Agreements to purchase goods or services that have cancellation provisions with no penalties are excluded from these purchase obligations.
It is not our business practice to enter into off-balance sheet arrangements. However, in the normal course of business, we enter into contracts in which we make representations and warranties that guarantee the performance of our products and services. Historically, there have been no significant losses related to such guarantees.
Our consolidated balance sheet at January 31, 2021 included $21.3 million of non-current tax reserves, net of related benefits (including interest and penalties of $3.4 million) for uncertain tax positions. We do not expect to make any significant payments for these uncertain tax positions within the next 12 months.
Contingent Payments Associated with Business Combinations
In connection with certain of our business combinations, we have agreed to make contingent cash payments to the former owners of the acquired companies based upon achievement of performance targets following the acquisition dates.
For the year ended January 31, 2021, we made $20.1 million of payments under contingent consideration arrangements. As of January 31, 2021, potential future cash payments, and earned consideration expected to be paid, subsequent to January 31, 2021, under contingent consideration arrangements, total $30.6 million, the estimated fair value of which was $18.6 million, including $12.5 million reported in accrued expenses and other current liabilities, and $6.1 million reported in other liabilities. The performance periods associated with these potential payments extend through January 2022.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See also Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements included under Item 8 of this report for additional information about recent accounting pronouncements recently adopted and those not yet effective.