ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and the related notes appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
Company Overview
We are a preclinical-stage pharmaceutical company focused on becoming a global leader in pain management by developing and delivering innovative non-opioid and non-addictive pharmaceutical products using new drug delivery systems and technology. We are developing branded pharmaceutical product candidates with a focus on pain management by using cutting-edge technology to enhance patients’ quality of life.
We have exclusive global rights to develop, sell and export (among other rights) a proprietary patented nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory Topical Spray Film Delivery Technology for acute musculoskeletal pain (“DSF100” or “EpoladermTM”) and for chronic osteoarthritis of the knee (“OSF200”). We also have exclusive global rights to a proprietary patented injectable, long-acting, local anesthetic Liposomal Gel Technology for postoperative pain management (“LBL100” or “ProbudurTM”). Additionally, we have exclusive global rights to a proprietary patented MET that uses an intranasal device to deliver exogenous enkephalin for the management of acute and chronic pain, including pain associated with cancer (“Envelta”) and for the management of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (“PES200”). Enkephalins are pain-relieving pentapeptides produced in the body, and function to inhibit neurotransmitters in the pathway for pain perception, thereby reducing the physical impact of pain.
We believe the Topical Spray Film Delivery Technology could provide a pathway for additional proprietary spray formulations with strong adhesion and accessibility properties upon application, especially around joints and curved body surfaces. Our belief is based on, in part, a recent ACP/AAFP (American College of Physicians and American Academy of Family Practice) national guideline for the treatment of non-Low Back Musculoskeletal Pain which recommends topical NSAIDs as the first-line therapy in patients with acute pain from non-low back, musculoskeletal injuries. According to the new guideline, evidence shows that topical NSAIDs were among the most effective for pain reduction, physical function, treatment satisfaction, and symptom relief and were not associated with any significant side effects. The guideline was based on a systematic evidence review of the comparative efficacy and safety of non-pharmacological and pharmacological management of acute pain from non-low back, musculoskeletal injuries in adults in the outpatient setting and a systematic review of the predictors of prolonged opioid use.
Pursuant to the MedPharm Research and Option Agreement, MedPharm will conduct certain research and development activities of proprietary formulations incorporating certain MedPharm technologies and certain of our proprietary molecules. These proprietary molecules relate to indications which include, but are not limited to, treatment of estrogen levels, Alzheimer’s disease, dementia, Parkinson’s disease, neuropathic issues, and acute and chronic pain. Under the agreement, we were granted an option to obtain an exclusive, world-wide, sub-licensable, royalty bearing, irrevocable license to research, develop, make, market, commercialize, and sell any product utilizing MedPharm’s spray formulation technology. See “Material Agreements” below for more information concerning this research and option agreement.
We believe Envelta and PES200 could support the current effort among prescribers, regulators, and patients to seek non-addictive treatment options. We plan to utilize these delivery technologies to selectively develop a portfolio of patented 505(b)(2) and NCE candidates for commercialization.
While we are currently focused on the development of our non-opioid and non-addictive pain management pipeline of product candidates, we also plan on using our proprietary delivery technologies to develop anti-viral therapies as an anti-viral barrier to potentially prevent or reduce the risk or the intensity of viral infections in humans, including, but not limited to, influenza and SARS-CoV-2 (COVID 19). Activities related to our anti-viral therapies have not commenced. We plan to finance our anti-viral-related activities through the use of grants.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
We have based our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to clinical development expenses and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be appropriate under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully discussed in Note 2 to our audited financial statements contained within this Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our financial statements.
Research and Development Expenses
We rely on third parties to conduct our preclinical studies and to provide services, including data management, statistical analysis and electronic compilation. Once our clinical trials begin, at the end of each reporting period, we will compare the payments made to each service provider to the estimated progress towards completion of the related project. Factors that we will consider in preparing these estimates include the number of patients enrolled in studies, milestones achieved and other criteria related to the efforts of our vendors. These estimates will be subject to change as additional information becomes available. Depending on the timing of payments to vendors and estimated services provided, we will record net prepaid or accrued expenses related to these costs.
Fair Value of Common Stock and Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. The Company’s policy permits the valuation of stock-based awards granted to non-employees to be measured at fair value at the grant date rather than on an accelerated attribution basis over the vesting period.
Determining the appropriate fair value of share-based awards requires the use of subjective assumptions, including the fair value of the Company’s common shares, and for options, the excepted life of the option and expected share price volatility. The Company uses the Black-Scholes option pricing model to value its option awards. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of share-based awards represents management’s best estimates and involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if factors change and management uses different assumptions, share-based compensation expense could be materially different for future awards.
The expected life of options was estimated using the simplified method, as the Company has historical information to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns and post-vesting employment.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Operating expenses:
General and administrative expenses increased by $344,977, or 13%, to $2,904,104 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $2,559,127 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily the result of an increase of $795,497 in share-based compensation expense, offset by a decrease of $343,014 in professional fees and a decrease of $107,506 in other general and administrative expenses.
Research and development expenses increased by $668,874, or 107%, to $1,291,615 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $622,741 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily the result of: i) an increase of $617,236 related to pre-clinical studies, certain milestone payments, and pre-IND related work associated with Envelta during the year ended December 31, 2020, ii) an increase of $76,482 related mainly to pre-clinical work associated with Epoladerm, and iii) an increase of $86,525 in professional fees associated with all indications. The increase in research and development expenses was partially offset by a $105,122 decrease in pre-clinical work related to Probudur during the year ended December 31, 2020.
As a result of the foregoing, our loss from operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $4,195,719, compared to a loss from operations of $3,181,868 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other expenses:
Interest expense increased by $23,290, or 19%, to $147,934 for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $124,644 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily the result of an increase in the principal amount of outstanding notes payable of $228,960 due to RRD in the current year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, our principal source of liquidity was our cash, which totaled $54,796. To continue to grow our business over the longer term, we plan to commit substantial resources to research and development, pre-clinical and clinical trials of product candidates, other operations and potential product acquisitions and in-licensing. We have evaluated and expect to continue to evaluate a wide array of strategic transactions as part of our plan to acquire or in-license and develop additional products and product candidates to augment our internal development pipeline. Strategic transaction opportunities that we may pursue could materially affect our liquidity and capital resources and may require us to incur additional indebtedness, seek equity capital or both. In addition, we may pursue development, acquisition or in-licensing of approved or development products in new or existing therapeutic areas or continue the expansion of our existing operations. Accordingly, we expect to continue to opportunistically seek access to additional capital to license or acquire additional products, product candidates or companies to expand our operations, or for general corporate purposes. Strategic transactions may require us to raise additional capital through one or more public or private debt or equity financings or could be structured as a collaboration or partnering arrangement. Any equity financing would be dilutive to our stockholders. We have no arrangements, agreements, or understandings in place at the present time to enter into any acquisition, in-licensing or similar strategic business transaction.
Equity Financings
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued 139,220 shares of common stock for gross proceeds totaling $1,376,900. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we issued 63,203 shares of common stock for gross proceeds totaling $625,000.
On February 16, 2021, we closed an initial public offering of 1,800,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $10.00 per share, for net proceeds of $16.0 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and offering expenses. We intend to use substantially all of the net proceeds from the offering to fund research and development of its Epoladerm, Probudur, Envelta and MMS019 indications and other development programs, and for working capital and other general corporate purposes.
In conjunction with our initial public offering, we amended our Certificate of Incorporation to increase the number of shares of common stock and preferred stock we are authorized to issue to 100,000,000 and 10,000,000, respectively.
Debt
Promissory Notes
On October 1, 2018, we issued a promissory note, as amended (the “2018 Promissory Note”), pursuant to which we are obligated to pay Anthony Mack, our Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, the principal amount of $500,000 that bears interest at a rate of 11.19% per annum. The 2018 Promissory Note has a maturity date of the earlier of an Event of Default (as defined below) and January 15, 2022. As of December 31, 2020, the balance on the 2018 Promissory Note was $500,000, with accrued but unpaid interest of $125,887 As of December 31, 2019, the balance on the 2018 Promissory Note was $500,000, with accrued but unpaid interest of $74,692.
On January 15, 2019, we issued a promissory note, as amended (the “2019 Promissory Note”), pursuant to which we are obligated to pay Mr. Mack the principal amount of $500,000 that bears interest at a rate of 11.19% per annum. The 2019 Promissory Note has a maturity date of the earlier of an Event of Default (as defined below) and January 15, 2022. As of December 31, 2020, the balance on the 2019 Promissory Note was $500,000, with accrued but unpaid interest of $109,569 As of December 31, 2019, the balance on the 2019 Promissory Note was $500,000, with accrued but unpaid interest of $56,329.
On October 28, 2020, we amended our 2018 Promissory Note dated October 1, 2018 and 2019 Promissory Note dated January 15, 2019 with Anthony Mack, Chief Executive Officer and significant investor, to extend the maturity date to December 31, 2023 for both promissory notes. All other terms and conditions of these agreements remained unchanged.
In January 2021, the Company issued notes with an aggregate principal amount of $75,000 and $25,000, respectively. These notes were issued to Anthony Mack, Chief Executive Officer and significant investor of the Company for $75,000 and Christopher Chipman, Chief Financial Officer, for $25,000. These notes were subsequently repaid with proceeds from the initial public offering in February 2021.
RRD Note
On August 29, 2019, we issued the RRD Note with a maximum principal balance of $400,000 that bears interest at a rate of 10.00% per annum, which will automatically convert into equity or cash (at the holders’ option) upon a transaction where we sell our equity securities for at least $1.5 million (a “RRD Qualified Financing”). Our initial public offering constituted an RRD Qualified Financing. The RRD Note was amended on March 20, 2020 to increase the maximum principal balance to $600,000. In October 2020, we amended the RRD Note to extend the maturity date from September 30, 2020 to November 30, 2020, increase the principal amount from $434,260 to $493,480, extend the RRD Qualified Financing deadline from September 30, 2020 to November 30, 2020, and provide for the payment of all interest accrued from April 1, 2020 through November 30, 2020, which was $30,431. On November 30, 2020, we amended the RRD Note to extend the conversion date to December 31, 2020 and on December 31, 2020, we amended the RRD Note to extend the conversion date to January 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2020, the principal balance on the RRD Note was $493,480, with accrued interest of $34,544. In February 2021, we repaid in full the RRD Note, including accrued interest, utilizing net proceeds received from our initial public offering.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan (“PPP Loan”)
On May 4, 2020, we entered into a Promissory Note (the “PPP Note”) with PNC Bank as the lender (the “Lender”), pursuant to which the Lender agreed to make a loan to us under the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP Loan”) offered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (the “SBA”) in a principal amount of $72,100 pursuant to Title 1 of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”).
The PPP Loan proceeds are available to be used to pay for payroll costs, including salaries, commissions, and similar compensation, group health care benefits, and paid leaves; rent; utilities; and interest on certain other outstanding debt. The amount that will be forgiven will be calculated in part with reference to our full time headcount during the period ending October 31, 2020.
Cash Flows
Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating and financing activities:
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operations was $1,384,860 compared to $1,131,834 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash used in operations was primarily the result of the increase in net loss, offset by an increase in non-cash interest and stock-based compensation expense from 2019, and an increase in accounts payable and accrued expense balances.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $1,398,120 during the year ended December 31, 2020, attributable to $1,376,900 from the sale of 139,220 shares of our common stock and $72,100 in proceeds received from the issuance of a PPP Loan offset by payment of deferred costs related to our initial public offering of $50,880. Cash provided by financing activities was $1,125,000 during the year ended December 31, 2019, attributable to $625,000 from the sale of 63,203 shares of our common stock and $500,000 from the issuance of debt.
Future Capital Requirements
We expect that our existing cash will be sufficient to fund our operations, future research and development, and general working capital through approximately November 2022. However, it is difficult to predict our spending for our product candidates prior to obtaining FDA approval. Moreover, changing circumstances may cause us to expend cash significantly faster than we currently anticipate, and we may need to spend more cash than currently expected because of circumstances beyond our control.
Our expectations regarding future cash requirements do not reflect the potential impact of any future acquisitions, mergers, dispositions, joint ventures or investments that we make in the future. We have no current understandings, agreements or commitments for any material acquisitions or licenses of any products, businesses or technologies. We may need to raise substantial additional capital in order to engage in any of these types of transactions.
We expect to continue to incur substantial additional operating losses for at least the next several years as we continue to develop our product candidates and seek marketing approval and, subject to obtaining such approval, the eventual commercialization of our product candidates. If we obtain marketing approval for our product candidates, we will incur significant sales, marketing and outsourced manufacturing expenses. In addition, we expect to incur additional expenses to add operational, financial and information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our planned product commercialization efforts. We also expect to continue to incur significant costs to comply with corporate governance, internal controls and similar requirements applicable to us as a public company.
Our future use of operating cash and capital requirements will depend on many forward-looking factors, including the following:
● the initiation, progress, timing, costs and results of clinical trials for our product candidates;
● the clinical development plans we establish for each product candidate;
● the number and characteristics of product candidates that we develop or may in-license;
● the terms of any collaboration agreements we may choose to execute;
● the outcome, timing and cost of meeting regulatory requirements established by the DEA, the FDA, the EMA or other comparable foreign regulatory authorities;
● the cost of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing our patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
● the cost of defending intellectual property disputes, including patent infringement actions brought by third parties against us;
● costs and timing of the implementation of commercial scale manufacturing activities; and
● the cost of establishing, or outsourcing, sales, marketing and distribution capabilities for any product candidates for which we may receive regulatory approval in regions where we choose to commercialize our products on our own.
To the extent that our capital resources are insufficient to meet our future operating and capital requirements, we must finance our cash needs through public or private equity offerings, debt financings, collaboration and licensing arrangements or other financing alternatives. We have no committed external sources of funds. Additional equity or debt financing or collaboration and licensing arrangements may not be available on acceptable terms, if at all.
If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholder will experience dilution. Debt financing, if available, would result in increased fixed payment obligations and may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. Any debt financing or additional equity that we raise may contain terms, such as liquidation and other preferences that are not favorable to us or our stockholder. If we raise additional funds through collaboration and licensing arrangements with third parties, it may be necessary to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
Liquidity and Going Concern
We, since inception, have been engaged in organizational activities, including raising capital and research and development activities. We have not generated revenues and has not yet achieved profitable operations, nor have we ever generated positive cash flow from operations. There is no assurance that profitable operations, if achieved, could be sustained on a continuing basis. We are subject to those risks associated with any preclinical stage pharmaceutical company that has substantial expenditures for research and development. There can be no assurance that our research and development projects will be successful, that products developed will obtain necessary regulatory approval, or that any approved product will be commercially viable. In addition, we operate in an environment of rapid technological change and is largely dependent on the services of its employees and consultants. Further, our future operations are dependent on the success of the Company’s efforts to raise additional capital.
We incurred a net loss of $4,339,653 and $3,306,512 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and had an accumulated deficit of $10,647,844 as of December 31, 2020. We anticipate incurring additional losses until such time, if ever, that we can generate significant revenue from our product candidates currently in development. Our primary source of capital has been the issuance of debt and equity securities. In February 2021, we closed our initial public offering which raised net proceeds of approximately $16,000,000.
Management believes that current cash, including the proceeds from our initial public offering, is sufficient to fund operations and capital requirements through approximately November 2022. Additional financings will be needed by us to fund its operations, to complete clinical development of and to commercially develop its product candidates. There is no assurance that such financing will be available when needed or on acceptable terms.
Global Pandemic Outbreak
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic. The outbreak has become increasingly widespread in the United States, impacting the markets in which we operate. While the full impact of the pandemic continues to evolve, the financial markets have been subject to significant volatility that adversely impacts our ability to enter into, modify, and negotiate favorable terms and conditions relative to equity and debt financing initiatives. The uncertain financial markets, disruptions in supply chains, mobility restraints, and changing priorities as well as volatile asset values also affect our ability to enter into collaborations, joint ventures, and license and royalty agreements. The outbreak and government measures taken in response to the pandemic have also had a significant impact, both direct and indirect, on businesses and commerce, as worker shortages have occurred; supply chains have been disrupted; facilities and production have been suspended; and demand for certain goods and services, such as medical services and supplies, have spiked, while demand for other goods and services, such as travel, have fallen. The future progression of the pandemic and its effects on our business and operations are uncertain. We may face difficulties recruiting or retaining patients in our ongoing and planned preclinical and clinical trials if patients are affected by the virus or are fearful of traveling to our clinical trial sites because of the outbreak. We and our third-party contract manufacturers, CROs, and clinical sites may also face disruptions in procuring items that are essential to our research and development activities, including, for example, medical and laboratory supplies used in our clinical trials or preclinical studies, in each case, that are sourced from abroad or for which there are shortages because of ongoing efforts to address the outbreak. While expected to be temporary, these disruptions may negatively impact our results of operations, financial condition, and liquidity in 2021, and potentially beyond.
Significant Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We lease our office facilities under a month-to-month operating lease.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
No relevant recent accounting pronouncements noted.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (“JOBS Act”) was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, reduce certain reporting requirements for an “emerging growth company”. As an “emerging growth company,” we are electing to take advantage of the extended transition period afforded by the JOBS Act for the implementation of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we will comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that our decision not to take advantage of the extended transition period is irrevocable. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, as an “emerging growth company,” we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the chief executive officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply until the fifth anniversary of the completion of our initial public offering or until we no longer meet the requirements for being an “emerging growth company,” whichever occurs first.