Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation
Unless the context otherwise indicates or requires, references to (1) “the Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Vertiv Holdings Co, a Delaware corporation, and its consolidated subsidiaries following the Business Combination; (2) “GSAH” refers to GS Acquisition Holdings Corp prior to the Business Combination; and (3) “Vertiv” refers to Vertiv Holdings, LLC and its subsidiaries prior to the Business Combination. In addition, dollar amounts are stated in millions, except for per share amounts. You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a global leader in the design, manufacturing and servicing of critical digital infrastructure technology that powers, cools, deploys, secures and maintains electronics that process, store and transmit data. We provide this technology to data centers, communication networks and commercial & industrial environments worldwide. We aim to help create a world where critical technologies always work, and where we empower the vital applications of the digital world.
Key Developments
Below is a summary of selected key developments affecting our business since December 31, 2019:
•On February 7, 2020, the Company (formerly known as GSAH), consummated its previously announced business combination pursuant to that certain Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of December 10, 2019 (the “Merger Agreement”), by and among the Company, Vertiv, a Delaware limited liability company, VPE Holdings, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “Vertiv Stockholder”), Crew Merger Sub I LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and a direct, wholly-owned subsidiary of GSAH (“First Merger Sub”), and Crew Merger Sub II LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and a direct, wholly-owned subsidiary of GSAH (“Second Merger Sub”). As contemplated by the Merger Agreement, (1) First Merger Sub merged with and into Vertiv, with Vertiv continuing as the surviving entity (the “First Merger”) and (2) immediately following the First Merger and as part of the same overall transaction as the First Merger, Vertiv merged with and into Second Merger Sub, with Second Merger Sub continuing as the surviving entity and renamed “Vertiv Holdings, LLC” (collectively with the First Merger and the other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement, the “Business Combination”). The Business Combination was approved by GSAH shareholders on February 6, 2020, and on February 10, 2020, the Company announced the completion of the Business Combination. The Company began trading on the New York Stock Exchange beginning on Monday, February 10, 2020.
•On March 2, 2020, Vertiv Group and Holdings closed a new seven-year $2,200.0 term loan (the “Term Loan Facility”), the proceeds of which were used, together with the proceeds of certain borrowings under the ABL Revolving Credit Facility referred to below, to repay in full Vertiv Group’s Prior Term Loan Facility (as defined herein), to redeem in full the Prior Notes (as defined herein), and to pay certain fees and expenses (collectively, the “Refinancing Transactions”). In connection with the repayment of indebtedness from the Business Combination and the subsequent Refinancing Transactions, we recognized a $99.0 write-off of deferred financing fees and a $75.0 early redemption premium on Prior Notes. At December 31, 2020, the Term Loan Facility bears annual interest at LIBOR plus an applicable margin of 3.00% (3.15% all-in), which applicable margin is 1.0% lower than under the previous term loan. In addition, Holdings, Vertiv Group and certain of its subsidiaries closed an amendment on their $455.0 asset-based lending (ABL) revolving credit facility (the “ABL Revolving Credit Facility”, and together with the Term Loan Facility, collectively, the "Senior Secured Credit Facilities") which, among other changes, extended the maturity to March 2, 2025 and lowered the applicable margin on loans thereunder by 0.25%. Concurrently with the closing of the Term Loan Facility, Vertiv Group executed interest rate swaps on a notional amount of $1,200.0 in 2020, and $1,000.0 in the remaining tenor of the term loan. Combined with the economics of the term loan, this results in an all-in rate of approximately 4.1%. The swap transactions exchange floating term loan interest payments for fixed rate interest payments on the notional amount to reduce interest rate volatility.
•On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization designated the outbreak of the novel strain of coronavirus, known as COVID-19, as a global pandemic. Governments and businesses around the world have taken actions to mitigate the spread of COVID-19, including but not limited to, shelter-in-place orders, quarantines, significant restrictions on travel, as well as restrictions that prohibit many employees from going to work. To date, COVID-19 has surfaced in nearly all regions around the world and has impacted our sales channels, supply chain, manufacturing operations, workforce, and other key aspects of our operations. We responded to this changing
environment by introducing a work from home policy, safety and hygiene protocols, and monitoring changing government rules and regulations in the countries where we operate. The outbreak and preventive measures taken to help curb the spread had an adverse impact on our operations and business results for the year ended December 31, 2020. We continue to monitor the rapidly evolving situation and guidance from international and domestic authorities, including federal, state and local public health authorities and may take additional actions based on their recommendations; however, there are numerous uncertainties, including with respect to: the duration and severity of the pandemic, actions that may be taken by governmental authorities, including preventing or curtailing the operations of our plants, the potential impact on global economic activity, global supply chain operations, our employees, and our customers, supplier and end-markets, and other consequences that could negatively impact our business. We also face the possibility that government policies may become more restrictive especially if COVID-19 transmission rates increase in certain areas. As a result of these numerous uncertainties, we are unable to specifically predict the extent and length of time the COVID-19 pandemic will negatively impact our business. COVID-19 had an adverse impact on our operations and business results for the year ended December 31, 2020 which are discussed in the Results of Operations section below and we expect that COVID-19 could continue to have a materially adverse impact on our business, results of operations, financial condition, cash flows and liquidity for at least the duration of 2021.
•During Q3 2020, the Company announced a restructuring program that will drive $85.0 in annualized run-rate cost savings by 2023. This restructuring program will primarily focus on headcount efficiencies, footprint optimization and other various activities that will support execution of our strategic initiative to hold fixed costs constant as we grow. Restructuring activities commenced in the third quarter of 2020 and will extend through 2023.
•On December 17, 2020, the Company announced its plans to redeem for cash all of its outstanding public warrants to purchase shares of our Class A common shares. During Q4 2020, $156.5 of cash was generated from the exercise of 13.6 million public warrants. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, 9.3 million public warrants were exercised which generated cash proceeds of $107.5. Public warrants that remained unexercised at 5 p.m. New York City time on January 19, 2021 were no longer exercisable, and the registered holders of such unexercised public warrants are entitled to receive the redemption price of $0.01 per warrant. All public warrants were exercised or redeemed as of January 22, 2021.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
The following discussion compares our results for the year ended December 31, 2020, to the year ended December 31, 2019. The discussion comparing our results for the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2018 is included within “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation” included as Exhibit 99.2 in the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K/A, filed with the SEC on March 12, 2020.
Net Sales
Net sales were $4,370.6 in 2020, a decrease of $60.6, or 1.4 percent, compared with $4,431.2 in 2019. The decrease in sales was primarily driven from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. By offering, critical infrastructure & solutions sales decreased $9.8 including the negative impacts from foreign currency of $20.7. Services & spares sales decreased $13.3, offset by positive impacts from foreign currency of $0.1. Integrated rack solutions sales decreased $37.5 including the negative impacts from foreign currency of $3.9.
Excluding intercompany sales, net sales were $2,040.6 in the Americas, $1,368.4 in Asia Pacific and $961.6 in EMEA. Movements in net sales by segment and offering are each detailed in the Business Segments section below.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales were $2,896.9 in 2020, a decrease of $81.3, or 2.7 percent compared to 2019. The decrease in cost of sales was primarily due to the flow-through impact of lower net sales volume, manufacturing productivity, pricing and favorable mix. Gross profit was $1,473.7 in 2020, or 33.7 percent of sales, compared to $1,453.0, or 32.8 percent of sales in 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses (SG&A) were $1,008.4 in 2020, a decrease of $92.4 compared to 2019. SG&A as a percentage of sales were 23.1 percent in 2020, which represents a 1.7 percentage point decrease compared with 24.8 percent in 2019. The decrease in SG&A is primarily the result of fixed cost reduction actions in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including discretionary spending cuts.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
In connection with the repayment of indebtedness from the Business Combination and the subsequent Refinancing Transactions, we recognized a $99.0 write-off of deferred financing fees and a $75.0 early redemption premium on our $500.0 of 12.00%/13.00% Senior PIK Toggle Notes due 2022 (the “2022 Senior Notes”), $750.0 of 9.250% Senior Notes due 2024 (“2024 Senior Notes”) and $120.0 of 10.00% Senior Secured Second Lien Notes due 2024 (the “2024 Senior Secured Notes” and, collectively with the 2022 Senior Notes and 2024 Senior Notes, our “Prior Notes”).
Other Deductions, Net
Other deductions, net, were $251.8 in 2020, an increase of $105.7, compared with 2019. The increase is primarily due to global restructuring charges related to headcount efficiencies, footprint optimization and other activities that will support execution of the Company's strategic initiative to hold fixed costs constant. Additional increases were due to asset impairment charges and higher foreign currency losses.
Earnings Before Interest & Income Taxes
Earnings before interest & income taxes in 2020 was $39.5, a decrease in EBIT of $166.6 when compared to EBIT of $206.1 in 2020. On a segment basis, EBIT was $396.8 in the Americas, $168.3 in Asia Pacific, and $90.5 in EMEA. Corporate expenses were $616.1 in 2020, including the loss on extinguishment of debt of $174.0 and implementation of cost reduction initiatives, digital project implementation costs, costs that support global product platform development, and costs related to the merger with GSAH. See “Business Segments” below for additional details.
Interest expense
Interest expense, net, was $150.4 in 2020 compared to $310.4 in 2019. The $160.0 decrease is primarily due to the reduction in outstanding borrowings resulting from the business combination, and lower interest rates secured through the debt refinancing, as described in Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements, offset by an increase of $21.3 due to accretion on the Tax Receivable Agreement and $6.4 related to net settlement payments on the Company's interest rate swaps.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense was $72.7 in 2020 versus $36.5 in 2019. The effective rate in the year-to-date period is primarily influenced by the mix of income between our U.S. and non-U.S. operations, changes in valuation allowance for U.S. and non-U.S. jurisdictions, the GILTI provisions of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ("the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act"), remeasurement and legislative changes impacting the indefinite reinvestment liability, discrete changes in certain non-US valuation allowances and changes in the liability for uncertain tax positions. For the year ended December 31, 2019, income tax expense was primarily influenced by the impact of the GILTI provisions of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act and the mix of income between our U.S. and non-U.S. operations which was offset by changes in valuation allowance for U.S. federal purposes.
The 2020 tax expense is higher than 2019 primarily due to improved operating performance during 2020 where the company has profitable operations and larger discrete tax benefits recorded in the prior period.
Business Segments
The following is detail of business segment results for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Segment profitability is defined as earnings before interest and income taxes. Segment margin represents segment earnings expressed as a percentage of segment net sales. For reconciliations of segment net sales and earnings to the Company’s consolidated results, see Note 14 - "Segment Information", of the Company's consolidated financial statements. Segment net sales are presented excluding intercompany sales.
Americas
Americas net sales of $2,040.6 in 2020 declined $188.5, or 8.5 percent from 2019. Sales decreases were primarily driven by the COVID-19 pandemic and timing of critical infrastructure and solutions demand from Enterprise and Channel customers. By offering, net sales decreased for all offering categories, represented by declines in critical infrastructure & solutions of $151.4, services & spares of $27.2, and integrated rack solutions of $9.9. Americas net sales were negatively impacted by foreign currency by approximately $29.3.
Earnings before interest and taxes in 2020 was $396.8, an increase of $38.7 compared with 2019. Margin improved 3.3 percentage points primarily due to contribution margin improvements (mix, operations productivity, procurement, and pricing), and fixed cost management, offset by a net increase of $10.2 of restructuring charges and $8.7 in asset impairment charges.
Asia Pacific
Asia Pacific net sales were $1,368.4 in 2020, an increase of $90.4, or 7.1 percent from 2019. Increases were driven by strong sales in China data center, 5G projects and wind power, offset by weaknesses in India and the rest of Asia. By product offering category, critical infrastructure & solutions and service & spares increased by $98.3 and $10.0, respectively, offset by a decline in integrated rack solutions of $17.9. Additionally, Asia Pacific net sales were negatively impacted by foreign currency of approximately $3.6.
Earnings before interest and taxes were $168.3 in 2020, an increase of $15.8 compared with 2019. Margin declined 0.4 percentage points primarily due to an increase in restructuring charges of $6.5 and negative mix driven from large projects and wind power, offset by fixed cost management.
Europe, Middle East & Africa
EMEA net sales were $961.6 in 2020, an increase of $37.5, or 4.1 percent from 2019. Sales increases were primarily due to increased demand from large Colocation providers. By product offering category, critical infrastructure & solutions and service & spares increased by $43.3 and $3.9, respectively, offset by a decline in integrated rack solutions of $9.7. Additionally, Europe, Middle East & Africa net sales were positively impacted by foreign currency of approximately $8.4.
Earnings before interest and taxes in 2020 was $90.5, an increase of $25.7 compared with 2019. Margin improved 2.4 percentage points primarily due to fixed cost savings and contribution margin improvements (mix, operations productivity, and pricing), offset by a net increase in restructuring charges of $31.6.
Corporate and Other
Corporate and other costs include costs associated with our headquarters located in Columbus, Ohio, as well as centralized global functions including Finance, Treasury, Risk Management, Strategy & Marketing, IT, Legal, and global product platform development and offering management. Corporate and other costs were $616.1 and $369.3 in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $246.8 increase in corporate and other expenses in 2020 versus the comparable prior year was primarily due to the loss on extinguishment of debt of $174.0, as described in Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements, higher restructuring charges of $4.9, and asset impairment charges of $12.3.
Capital Resources and Liquidity
Our primary future cash needs relate to working capital, operating activities, capital spending, strategic investments and debt service. In connection with the consummation of the Business Combination on February 7, 2020, the Company used $1,464.0 of the proceeds from the Merger Consideration and PIPE Investment to pay down its existing debt. On March 2, 2020, Vertiv announced the closing of a new seven-year $2,200.0 Term Loan Facility, the proceeds of which were used to repay in full its Prior Term Loan Facility, redeem in full its Prior Notes and pay certain fees and expenses. Additionally, Holdings, Vertiv Group and certain of its subsidiaries closed an amendment on their $455.0 ABL Revolving Credit Facility which extended the maturity to March 2, 2025.
In addition to the cash inflow generated from the closing of the merger with GSAH, we believe that net cash provided by operating activities, augmented by long-term debt arrangements and the ABL Revolving Credit Facility, will provide adequate near-term liquidity for the next 12 months of independent operations, as well as the resources necessary to invest for growth in existing businesses and manage our capital structure on a short- and long-term basis. We expect to continue to opportunistically access the capital markets and financing markets from time to time. Access to capital and the availability of financing on acceptable terms in the future will be affected by many factors, including our credit rating, economic conditions, and the overall liquidity of capital markets. There can be no assurance that we will continue to have access to the capital markets and financing markets on acceptable terms.
At December 31, 2020, we had $534.6 in cash and cash equivalents, which includes amounts held outside of the U.S., primarily in Europe and Asia. Non-U.S. cash is generally available for repatriation without legal restrictions, subject to certain taxes, mainly withholding taxes. We are not asserting indefinite reinvestment of cash or outside basis for our non-U.S. subsidiaries due to the outstanding debt obligations in instances where alternative repatriation options other than dividends are not available. Our ABL Revolving Credit Facility provides for up to $455.0 of revolving borrowings, with separate sublimits for letters of credit, swingline borrowings and borrowings made to certain non-U.S. subsidiaries, and an uncommitted accordion of up to $145.0. At December 31, 2020, Vertiv Group and certain other subsidiaries of the Company had $434.2 of availability (subject to customary borrowing base and other conditions) under the ABL Revolving Credit Facility, net of letters of credit outstanding in the aggregate principal amount of $20.8, and taking into account the borrowing base limitations set forth in the ABL Revolving Credit Facility.
Long-Term Debt Obligations
See Note 5 - "Debt" of the consolidated financial statements of the long-term debt arrangements issued by the Company with certain of our subsidiaries named as guarantors or co-borrowers.
Summary Statement of Cash Flows
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
Net Cash provided by Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $208.9 in 2020, a $151.4 increase in cash generation compared to 2019. The increase in cash generation was primarily driven by lower cash interest as a result of our overall reduction in long-term debt and our first quarter debt refinancing as well as lower transformation-related spending.
Net Cash used for Investing Activities
Net cash used for investing activities was $45.7 in 2020 compared to net cash used for investing activities of $65.3 in 2019. The lower use of cash over the comparable period was primarily the result of reduced investment in capitalized software partly due from a strategic shift in the implementation of an ERP platform in the Americas segment.
Net Cash provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $140.7 in 2020 compared to $14.8 in 2019. The increase in cash generation was primarily the result of the exercise of public warrants of $156.5, offset by higher net repayments on the ABL Revolving Credit Facility revolving credit facility of $146.3 in 2020 compared to net repayments of $99.4 in 2019. The remaining net financing activities resulted from the reverse recapitalization and refinancing transactions. Borrowings on the new Term Loan Facility of $2,189.0, net of original discount, and proceeds from the reverse recapitalization of $1,832.5 were offset by the repayment of the Prior Term Loan Facility and Prior Notes as well as a payment made to Platinum Equity Advisors, LLC ("Advisors") in connection with the closing of the merger with GSAH.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The Company's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates and judgments related to these assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. We believe these estimates to be reasonable under the circumstances. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience, expected future outcomes, and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
The Company believes that the following accounting estimates are critical to our financial results:
Long-lived assets
Goodwill
The Company accounts for goodwill and other intangible assets acquired in a business combination in conformity with current accounting guidance which does not allow for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets to be amortized.
The Company reviews goodwill for impairment annually in the fourth quarter or when events and circumstances indicate an impairment may have occurred. The Company tests goodwill for impairment by comparing the estimated fair value of the reporting units to the related carrying value. If the fair value of the reporting unit is lower than its carrying amount, goodwill is written down for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds fair value. However, the loss recognized cannot exceed the carrying amount of goodwill. Reporting units are defined as either operating segments or one level below the operating segments for which discrete financial information is available and reviewed by the business management. The Company’s reporting units align with its reportable segments and are comprised of the Americas, Asia Pacific, and EMEA reporting units.
The Company makes various estimates and assumptions in determining the estimated fair value of each reporting unit using a combination of discounted cash flow models and valuations based on earnings multiples for guideline public companies and transactions in each reporting unit’s industry peer group, when externally quoted market prices are not readily available. Discounted cash flow models are highly reliant on various assumptions, including projected business results, long-term growth factors and discount rate. Management judgement is involved in estimating these variables, and they include inherent uncertainties since they are forecasting future events. The Company performs sensitivity analyses by using a range of inputs to confirm the reasonableness of the long-term growth rate and discount rate estimates. Additionally, the Company compares the indicated equity value to the Company’s market capitalization and evaluates the resulting implied control premium/discount to determine if the estimated enterprise value is reasonable compared to external market indicators.
The Company performed its annual goodwill impairment using the quantitative approach in the fourth quarter and concluded there was no impairment as of that date. The impairment test concluded that Americas, EMEA and Asia Pacific reporting units had fair values significantly in excess of their respective carrying amounts. The Company compared the total fair values of the reporting units to the Company’s market capitalization, to determine if the fair values are reasonable compared to external market indicators. The Company believes its use of significant assumptions within its valuation models are reasonable estimates of likely future events. Subsequent to this annual impairment test, no additional indications of an impairment were identified.
Significant assumptions inherent in the valuation methodologies include estimates of future projected business results (principally revenue and EBITDA), long-term growth rates, and the discount rate. The Company performed sensitivity analyses by using a range of inputs to confirm the reasonableness of long-term growth rate and discount rate estimates. Significant assumptions utilized in the impairment analysis performed during the fourth quarter of 2020 included the weighted-average cost of capital, ranging between 10.5% and 12.0%, and terminal growth rates of 3.0%. Specific to the EMEA reporting unit, certain risk factor components within the discount rate estimate were adjusted upward to factor business performance risk and forecasting risk in the future outlook. Based on sensitivity analysis performed on two key assumptions in the discounted cash flow model, a 1% decrease in the long-term growth factor assumption or a 1% increase in the discount rate assumption across each of the Company’s reporting units, including EMEA, would not have resulted in a fair value below the respective reporting units carrying value. For further information, see Note 4 - “Goodwill and Other Intangibles” of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Tangible assets
The cost of property, plant and equipment is depreciated by the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets. Machinery and equipment are depreciated principally over 10 to 12 years and buildings principally over 30 to 40 years. The Company reviews property, plant and equipment asset groups for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. The Company monitors these changes and events on at least a quarterly basis. Examples of events or changes in circumstances could include, but are not limited to, a prolonged economic downturn, current period operating or cash flow losses combined with a history of losses or a forecast of continuing losses associated with the use of an asset group, or a current expectation that an asset group will be sold or disposed of before the end of its previously estimated useful life. Recoverability is based upon projections of anticipated future undiscounted cash flows associated with the use and eventual disposal of the property, plant and equipment asset groups, as well as specific appraisals in certain instances. Reviews occur at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of cash flows associated with other property, plant and equipment asset groups. If the future undiscounted cash flows result in a value that is less than the carrying value, then the long-lived asset is considered impaired and a loss is recognized based on the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the estimated fair value. Various factors that the Company uses in determining the impact of these assessments include the expected useful lives of long-lived assets and the ability to realize any undiscounted cash flows in excess of the carrying amounts of such asset groups, and are affected primarily by changes in the expected use of the assets, changes in technology or development of alternative assets, changes in economic conditions, changes in operating performance and changes in expected future cash flows. Because judgment is involved in determining the fair value of property, plant and equipment asset groups, there is risk that the carrying value of these assets may require adjustment in future periods.
Total depreciation expense on property, plant and equipment for 2020, 2019 and 2018 was $60.3, $57.1 and $60.4, respectively.
Finite-lived intangible assets
Finite-lived intangible assets principally consist of certain customer relationships, developed technology, capitalized software and trademarks. These intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives. The cost of customer relationships is amortized principally over 10 to 13 years, developed technology over 5 to 10 years, capitalized software over 5 years, and trademarks over 5 to 10 years. The Company reviews finite-lived intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. The Company monitors these changes and events on at least a quarterly basis.
Amortization expense recognized on finite-lived intangible assets was $142.8 for 2020, $145.8 for 2019 and $156.6 for 2018.
Other indefinite-lived intangible assets
Other indefinite-lived intangible assets include certain trademarks. The Company reviews these intangible assets for possible impairment annually in the fourth quarter or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that carrying amounts may not be recoverable. If the carrying value of an individual indefinite-lived intangible asset exceeds its fair value, the asset is written down to its fair value and the amount of the write down is the impairment charge. Similar to its annual assessment for goodwill, the Company performs a quantitative test for impairment.
When a quantitative analysis is performed, the Company tests these assets using a “relief-from-royalty” valuation method to determine the fair value. Significant assumptions inherent in the valuation methodologies include, but are not limited to, future projected business results, growth rates, the discount rate for a market participant, and royalty rates.
In conjunction with the annual assessment of indefinite-lived intangible assets, the Company’s quantitative approach model did not indicate any impairment, as each indefinite-lived intangible asset’s fair value exceeded their carrying values.
The Company’s assessment of an impairment on any of these assets classified currently as having indefinite lives, including goodwill, could change in future periods if significant events happen and/or circumstances change that effect the previously mentioned assumptions. Significant assumptions inherent in the valuation methodologies include, but are not limited to, such estimates as future projected business results, growth rates, the weighted average cost of capital for a market participant, and royalty and discount rates. For further information, see Note 4 - “Goodwill and Other Intangibles” of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue recognition
The Company recognizes revenue from the sale of manufactured products and services when control of promised goods or services are transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. Control is transferred when the customer has the ability to direct the use of and obtain benefits from the goods or services. The majority of the Company’s sales agreements contain performance obligations satisfied at a point in time when control is transferred to the customer. Sales for service contracts, including installation, inventory with no alternative use and an enforceable right of payment upon customer termination and other discrete services, generally are recognized over time as the services are provided. Payments received in advance for service arrangements are recorded as deferred revenue and recognized in net sales when the revenue recognition criteria are met. Unbilled revenue is recorded when performance obligations have been satisfied, but the Company does not have present right to payment.
For agreements with multiple performance obligations, judgment is required to determine whether performance obligations specified in these agreements are distinct and should be accounted for as separate revenue transactions for recognition purposes. In these types of agreements we allocate sales price to each distinct obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis. The majority of revenue from arrangements with multiple performance obligations is recognized when tangible products are delivered, with smaller portions for associated installation and commissioning recognized shortly thereafter. Generally, contract duration is short term, and cancellation, termination or refund provisions apply only in the event of contract breach. These provisions have historically not been invoked.
Payment terms vary by the type and location of the customer and the products or services offered. Revenue from our sales have not been adjusted for the effects of a financing component as we expect that the period between when we transfer control of the product and when we receive payment to be one year or less. Sales, value add, and other taxes collected concurrent with revenue are excluded from sales. The Company records amounts billed to customers for shipping and handling in a sales transaction as revenue. Shipping and handling costs are treated as fulfillment costs and are included in costs of sales.
Income Taxes
The Company is subject to income taxes in the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Judgment in the forecasting of taxable income using historical and projected future operating results is required in determining the Company’s provision for income taxes and the related assets and liabilities. The provision for income taxes includes income taxes paid, currently payable or receivable, and deferred taxes. Under U.S. GAAP, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between financial reporting and tax basis of assets and liabilities and are measured using enacted tax rates and laws that are expected to be in effect when the differences reverse. Deferred tax assets are also recognized for the estimated future effects of tax loss and credit carryforwards. The effect on deferred taxes of changes in tax rates is recognized in the period in which the enactment date occurs. Valuation allowances are established when necessary on a jurisdictional basis to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts expected to be realized. Deferred taxes are not provided on the unremitted earnings of subsidiaries outside of the United States when it is expected that these earnings are indefinitely reinvested. In the event that the actual outcome of future tax consequences differs from the Company’s estimates and assumptions due to changes or future events such as tax legislation, geographic mix of earnings, completion of tax audits or earnings repatriation plans, the resulting change to the provision for income taxes could have a material effect on the Consolidated Statements of Earnings (Loss) and Consolidated Balance Sheets.
The recoverability of deferred tax assets and the recognition and measurement of uncertain tax positions are subject to various assumptions and judgment by Vertiv. If actual results differ from the estimates made by Vertiv in establishing or maintaining valuation allowances against deferred tax assets, the resulting change in the valuation allowance would generally impact earnings. Additionally, the positions taken with regard to tax contingencies may be subject to audit and review by tax authorities, which may result in future taxes, interest and penalties. Positive and negative evidence is considered in determining the need for a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets, which includes such evidence
as historical earnings, projected future earnings, tax planning strategies and expected timing of reversal of existing temporary differences.
In determining the recoverability of deferred tax assets Vertiv gives consideration to all available positive and negative evidence including reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future income, tax planning strategies and recent trends in financial results. Vertiv attaches the most weight to historical earnings as they are more objectively verifiable compared to forecasts. In evaluating the objective evidence that historical results provide, Vertiv generally considers three years of cumulative income or loss at the jurisdictional taxpayer level as an important factor.