ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of the Company's results of operations and financial condition should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto, included elsewhere in this report.
Executive Overview
The COVID-19 Pandemic
The global outbreak of the novel coronavirus ("COVID-19"), which was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization on March 11, 2020, has led to adverse impacts on the United States ("U.S.") and global economies and created significant uncertainty regarding potential impacts to Veritiv Corporation's ("Veritiv" or the "Company") operations, supply chain and customer demand. The COVID-19 pandemic has had widespread, rapidly evolving and unpredictable impacts on global societies, economies, financial markets and business practices. Federal and state governments have implemented measures in an effort to contain the virus, including physical distancing recommendations, travel restrictions, border closures, limitations on public gatherings, work-from-home recommendations, supply chain logistical changes and closure of non-essential businesses. Veritiv’s logistics and distribution operations have fallen within guidance provided by various government authorities on essential businesses, services and workplaces and therefore the Company has not experienced any closures of distribution centers. Veritiv serves customers across a broad range of industry sectors and geographies, with varying COVID-19 impacts. Primarily beginning in April 2020, unfavorable impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic have had a negative impact on the Company's financial results, including decreased sales activity across all segments. During the third and fourth quarters of 2020, the Company experienced improvements in sales activity in each of its reportable segments as compared to the second quarter of 2020, with the Packaging segment nearing pre-COVID-19 levels.
Veritiv's first priority remains the health and safety of its employees, customers and their families. The Company has taken steps to limit exposure and enhance the safety of its facilities for employees working to continue to supply vital products to its customers. In response to the pandemic, Veritiv initiated its Corporate Incident Response Team and initiated enhanced health and safety measures across its facilities. The Company modified practices at its distribution centers and offices to adhere to guidance from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and local health and governmental authorities with respect to social distancing, enhanced cleaning protocols and usage of personal protective equipment, where appropriate. In addition, the Company implemented global travel restrictions and work-from-home policies for employees who have the ability to work remotely.
Towards the end of the first quarter of 2020, the Company began to experience decreased sales activity in each of its reportable segments as compared to the corresponding prior year period. As a result, in April 2020, Veritiv took several actions to help mitigate the effects of the revenue decline and improve liquidity. These actions included (i) temporarily reducing salaries for senior leaders ranging from 10% to 50% through June 2020, (ii) temporarily reducing annual cash retainers for independent directors by 50% through June 2020, (iii) placing approximately 15% of its salaried workforce on temporary furloughs through mid-July 2020, (iv) adjusting its supply chain operations staff depending on volume at specific locations, (v) suspending its share repurchase program and (vi) reducing discretionary spending including planned capital expenditures. In July 2020, Veritiv took additional actions in response to the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic to enhance liquidity, including implementing cost-savings and cash preservation initiatives. These actions included the permanent reduction of the Company's U.S. salaried workforce by approximately 15% across all business segments and corporate functions, as further described under "2020 Restructuring Plan" below. In addition, during the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020 the Company invested $75.0 million of its cash in highly-liquid investments instead of paying down its long-term debt.
Veritiv's management expects that cash provided by operating activities and available capacity under the Asset-Based Lending Facility (the "ABL Facility") will provide sufficient funds to operate the business and meet other liquidity needs. As of December 31, 2020, Veritiv had cash and cash equivalents of $120.6 million and also had $341.9 million in available additional borrowing capacity under the ABL Facility. In April 2020, Veritiv refinanced and extended the maturity date of the ABL Facility to April 2025.
The current circumstances are dynamic and the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company's business operations, including the duration and impact on overall customer demand, cannot be reasonably estimated at this time. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts the Company's business, results of operations, access to sources of liquidity
and financial condition will depend on future developments. These developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, include, but are not limited to, the duration, spread and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company's employees, customers, suppliers and vendors and the remedial actions and stimulus measures adopted by local and federal governments, the availability, adoption and effectiveness of a vaccine and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume and be sustained. Even after the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided, the Company may experience an impact to its business as a result of any economic recession, downturn or volatility that has occurred or may occur in the future.
See Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors, for additional information on risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other Recent Events
2020 Restructuring Plan
During the second quarter of 2020, the Company initiated a restructuring plan in response to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on its business operations and the ongoing secular changes in its Print and Publishing segments. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company expanded the initial plan to further align its cost structure with ongoing business needs as the Company executes on its stated corporate strategy. The initial and expansion activities are collectively referred to as the "2020 Restructuring Plan."
The 2020 Restructuring Plan will result in (i) the reduction of the Company's U.S. salaried workforce by approximately 15% across all business segments and corporate functions, (ii) the closure of certain warehouse facilities and retail stores, (iii) adjustments to various compensation plans, (iv) repositioning of inventory to expand the Company's service radius and (v) other actions.
The Company estimates it will now incur total restructuring charges of between $77 million and $101 million in connection with the 2020 Restructuring Plan. These costs will consist of approximately (i) $52 million to $54 million in employee termination and other one-time compensation costs, (ii) $11 million to $29 million in real estate exit costs, (iii) $10 million in inventory related costs and (iv) $4 million to $8 million in other exit costs. In addition, the Company expects to incur approximately $4 million of inventory related costs to be reported in cost of products sold. The Company expects to substantially complete the 2020 Restructuring Plan by the end of 2021. Initial charges were incurred and recorded in June 2020. See Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information related to the Company's restructuring efforts.
Supply Chain Restructuring
On March 13, 2020, Veritiv announced that its Board of Directors authorized Company management to evaluate alternatives to restructure the Company’s integrated supply chain in an effort to facilitate better alignment with the supply chain needs of the Company’s customers by segment, with a view towards reducing complexity and lowering overall supply chain costs. Each of the Company’s reportable segments has different market dynamics and business and service needs. As a result, the Company is investigating whether an alternative supply chain structure would be more economically or operationally desirable. Moreover, to address the ongoing and rapid secular decline of the paper industry, management continues to explore opportunities to adapt the cost structure necessary to support the Print segment. In an effort to ensure all aspects of the Company can operate most effectively, the Company intends to review and evaluate restructuring options and what the optimal path forward will be. The Company plans to proceed with this review in a timely manner, but no decision has been made to pursue any specific course of action, and there can be no assurance as to what form the restructuring may take or whether this evaluation will result in any restructuring. Additionally, any restructuring may result in a significant charge to earnings in any given financial reporting period or periods.
Business Overview
Veritiv is a leading North American business-to-business full-service provider of value-added packaging products and services, as well as facility solutions, print and publishing products and services. Additionally, Veritiv provides logistics and supply chain management solutions to its customers. On August 31, 2017, Veritiv completed its acquisition of 100% of the equity interest in various All American Containers entities (collectively, "AAC"). AAC was a family owned and operated distributor of rigid packaging products, including plastic, glass and metal containers, caps, closures and plastic pouches. The Company operates from 125 distribution centers primarily throughout the United States ("U.S."), Canada and Mexico.
Veritiv's business is organized under four reportable segments: Packaging, Facility Solutions, Print, and Publishing and Print Management ("Publishing"). This segment structure is consistent with the way the Chief Operating Decision Maker, who is Veritiv's Chief Executive Officer, makes operating decisions and manages the growth and profitability of the Company's business. The Company also has a Corporate & Other category which includes certain assets and costs not primarily attributable to any of the reportable segments, as well as the Veritiv logistics solutions business which provides transportation and warehousing solutions. The following summary describes the products and services offered in each of the reportable segments:
•Packaging - Veritiv is a global provider of packaging products, services and solutions. The Packaging segment provides custom and standard packaging solutions for customers based in North America and in key global markets. We service our customers with a full spectrum of packaging product materials within the fiber-based, flexible and rigid categories. The business is strategically focused on higher growth industry sectors including manufacturing, food processing and service, fulfillment and internet retail, as well as niche sectors based on industry and product expertise. Veritiv's packaging professionals create customer value through supply chain solutions, structural and graphic packaging design and engineering, automation, workflow and equipment services and kitting.
•Facility Solutions - Veritiv is a global provider of hygiene and facility solutions products and services. The Facility Solutions segment sources and sells cleaning, break-room and other supplies such as towels, tissues, commercial cleaning chemicals, personal protective equipment and safety supplies, wipers, can liners, soaps and sanitizers, dispensers, sanitary maintenance supplies and equipment, hazard supplies, and shampoos and amenities primarily in North America. Through this segment, Veritiv manages a world class network of leading suppliers in most facilities solutions categories. Additionally, the Company offers total cost of ownership solutions with re-merchandising, budgeting and compliance reporting, inventory management and a sales-force trained to bring leading vertical expertise to the major North American geographies.
•Print - The Print segment sells and distributes commercial printing, writing, copying, digital, specialty products, graphics consumables and graphics equipment primarily in North America. This segment also includes customized paper conversion services of commercial printing paper for distribution to document centers and form printers. Veritiv's broad geographic platform of operations coupled with the breadth of paper and graphics products, including exclusive private brand offerings, provides a foundation to service national, regional and local customers across North America.
•Publishing - The Publishing segment sells and distributes coated and uncoated commercial printing papers to publishers, retailers, converters, printers and specialty businesses for use in magazines, catalogs, books, directories, gaming, couponing, retail inserts and direct mail primarily in the U.S. This segment also provides print management, procurement and supply chain management solutions to simplify paper and print procurement processes for Veritiv's customers.
Results of Operations, Including Business Segments
The following discussion compares the consolidated operating results of Veritiv for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Net Sales
•2020 compared to 2019: Net sales decreased by $1,313.8 million, or 17.2%. Primarily beginning in April 2020, the Company experienced decreased net sales in each of its segments due to the negative impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic. Declines in the Print and Publishing segments' net sales were responsible for approximately 70% of the total decline in net sales. However, net sales declines of 10.5% in the fourth quarter of 2020 and 17.3% in the third quarter of 2020 were sequential improvements as compared to the decline of 28.3% in the second quarter of 2020. See the "Segment Results" section for additional discussion. Management expects net sales during the first half of 2021 to be unfavorably impacted in each of the Company's reportable segments, with the possible exception of the Packaging segment, due to the continuing negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The duration and extent of the COVID-19 pandemic is highly uncertain and the magnitude of net sales declines is difficult to predict.
•2019 compared to 2018: Net sales decreased by $1,036.8 million, or 11.9%, primarily due to the Print and Publishing segments' decline in net sales as those segments were responsible for over 75% of the total decline in net sales. See the "Segment Results" section for additional discussion.
Cost of Products Sold (exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately below)
•2020 compared to 2019: Cost of products sold decreased by $1,166.0 million, or 18.8%, primarily due to the decline in net sales as previously discussed. Cost of products sold decreased at a faster rate than net sales due to improvements in pricing, as well as changes in both segment and customer mix. See the "Segment Results" section for additional discussion.
•2019 compared to 2018: Cost of products sold decreased by $949.5 million, or 13.3%, primarily due to the decline in net sales as previously discussed. See the "Segment Results" section for additional discussion.
Distribution Expenses
•2020 compared to 2019: Distribution expenses decreased by $79.4 million, or 15.6%. The decrease was primarily attributable to (i) a $39.1 million decrease in wages and temporary employee expenses, (ii) a $23.8 million decrease in freight and logistics expense, (iii) a $10.9 million decrease in equipment and facility rent expense and (iv) a $3.3 million decrease in maintenance costs. The decrease in wages and temporary employee expenses was primarily driven by actions taken by the Company in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including lowering headcount across the Company's distribution network. The decrease in freight and logistics expense was primarily driven by a decrease in third-party freight and fuel expenses mostly related to lower net sales volumes. The decrease in equipment and facility rent expense was primarily driven by consolidation of the Company's facilities.
•2019 compared to 2018: Distribution expenses decreased by $41.3 million, or 7.5%. The decrease was primarily attributable to (i) a $25.7 million decrease in freight and logistics expenses, primarily driven by a decrease in third-party freight and fuel expenses, (ii) an $18.7 million decrease in personnel expenses driven by lower wages, temporary employee expenses and multi-employer pension plan ("MEPP") withdrawal charges and (iii) a $3.5 million decrease related to replacing certain equipment leases, previously treated as operating leases (expenses included in distribution expense), with finance leases (expenses included in depreciation and amortization and interest expense, net), partially offset by a $7.4 million increase in storage expenses mostly during the first half of 2019, primarily due to replacing certain property leases, previously treated as financing arrangements (expenses included in depreciation and amortization and interest expense, net) with operating leases. Charges associated with withdrawals from MEPPs were $6.6 million in 2019 and $11.2 million in 2018.
Selling and Administrative Expenses
•2020 compared to 2019: Selling and administrative expenses decreased by $105.4 million, or 12.8%. The decrease was primarily due to (i) a $78.9 million decrease in personnel expenses, (ii) an $8.6 million decrease in professional fees expense, (iii) an $8.3 million net gain on the sale of property, (iv) a $3.9 million decrease related to the escheat audit expense in 2019 that did not repeat in 2020 and (v) a $2.5 million decrease in bad debt expense. The decrease in personnel expenses was primarily driven by (i) lower wages and temporary employee expenses primarily as a result of actions taken by the Company in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, (ii) a decrease in commission expenses driven by lower net sales and (iii) a decrease in travel and entertainment expenses in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by higher incentive compensation expenses.
•2019 compared to 2018: Selling and administrative expenses decreased by $44.3 million, or 5.1%. The decrease was primarily due to (i) a $30.6 million decrease in personnel expense, mainly driven by a decrease in commission and compensation expenses primarily related to the Print segment, (ii) a $12.2 million decrease in bad debt expense primarily related to the Print segment and (iii) an $8.7 million decrease in professional fees expense, partially offset by a $2.7 million decrease related to a facility sale net gain in 2018, a $1.4 million increase in insurance expense and a $1.2 million increase related to the escheat audit.
Depreciation and Amortization
•2020 compared to 2019: Depreciation and amortization expense increased by $4.2 million, or 7.9%, primarily due to increases in depreciation related to capitalized delivery equipment.
•2019 compared to 2018: Depreciation and amortization expense was flat as compared to 2018.
Integration and Acquisition Expenses
During the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, Veritiv incurred costs and charges to integrate its combined businesses. Integration expenses included internally dedicated integration management resources, retention compensation, information technology conversion costs, professional services and other costs to integrate its businesses. Additionally, Veritiv incurred integration and acquisition expenses of $0.8 million and $2.1 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively, related to the acquisition of AAC on August 31, 2017. The Company completed its integration efforts as of December 31, 2019. See Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information related to integration and acquisition expenses.
Restructuring Charges, Net
During the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred charges of $11.8 million and
$52.2 million, respectively related to the 2020 Restructuring Plan. The Company expects to substantially complete the 2020 Restructuring Plan by the end of 2021. Initial charges were incurred and recorded in June 2020.
For periods prior to 2020, Restructuring charges, net related primarily to Veritiv's Merger related restructuring of its North American operations intended to integrate the legacy xpedx and Unisource operations, generate cost savings and capture synergies across the combined company. Restructuring charges, net in 2018 also included impacts from its Print restructuring plan, which was completed in 2018. Restructuring charges, net included net (losses) or gains related to the sale or exit of certain facilities totaling ($0.4) million and $15.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The Company completed its Merger related restructuring efforts as of December 31, 2019.
See Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information related to the Company's restructuring efforts.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net in 2020 consisted of (i) $18.9 million of interest expense on the Company's ABL Facility, (ii) $3.0 million of finance lease interest expense, (iii) $2.1 million for amortization and write-off of deferred financing costs related to the ABL Facility and (iv) $1.1 million in miscellaneous interest expense. Interest expense, net in 2020 decreased by $13.0 million, or 34.1%, compared to 2019 primarily due to (i) lower average interest rates and (ii) a lower average balance on the ABL Facility. The decreased average balance was due to an increase in operating cash flow used to reduce the ABL Facility balance. See Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information related to the ABL Facility.
Interest expense, net in 2019 consisted of (i) $32.8 million of interest expense on the ABL Facility, (ii) $2.6 million for amortization of deferred financing costs related to the ABL Facility and (iii) $2.7 million in miscellaneous interest expense. Interest expense, net in 2019 decreased by $4.2 million compared to 2018 primarily due to a lower average balance on the ABL Facility. The decreased average balance was due to an increase in operating cash flow used to reduce the ABL Facility balance. See Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information related to the ABL Facility.
Other (Income) Expense, Net
•2020 compared to 2019: Other (income) expense, net, in 2020 was income of $20.3 million. This was a net improvement of $31.9 million, as compared to the same period in 2019. In December 2020, the Company and UWW Holdings, LLC (the "UWWH Stockholder") agreed to settle the Tax Receivable Agreement ("TRA"), which was entered into at the time of the Merger. The Company paid the UWWH Stockholder a total of $12.0 million in settlement of all past and future liabilities that would have been owed under the TRA and the parties agreed to a mutual release of claims under the TRA. As a result of the settlement, the Company recognized a favorable fair value adjustment of $20.1 million in other (income) expense, net in the fourth quarter of 2020. The remaining net improvement in 2020 was primarily due to the 2020 AAC contingent consideration expense being $12.1 million lower than the 2019 expense. The AAC contingent consideration liability was settled in March 2020. See Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information related to the AAC contingent consideration.
•2019 compared to 2018: Other (income) expense, net, in 2019 was expense of $11.6 million. This was a net other expense increase of $27.9 million, compared to the same period in 2018. In 2019 there was a $13.1 million increase in the fair value of the AAC contingent consideration as compared to a reduction of $12.3 million in 2018. See Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information related to the AAC contingent consideration. The remaining expense was primarily driven by changes associated with the TRA.
See Note 8 and Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information related to the TRA.
Effective Tax Rate
Veritiv's effective tax rates were 20.5%, (2.4)% and (53.9)% for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The difference between the Company's effective tax rates and the U.S. statutory tax rate of 21.0% primarily relates to the tax effect of TRA changes, state income taxes (net of federal income tax benefit), tax expense for stock compensation vesting, Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income, non-deductible expenses, tax credits and the Company's pre-tax book income (loss) by jurisdiction, and changes in the valuation allowance against deferred tax assets. In addition, the
Company's effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes a $2.4 million benefit related to the carryback of net operating losses under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act ("CARES Act").
The Company's effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2018 was impacted by the following discrete item:
•A $1.3 million expense recorded in 2018 for the accounting completed under the measurement period related to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the "Tax Act") under Staff Accounting Bulletin 118, totaling $31.5 million of cumulative effect of which $24.0 million is remeasurement of our deferred taxes and $7.5 million for the one-time transition tax. See Note 7 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details regarding the Tax Act.
The volatility of the Company's effective tax rate has been primarily due to both the level of pre-tax book income (loss) as well as variations in the Company's income (loss) by jurisdiction. The Company expects continued volatility of the effective tax rate for the foreseeable future due to potential fluctuations in the amount and source, including both foreign and domestic, of pre-tax book income (loss) by jurisdiction, potential deferred tax valuation allowance increases in certain jurisdictions, changes in amounts of non-deductible expenses, and other items that could impact the effective tax rate. Additionally, continued unfavorable impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic have had a negative impact on the Company's financial results during the year ended December 31, 2020. The negative impact on the Company's financial and operating results and other one-time costs further influence volatility. See further discussion of the COVID-19 pandemic impacts in the Executive Overview section above. See Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to the Company's income taxes.
Segment Results
Adjusted EBITDA (earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, restructuring charges, net, integration and acquisition expenses and other similar charges including any severance costs, costs associated with warehouse and office openings or closings, consolidation, and relocation and other business optimization expenses, stock-based compensation expense, changes in the LIFO reserve, non-restructuring asset impairment charges, non-restructuring severance charges, non-restructuring pension charges, net, fair value adjustments related to contingent liabilities assumed in mergers and acquisitions and certain other adjustments) is the primary financial performance measure Veritiv uses to manage its businesses, to monitor its results of operations, to measure its performance against the ABL Facility and to incentivize its management. Veritiv believes investors commonly use Adjusted EBITDA as a key financial metric for valuing companies. In addition, the credit agreement governing the ABL Facility permits the Company to exclude these and other charges in calculating Consolidated EBITDA, as defined in the ABL Facility. This common metric is intended to align shareholders, debt holders and management. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure and is not an alternative to net income, operating income or any other measure prescribed by U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("U.S. GAAP").
Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of Veritiv's results as reported under U.S. GAAP. For example, Adjusted EBITDA:
•Does not reflect the Company's income tax expenses or the cash requirements to pay its taxes; and
•Although depreciation and amortization charges are non-cash charges, it does not reflect that the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and the foregoing metric does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements.
Other companies in the industry may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than Veritiv does, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure. Because of these limitations, Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as a measure of discretionary cash available to Veritiv to invest in the growth of its business. Veritiv compensates for these limitations by relying both on the Company's U.S. GAAP results and by using Adjusted EBITDA for supplemental purposes. Additionally, Adjusted EBITDA is not an alternative measure of financial performance under U.S. GAAP and therefore should be considered in conjunction with net income and other performance measures such as operating income or net cash provided by operating activities and not as an alternative to such U.S. GAAP measures.
Due to the shared nature of the distribution network to support the Packaging, Facility Solutions and Print segments, distribution expenses are not a specific charge to each segment, but are instead allocated to each segment based primarily on operational metrics that correlate with changes in volume. Accordingly, distribution expenses allocated to each segment are highly interdependent on the results of other segments. Lower volume in any segment that is not offset by a reduction in
distribution expenses can result in the other segments absorbing a larger share of distribution expenses. Conversely, higher volume in any segment can result in the other segments absorbing a smaller share of distribution expenses. The impact of this at the segment level is that the changes in distribution expense trends may not correspond with volume trends within a particular segment.
The Company sells thousands of products. In the Packaging and Facility Solutions segments, Veritiv is unable to compute the impact of changes in sales volume based on changes in sales of each individual product. Rather, the Company assumes that the margin stays constant and estimates the volume impact based on changes in cost of products sold as a proxy for the change in sales volume. After any other significant sales variances are identified, the remaining sales variance is attributed to price/mix.
The Company approximates foreign currency effects by applying the foreign currency exchange rate for the prior period to the local currency results for the current period. We believe the elimination of the foreign currency translation impact provides better year-to-year comparability without the distortion of foreign currency fluctuations.
The Company believes that the decline in the demand for paper and related products is due to the widespread use of electronic media and permanent product substitution, more e-commerce, less print advertising, fewer catalogs and a reduced volume of direct mail, among other factors. This trend, which may have been accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic, is expected to continue and will place continued pressure on the Company's revenues and profit margins and make it more difficult to maintain or grow Adjusted EBITDA within the Print and Publishing segments.
Included in the following table are net sales and Adjusted EBITDA for each of the reportable segments and Corporate & Other:
* - not meaningful
See Note 16 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a reconciliation of net income (loss) as reflected on the Consolidated Statements of Operations to Adjusted EBITDA for the reportable segments.
Packaging
The table below presents selected data with respect to the Packaging segment:
The table below presents the components of the net sales change compared to the prior year:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net sales decreased $129.6 million, or 3.8%, compared to 2019. The net sales decrease was primarily attributable to decreased sales of films, tapes, corrugated products and bags that was in part attributable to the negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic beginning in April 2020, partially offset by favorable price/mix. Net sales increased 4.3% in the fourth quarter of 2020 from the 2019 fourth quarter, as compared to declines of 2.7% and 11.3% in the third and second quarters of 2020, respectively, from the corresponding quarters of the prior year. The sequential quarterly improvement in net sales was due in part to strong e-commerce and rigid packaging demand and improvements in sales to industrial manufacturing customers that had been previously impacted by partial or complete shutdowns due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Adjusted EBITDA increased $56.5 million, or 23.2%, compared to 2019. The increase in Adjusted EBITDA was primarily attributable to (i) cost of products sold decreasing at a faster rate than net sales, (ii) a $35.9 million decrease in selling and administrative expenses and (iii) a $10.1 million decrease in distribution expenses, partially offset by a decline in net sales. The decrease in selling and administrative expenses was primarily driven by (i) a $26.2 million decrease in personnel expenses, primarily driven by actions taken by the Company in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and (ii) a $5.5 million decrease in bad debt expense. The decrease in distribution expenses was primarily driven by (i) a $5.9 million decrease in freight and logistics expense, primarily driven by third-party freight and fuel expenses and (ii) a $4.5 million decrease in personnel expenses.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Net sales decreased $100.8 million, or 2.8%, compared to 2018. The net sales decrease was primarily attributable to decreased sales of films, corrugated products and food packaging.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased $3.2 million, or 1.3%, compared to 2018. The decrease in Adjusted EBITDA was primarily attributable to (i) a $12.2 million increase in selling and administrative expenses, (ii) a $4.8 million increase in distribution expenses and (iii) a decline in net sales, partially offset by cost of products sold decreasing at a faster rate than net sales. The increase in selling and administrative expenses was primarily driven by (i) an $8.3 million increase in personnel expenses associated with a reallocation of resources to support the Company's Packaging growth strategy and (ii) a $2.0 million increase in bad debt expense. The increase in distribution expenses was primarily due to an increase in facility rent mostly during the first half of 2019 related to replacing certain property leases, previously treated as financing arrangements (expenses included in depreciation and amortization and interest expense, net) with operating leases (expenses included in distribution expense).
Facility Solutions
The table below presents selected data with respect to the Facility Solutions segment:
The table below presents the components of the net sales change compared to the prior year:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net sales decreased $259.5 million, or 22.0%, compared to 2019. The net sales decrease was primarily attributable to (i) decreased sales of towels and tissues, food service products and can liners primarily driven by the negative impact on demand from the COVID-19 pandemic and (ii) the Company exiting a branded re-distribution business. The Company began exiting a branded re-distribution business in the third quarter of 2019 and substantially completed the exit by December 31, 2019. During 2020, net sales associated with this business decreased $96.7 million from 2019 and have historically been approximately 12% of the Facility Solutions segment's net sales. Beginning in April 2020 net sales were negatively impacted due to reduced customer demand resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic despite strong demand in the product categories of personal protective equipment and hygiene-related products. Negative impacts to customer demand have included business and school temporary closures, travel restrictions, constraints on large venues hosting sporting, conventions and entertainment events as well as extended work-from-home measures. In addition, net sales were lower due to strategic decisions to exit certain customer relationships that were not aligned with the Company's product and service capabilities.
Beginning in March 2020, the Facility Solutions segment experienced significant sales growth driven by increased demand for sanitizers and soap products, gloves and other personal protective products, and cleaning supplies due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Demand for these personal protective equipment and hygiene-related products was strong in the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020. However, as noted above, net sales for other Facility Solutions products were negatively impacted beginning in April 2020 due to overall reduced customer demand.
Adjusted EBITDA increased $8.5 million, or 25.7%, compared to 2019. The increase in Adjusted EBITDA was primarily attributable to (i) a $29.6 million decrease in distribution expenses, (ii) a $29.3 million decrease in selling and administrative expenses and (iii) cost of products sold decreasing at a faster rate than net sales, partially offset by a decline in net sales. The decrease in distribution expenses was primarily driven by (i) a $16.8 million decrease in personnel expenses, (ii) an $8.7 million decrease in freight and logistics expense, primarily driven by third-party freight and fuel expenses and (iii) a $2.7 million decrease in equipment and facility rent expense, primarily driven by consolidation of the Company's facilities. The decrease in selling and administrative expense was primarily driven by a $27.5 million decrease in personnel expenses, primarily driven by actions taken by the Company in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and a decrease in commission expense driven by lower net sales.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Net sales decreased $129.9 million, or 9.9%, compared to 2018. The net sales decrease was primarily attributable to decreased sales of food service products, towels and tissues and chemicals. The decrease in net sales was also due to strategic
decisions to exit certain customer relationships that were not aligned with the Company's product and service capabilities. During the 2019 third quarter the Company began exiting a branded re-distribution business which was substantially completed by year-end 2019. Net sales associated with this business decreased $53.7 million from 2018 and have historically been approximately 12% of the Facility Solutions segment's net sales.
Adjusted EBITDA increased $4.1 million, or 14.1%, compared to 2018. The increase in Adjusted EBITDA was primarily attributable to (i) a $17.9 million decrease in distribution expenses, (ii) a $10.2 million decrease in selling and administrative expenses and (iii) cost of products sold decreasing at a faster rate than net sales, partially offset by a decline in net sales. The decrease in distribution expenses was primarily driven by (i) an $8.0 million decrease in freight and logistics expenses, primarily driven by a decrease in third-party freight and fuel expenses, (ii) a $6.2 million decrease in personnel expenses and (iii) a $3.1 million decrease in facilities rent and other related expenses. The decrease in selling and administrative expenses was primarily driven by a $8.8 million decrease in personnel expenses.
Print
The table below presents selected data with respect to the Print segment:
The table below presents the components of the net sales change compared to the prior year:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net sales decreased $646.4 million, or 30.7%, compared to 2019. The net sales decrease was primarily attributable to (i) the continued secular decline in the paper industry in addition to managing risk in the segment through strategic adjustments to the Company's customer base and (ii) the negative impact on demand from the COVID-19 pandemic beginning in April 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased $9.4 million, or 21.8%, compared to 2019. The Adjusted EBITDA decrease was primarily attributable to a decline in net sales, partially offset by (i) a $42.9 million decrease in distribution expenses and (ii) a $37.2 million decrease in selling and administrative expenses. The decrease in distribution expenses was primarily driven by (i) a $19.3 million decrease in personnel expenses, (ii) an $11.4 million decrease in equipment and facility rent expense, primarily driven by consolidation of the Company's facilities, (iii) a $9.1 million decrease in freight and logistics expense, primarily driven by a decrease in third-party freight and fuel expenses and (iv) a $2.3 million decrease in maintenance expenses. The decrease in selling and administrative expenses was primarily driven by (i) a $33.2 million decrease in personnel expenses, primarily driven by actions taken by the Company in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and a decrease in commission expense driven by lower net sales and (ii) a $1.5 million decrease in professional fees expense.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Net sales decreased $572.1 million, or 21.4%, compared to 2018. The net sales decrease was primarily attributable to the continued secular decline in the paper industry as well as managing risk in the Print segment through strategic adjustments
to the Company's customer base and product offerings, partially offset by higher market prices.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased $20.9 million, or 32.7%, compared to 2018. The Adjusted EBITDA decrease was primarily driven by the decline in net sales and cost of products sold decreasing at a slower rate than net sales, partially offset by (i) a $41.0 million decrease in selling and administrative expenses and (ii) a $24.2 million decrease in distribution expenses. The decrease in selling and administrative expenses was primarily due to (i) a $26.0 million decrease in personnel expenses due to a decrease in commission expense driven by lower net sales and a decrease in headcount and commission expense related to the Print segment restructuring plan and (ii) a $13.1 million decrease in bad debt expense. The decrease in distribution expenses was driven by (i) a $12.4 million decrease in freight and logistics expenses, primarily driven by a decrease in third-party freight and fuel expenses and (ii) a $9.7 million decrease in personnel expenses.
Publishing
The table below presents selected data with respect to the Publishing segment:
The table below presents the components of the net sales change compared to the prior year:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net sales decreased $254.5 million, or 31.9%, compared to 2019. The net sales decrease was primarily attributable to (i) the continued secular decline in the paper industry, managing risks in the segment through strategic adjustments to the Company's customer base, and changes in order patterns due to customer consolidation, digital advertising and other factors as well as (ii) the negative impact on demand from the COVID-19 pandemic beginning in April 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased $8.6 million, or 40.2%, compared to 2019. The Adjusted EBITDA decrease was primarily attributable to a decline in net sales, partially offset by (i) cost of products sold decreasing at a faster rate than net sales and (ii) a $2.5 million decrease in selling and administrative expenses. The decrease in selling and administrative expenses was primarily driven by a $5.4 million decrease in personnel expenses, primarily driven by a decrease in commission expense driven by lower net sales and actions taken by the Company in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by a $3.6 million increase in bad debt expense.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Net sales decreased $221.2 million, or 21.7%, compared to 2018. The net sales decrease was primarily attributable to the continued secular decline in the paper industry as well as managing risk in the Publishing segment through strategic adjustments to the Company's customer base, partially offset by higher market prices.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased $3.2 million, or 13.0%, compared to 2018. The Adjusted EBITDA decrease was primarily attributable to the decline in net sales, partially offset by cost of products sold decreasing at a faster rate than net sales,
and a $5.0 million decrease in selling and administrative expenses which was primarily driven by a decrease in personnel expenses.
Corporate & Other
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net sales decreased $23.8 million, or 18.5%, compared to 2019. The net sales decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in volume of freight brokerage services including the negative impact on demand from the COVID-19 pandemic beginning in April 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased $15.3 million, or 8.3%, compared to 2019. The Adjusted EBITDA decrease was primarily driven by (i) a $10.4 million increase in selling and administrative expenses, (ii) cost of products sold decreasing at a slower rate than net sales and (iii) a decline in net sales. The increase in selling and administrative expenses was primarily driven by a $33.8 million increase in incentive compensation expenses driven by the Company outperforming incentive targets and a one-time discretionary payout for employees not participating in the annual incentive program for helping to ensure Veritiv's continued operations during the pandemic, partially offset by (i) a $13.9 million decrease in wages and temporary employee expenses, primarily driven by actions taken by the Company in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, (ii) a $7.7 million decrease in professional fees expense and (iii) a $2.5 million decrease in travel and entertainment expenses.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
Net sales decreased $12.8 million, or 9.0%, compared to 2018, driven by a decrease in volume of freight brokerage services.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased $6.3 million, or 3.5%, compared to 2018, primarily driven by (i) a $2.9 million increase in incentive compensation driven by strong cash flow results, (ii) a $1.4 million increase in casualty insurance losses and (iii) the decline in net sales.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The cash requirements of the Company are provided by cash flows from operations and borrowings under the ABL Facility. See Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the Company's debt position.
The following table sets forth a summary of cash flows:
Analysis of Cash Flows
2020 Cash Flows
The Company ended 2020 with $120.6 million in cash and cash equivalents, an increase of $82.6 million over the prior year-end balance. Cash flow from operations was $289.2 million in 2020 compared with $281.0 million in 2019. Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $8.2 million as compared to the prior year, primarily as a result of improvements in operating results partially offset by lower cash flows from operating assets and liabilities as decreases in cash flows from inventory, accounts receivable and supplier purchase incentives were offset by improvements in cash flows from accounts payable, deferred payroll taxes and restructuring accruals. The decrease in working capital was driven by the decline in net sales primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the continued secular decline in the paper industry. The factors driving cash flow from operating activities in 2020 were: (i) an $89.7 million decrease in inventories, (ii) a $56.5 million decrease in accounts receivable and related party receivable and (iii) net income of $34.2 million. Net cash used for investing activities decreased by $28.3 million as compared to the prior year, due to cash proceeds received from the sale of two properties and lower capital expenditures. The primary use of cash for financing activities during 2020 was $153.2 million to pay outstanding revolving loan borrowings under the ABL Facility, a net decrease of $107.3 million compared to the prior year. Additionally, beginning in the second quarter of 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company invested $75.0 million of its cash in highly-liquid investments instead of paying down its long-term debt.
2020 Special Financing Activities
During the first quarter of 2020, the Company repurchased 383,972 shares of its common stock at a cost of $3.5 million under its 2020 Share Repurchase Program, which has been suspended since March 27, 2020. See Part II, Item 5 of this report for additional information on the Company's 2020 Share Repurchase Program. The Company expects to finance any future repurchases from a combination of cash on hand, cash provided by operating activities or borrowings under the Company's ABL Facility.
During the second quarter of 2020, in conjunction with the amendment of the ABL Facility, the Company incurred and paid $3.4 million in new financing fees.
2020 Special Operating Activities
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company prepaid $8.1 million of restructuring costs for other one-time compensation, of which $1.1 million was expensed during the quarter and $7.0 million remained as a component of other current assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020. The Company is expected to make another payment of approximately $8.1 million during the fourth quarter of 2021.
Additionally, during the fourth quarter, the Company and the UWWH Stockholder agreed to settle the TRA. The Company paid the UWWH Stockholder a total of $12.0 million in settlement of all past and future liabilities that would have been owed under the TRA and the parties agreed to a mutual release of claims under the TRA. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company deferred the payment of $19.1 million in payroll taxes incurred through December 31, 2020, as provided by the CARES Act, until 2021 and 2022.
2019 Cash Flows
The Company ended 2019 with $38.0 million in cash, a decrease of $26.3 million over the prior year-end balance. Cash flow from operations was $281.0 million in 2019 compared with $15.0 million in 2018. The improvement in cash flow from operations was primarily due to a decrease in working capital, driven by the decline in net sales and management's focus on working capital improvement. The factors driving cash flow from operating activities in 2019 were: (i) a $252.3 million decrease in accounts receivable and related party receivable, (ii) a $139.7 million decrease in inventories and (iii) a $37.1 million decrease in other current assets. The increase in cash from operating activities was partially offset by: (i) a net loss, (ii) a $199.7 million decrease in accounts payable and related party payable and (iii) a $22.4 million decrease in other accrued liabilities. The primary uses of cash during 2019 were: (i) $260.5 million from a net decrease in revolving loan borrowings under the ABL Facility, (ii) $34.1 million for property and equipment additions, of which $22.7 million were ordinary capital expenditures and $11.4 million were integration-related capital expenditures and (iii) $20.0 million for payments under other contingent consideration.
For information regarding the Company's cash flows for 2018, refer to the "Liquidity and Capital Resources" section of Item 7 of the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Funding and Liquidity Strategy
On April 9, 2020, the Company amended its ABL Facility to extend the maturity date to April 9, 2025, reduced the aggregate commitments from $1.4 billion to $1.1 billion and adjusted the pricing grid for applicable interest rates. All other significant terms remained substantially the same.
The ABL Facility is comprised of U.S. and Canadian sub-facilities of $1.1 billion and $150.0 million, respectively. The ABL Facility is available to be drawn in U.S. dollars, in the case of the U.S. sub-facilities, and in U.S. dollars or Canadian dollars, in the case of the Canadian sub-facilities, or in other currencies that are mutually agreeable.
The ABL Facility provides for the right of the individual lenders to extend the maturity date of their respective commitments and loans upon the request of Veritiv and without the consent of any other lenders. The ABL Facility may be prepaid at Veritiv's option at any time without premium or penalty and is subject to mandatory prepayment if the amount outstanding under the ABL Facility exceeds either the aggregate commitments with respect thereto or the current borrowing base, in an amount equal to such excess. In conjunction with the amendment of the ABL Facility in 2020, the Company incurred and deferred $3.4 million in new financing costs, which are reflected in other non-current assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheets, and will be amortized to interest expense on a straight-line basis over the amended term of the ABL Facility.
Availability under the ABL Facility is determined based upon a monthly borrowing base calculation which includes eligible customer receivables and inventory, less outstanding borrowings, letters of credit and certain designated reserves. As of December 31, 2020, the available additional borrowing capacity under the ABL Facility was approximately $341.9 million. As of December 31, 2020, the Company held $12.1 million in outstanding letters of credit.
The ABL Facility has a springing minimum fixed charge coverage ratio of at least 1.00 to 1.00 on a trailing four-quarter basis, which will be tested only when specified availability is less than limits outlined under the ABL Facility. At December 31, 2020 the above test was not applicable and based on information available as of the date of this report it is not expected to be applicable in the next 12 months.
Under the terms of the ABL Facility, interest rates are based upon LIBOR or the prime rate plus a margin rate, or in the case of Canada, a banker's acceptance rate or base rate plus a margin rate. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, the weighted-average borrowing interest rates were 2.9%, 3.4% and 4.6%, respectively.
Veritiv's ability to fund its capital needs will depend on its ongoing ability to generate cash from operations, borrowings under the ABL Facility and funds received from capital market offerings. If Veritiv's cash flows from operating activities are lower than expected, the Company will need to borrow under the ABL Facility and may need to incur additional debt or issue additional equity. Although management believes that the arrangements currently in place will permit Veritiv to finance its operations on acceptable terms and conditions, the Company's access to, and the availability of, financing on acceptable terms and conditions in the future will be impacted by many factors, including the liquidity of the overall capital markets and the current state of the economy. To preserve liquidity, particularly during the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company may invest a portion of its cash in highly-liquid investments with original maturities to the Company of three months or less that are readily convertible into known amounts of cash. As of December 31, 2020, the Company held $75.0 million in these cash equivalents. The Company also elected to defer the payment of $19.1 million in payroll taxes incurred through December 31, 2020, as provided by the CARES Act, until 2021 and 2022.
Veritiv's management expects that the Company's primary future cash needs will be for working capital, capital expenditures, contractual commitments, share repurchases and strategic investments. The Company estimates it will incur total restructuring charges of between $77 million and $101 million in connection with the 2020 Restructuring Plan. In addition, Veritiv expects to incur approximately $4 million of inventory related costs to be reported in cost of products sold. Management expects that cash on hand, cash provided by operating activities and the available capacity under the ABL Facility will provide sufficient funds to operate the business and meet other liquidity needs.
All of the cash held by Veritiv's non-U.S. subsidiaries is available for general corporate purposes. Veritiv considers the earnings of certain non-U.S. subsidiaries to be permanently invested outside the U.S. on the basis of estimates that future domestic cash generation will be sufficient to meet future domestic cash needs and management's specific plans for
reinvestment of those subsidiary earnings. The table below summarizes the Company's cash and cash equivalent positions as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Veritiv does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020, other than leases that have not yet commenced and the letters of credit under the ABL Facility (see Note 3 and Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, respectively, for additional information on these items). The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a material current or future effect on its financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Overview of Contractual Obligations
The table below summarizes the Company's contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Finance lease obligations include amounts classified as interest.
(2) Amounts shown exclude contractual sublease rental income as it is not significant. In addition to the amounts shown in the table above, at December 31, 2020, the Company had committed to future obligations of approximately $10.2 million for a real estate operating lease that had not yet commenced.
(3) The ABL Facility will mature and the commitments thereunder will terminate after April 9, 2025. Interest payments included here were estimated using a
simple interest method based on the year-end December 31, 2020 ABL Facility outstanding balance of $520.2 million and its corresponding year-end
weighted-average interest rate of 2.9%. The 2025 payment amount shown above includes an estimated $520.2 million of principal balance.
(4) The deferred compensation obligation reflects gross cash payment amounts due for scheduled payments under the legacy Unisource plan and the Veritiv
Deferred Compensation Savings Plan.
(5) The MEPP withdrawal obligations include final gross unpaid charges for four withdrawals where determinations have been issued.
The table above does not include future expected Company contributions to its pension plans nor does it include future expected payments related to the partial and subsequent full withdrawal from the Western Pennsylvania Teamsters and Employers Pension Fund MEPP. Final charges for MEPP withdrawals are not known until the plans issue their respective determinations. As a result, these estimates may increase or decrease depending upon the final determination. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has not yet received the determination letters for the partial and subsequent full withdrawal from the Western Pennsylvania Teamsters and Employers Pension Fund. The Company expects that payments will occur over an approximate 20-year period, which could run consecutively. See Note 9, for additional information regarding these transactions. The table above also excludes the liability for uncertain tax positions, cash-based long-term incentive plans and unscheduled portions of the Veritiv Deferred Compensation Savings Plan, as the Company cannot predict with reasonable certainty the timing of future cash outflows associated with these liabilities.
See Note 3, Note 6, and Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information related to these obligations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires the Company to establish accounting policies and utilize estimates that affect both the amounts and timing of the recording of assets, liabilities, net sales and
expenses. Some of these estimates require judgment about matters that are inherently uncertain. Different amounts would be reported under different operating conditions or under alternative assumptions.
The Company has evaluated the accounting policies used in the preparation of the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes and believes those policies to be reasonable and appropriate. Management believes that the accounting estimates discussed below are the most critical accounting policies whose application may have a significant effect on the reported results of operations and financial position of the Company and can require judgments by management that affect their application. Although these estimates are based on management's knowledge of current events and actions it may undertake in the future, actual results may ultimately differ from these estimates and assumptions, particularly in light of the COVID-19 pandemic and its effects on the domestic and global economies. Estimates are revised as additional information becomes available. See the "Use of Estimates" section of Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the Company's estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Veritiv applies the five-step model to assess its contracts with customers. The Company's revenue is reported as net sales and is measured as the determinable transaction price, net of any variable consideration (e.g., sales incentives and rights to return product) and any taxes collected from customers and remitted to governmental authorities. When the Company enters into a sales arrangement with a customer, it believes it is probable that it will collect substantially all of the consideration to which it will be entitled in exchange for the goods or services that will be transferred to the customer. When management cannot conclude collectability is probable for shipments to a particular customer, revenue associated with that customer is not recognized until cash is collected or management is otherwise able to establish that collectability is probable. The Company has established credit and collection processes whereby collection assessments are performed and expected credit losses are recognized. As a normal business practice, Veritiv does not enter into contracts that require more than one year to complete or that contain significant financing components.
Revenue generally consists of a single performance obligation to transfer a promised good or service and is short-term in nature. Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to Veritiv's customers and in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods and services. Sales transactions with customers are designated free on board destination and revenue is recorded at the point in time when the product is delivered to the customer's designated location or when the customer has otherwise obtained the benefit of the goods, when title and risk of loss are transferred. Revenues from Veritiv's transportation services are recognized upon completion of the related delivery services and revenues from warehousing services are recognized over time as the storage services are provided. The Company considers handling and delivery as activities to fulfill its performance obligations. Billings for third-party freight are accounted for as net sales and handling and delivery costs are accounted for as distribution expenses.
Certain revenues are derived from shipments which are made directly from a manufacturer to a Veritiv customer. The Company is considered to be a principal to these transactions because, among other factors, it maintains control of the goods after they leave the supplier and before they are received at the customer's location, in most cases it selects the supplier and sets the price to the customer, and it bears the risk of the customer defaulting on payment or rejecting the goods. Revenues from these sales are reported on a gross basis on the Consolidated Statements of Operations and have historically represented approximately 35% of Veritiv's total net sales.
Additionally, Veritiv enters into incentive programs with certain of its customers, which are generally based on sales to those same customers. Veritiv follows the expected value method when estimating its retrospective incentives and records the estimated amount as a reduction to gross sales when revenue is recognized. Estimates of the variable consideration are based primarily on contract terms, current customer forecasts as well as historical experience.
Customer product returns are estimated based on historical experience and the identification of specific events necessitating an adjustment. The estimated return value is recognized as a reduction of gross sales and related cost of products sold. The estimated inventory returns value is recognized as part of inventories, while the estimated customer refund liability is recognized as part of other accrued liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
A customer contract liability will arise when Veritiv has received payment for goods and services, but has not yet transferred the items to a customer and satisfied its performance obligations. Veritiv records a customer contract liability for performance obligations outstanding related to payments received in advance for customer deposits on equipment sales and other sale arrangements requiring prepayment. Veritiv expects to satisfy these remaining performance obligations and
recognize the related revenues upon delivery of the goods and services to the customer's designated location within 12 months following receipt of the payment. Most equipment sales deposits are held for approximately 90 days and other sale arrangements requiring prepayment initially cover a 60-90 day period, but can be renewed by the customer.
See Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the Company's revenues.
Integration and Acquisition Expenses
The Company's Consolidated Statements of Operations include a line item titled, "Integration and acquisition expenses". Integration and acquisition expenses is not a defined term in U.S. GAAP, thus management must use judgment in determining whether a particular expense should be classified as an integration and acquisition expense. Management believes its accounting policy for integration and acquisition expenses is critical because these costs have been significant, generally involve cash expenditures, are not defined in U.S. GAAP, are excluded in determining compliance with the ABL Facility and are excluded in determining management compensation.
Integration and acquisition expenses include internally dedicated integration management resources, retention compensation, information technology conversion costs, professional services and other costs to integrate its businesses. See Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a breakdown of these expenses. Integration and acquisition expenses are differentiated from restructuring charges as restructuring charges primarily relate to contract termination costs, involuntary termination benefits and other direct costs associated with consolidating facilities and reorganizing functions.
Allowance for Credit Losses
The Company's allowance for credit losses reflects the best estimate of expected losses to the Company's accounts receivable portfolio determined on the basis of historical experience, current conditions, reasonable and supportable forecasts and specific allowances for known troubled accounts. In addition to leveraging the internally developed risk ratings and historical experience, the expected credit loss estimates are developed using quantitative analyses, where meaningful, and qualitative analyses to forecast the impact that external factors and economic indicators may have on the amount that the Company expects to collect. The allowances contain uncertainties because the calculation requires management to make assumptions and apply judgment regarding the customer's credit worthiness. Veritiv performs ongoing evaluations of its customers' financial condition and adjusts credit limits based upon payment history and the customer's current credit worthiness as determined by its review of their current financial information. The Company continuously monitors collections from its customers and maintains a provision for estimated credit losses based upon the customers' financial condition, collection experience and any other relevant customer specific information. Veritiv's assessment of this and other information forms the basis of its allowances.
If the financial condition of Veritiv's customers deteriorates, resulting in an inability to make required payments to the Company, or if economic conditions deteriorate, additional allowances may be deemed appropriate or required. If the allowance for doubtful accounts changed by 0.1% of gross billed receivables, reflecting either an increase or decrease in expected future write-offs, the impact to consolidated pre-tax income would have been approximately $0.9 million.
See Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the Company's credit losses.
Income Taxes
The Company’s determination of the provision for income taxes requires significant judgment, the use of estimates and the interpretation and application of complex tax laws. The provision for income taxes primarily reflects a combination of income earned and taxed in the various U.S. federal and state, as well as foreign, jurisdictions. Tax law changes, increases or decreases in book versus tax basis differences, accruals or adjustments of accruals for unrecognized tax benefits or valuation allowances, and the change in the mix of earnings from these taxing jurisdictions all affect the overall effective tax rate. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic may change the mix of earnings by jurisdiction and has increased the risk that operating losses may occur within certain jurisdictions that could lead to the recognition of valuation allowances against certain deferred tax assets in the future, if these losses are prolonged beyond current expectations. This would negatively impact Veritiv’s
income tax expense, net earnings, and balance sheet.
Employee Benefit Plans
Veritiv sponsors defined benefit plans and Supplemental Executive Retirement Plans in the U.S. and Canada. These plans were frozen prior to the Merger with the exception of employees covered by certain collective bargaining agreements. See Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding these plans.
Management is required to make certain critical estimates related to actuarial assumptions used to determine the Company's pension expense and related obligation. The Company believes the most critical assumptions are related to (i) the discount rate used to determine the present value of the liabilities and (ii) the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. All of the actuarial assumptions are reviewed annually, or more frequently when changes in circumstances warrant a reassessment. Changes in these assumptions could have a material impact on the measurement of pension expense and the related obligation.
At each measurement date, management determines the discount rate by reference to rates of high-quality, long-term corporate bonds that mature in a pattern similar to the future payments anticipated to be made under the plans. As of December 31, 2020, the weighted-average discount rates used to compute the benefit obligations were 2.15% and 2.50% for the U.S. and Canadian plans, respectively.
The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is based upon the long-term outlook of the investment strategy as well as historical returns and volatilities for each asset class. Veritiv also reviews current levels of interest rates and inflation to assess the reasonableness of the long-term rates. The Company's pension plan investment objective is to ensure all of its plans have sufficient funds to meet their benefit obligations when they become due. As a result, the Company periodically revises asset allocations, where appropriate, to improve returns and manage risk. The weighted-average expected long-term rates of return used to calculate the pension expense for the year ended 2020 were 7.15% and 5.25% for the U.S. and Canadian plans, respectively.
The following illustrates the effects of a 1% change in the discount rate or return on plan assets on the 2020 net periodic pension cost and projected benefit obligation (in millions):
See Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a comprehensive discussion of Veritiv's pension and postretirement benefit expense, including a discussion of the actuarial assumptions, the policy for recognizing the associated gains and losses and the method used to estimate service and interest cost components.
Leases
The Company determines if an arrangement is a lease at lease inception and reviews lease arrangements for finance or operating lease classification at their commencement date. Operating leases are reported as part of other non-current assets, other accrued liabilities and other non-current liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Finance leases are reported as part of property and equipment and debt obligations on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The Company does not include leases with a term of twelve months or less on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. In order to value the right-of-use ("ROU") assets and related liabilities, the Company makes certain estimates and assumptions related to establishing the lease term, discount rates and variable lease payments (e.g., rent escalations tied to changes in the Consumer Price Index). The exercise of any lease renewal or asset purchase option is at the Company's sole discretion. The lease term for all of the Company's leases includes the noncancelable period of the lease and any periods covered by renewal options that the Company is reasonably certain to exercise. Certain leases include rent escalations pre-set in the agreements, which are factored into the lease payment stream. Similar to a variable lease payment, certain delivery equipment leases include a provision for an amount the Company may be required to pay at the end of the lease for any residual value deficiency incurred by the lessor upon resale of the underlying
asset. The Company uses the implicit rate of interest when it is available; however, as most of the Company's leases do not provide an implicit rate of interest, the Company uses its incremental borrowing rate based on information available at the lease commencement date in determining the discounted value of the lease payments. Lease expense and depreciation expense are recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term, or for a finance lease, over the shorter of the life of the underlying asset or the lease term.
The Company’s decisions to cease operations in certain warehouse facilities and retail locations leads to different accounting treatment depending upon whether the leased properties are considered abandoned versus properties that the Company has the intent and ability to sublease. Abandoned ROU assets are assessed for impairment based on estimates of undiscounted operating cash flows until the anticipated cease-use date and any remaining lease expense is accelerated through the anticipated cease-use date. Leases for which the Company has the intent and ability to sublease are assessed for impairment and any remaining ROU assets are amortized over the shorter of the remaining useful lives of the assets or lease term. The intent and practical ability to sublease and estimates of future cash flows attributable to the sublease are assessed considering the terms of the lease agreement, certain market conditions, remaining lease terms and the time required to sublease the facility, and other factors.
See Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the Company's leases.
Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets and Goodwill
A long-lived asset is potentially impaired when the asset's carrying amount exceeds its expected future undiscounted cash flows. When this situation occurs, the Company must estimate the fair value of the long-lived asset and reduce the carrying amount to the fair value if it is less than the carrying amount. A goodwill impairment exists when the carrying amount of goodwill exceeds its fair value. Assessments of possible impairments of long-lived assets and goodwill are made annually in the fourth quarter, and when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable through future operations. The amount and timing of any impairment charges based on these assessments require the estimation of future cash flows and the fair market value of the related assets based on management's best estimates of certain key factors. These key factors include future selling prices and volumes, operating, inventory, energy and freight costs and various other projected operating economic factors. The calculation of lease impairment charges requires significant judgments and estimates, including estimated sublease rentals, discount rates and future cash flows based on the Company's experience and knowledge of the market in which the property is located, previous efforts to dispose of similar assets and an assessment of current market conditions. As these key factors change in future periods, the Company will update its impairment analyses to reflect the latest estimates and projections.
Goodwill is reviewed for impairment on a reporting unit basis. The testing of goodwill for possible impairment is performed by completing a Step 0 test or electing to by-pass the Step 0 test and comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying value, including goodwill. The Step 0 test utilizes qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value. Qualitative factors include: macroeconomic conditions; industry and market considerations; overall financial performance and cost factors to determine whether a reporting unit is at risk for goodwill impairment. In the event a reporting unit fails the Step 0 goodwill impairment test, it is necessary to move forward with a comparison of the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying value, including goodwill. If the fair value exceeds the carrying value, goodwill is not considered to be impaired. If the fair value of a reporting unit is below the carrying value, a goodwill impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit's fair value; however, any loss recognized will not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. In calculating the estimated fair value of its reporting units, Veritiv uses an income approach that utilizes discounted cash flows and requires management to make significant assumptions and estimates related to the forecasts of future revenues, profit margins and discount rates. Subsequent changes in economic and operating conditions can affect these assumptions and could result in additional interim testing and goodwill impairment charges in future periods. Upon completion, the resulting estimated fair values are then analyzed for reasonableness by comparing them to earnings multiples for historic industry business transactions and by comparing the sum of the reporting unit fair values to the fair value of the Company as a whole.
Intangible assets acquired in a business combination are recorded at fair value. The Company's intangible assets may include customer relationships, trademarks and trade names and non-compete agreements. Intangible assets with finite useful lives are subsequently amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets.
See Note 1 and Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the Company's long-lived assets, goodwill and other intangible assets.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding recently issued accounting standards.