ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read this discussion together with the financial statements, related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains assumptions, estimates and other forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties, including those discussed under “Risk Factors,” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. To the extent that this Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements regarding the financial condition, operating results, business prospects or any other aspect of our Company, please be advised that our actual financial condition, operating results and business performance may differ materially from that projected or estimated by us in forward-looking statements and thus you should not unduly rely on these statements.
Explanatory Note
All references to shares of our common stock contained herein have been adjusted to reflect a 1-for-500 reverse stock split which was completed and became effective on January 13, 2021.
Overview
Since August 1, 2018, we, through our wholly-owned subsidiary, Verus Foods, an international supplier of consumer food products, have been focused on international consumer packaged goods, foodstuff distribution and wholesale trade. Our fine food products are sourced in the United States and exported internationally. We market consumer food products under our own brand primarily to supermarkets, hotels and other members of the wholesale trade. Initially, we focused on frozen foods, particularly meat, poultry, seafood, vegetables, and french fries with beverages as a second vertical, and during 2018, we added cold-storage facilities and began seeking international sources for fresh fruit, produce and similar perishables, as well as other consumer packaged foodstuffs with the goal to create vertical farm-to-market operations. We have also begun to explore new CPG non-food categories, such as cosmetic and fragrances, for future product offerings.
We currently have a significant concentration of our business in MENA and sub-Saharan Africa (excluding The Office of Foreign Assets Control restricted nations), especially in the and GCC countries, which includes the UAE, Oman, Bahrain, Qatar, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and Kuwait.
In addition to the foregoing, since our acquisition of BLF during April 2019, pursuant to which we acquired a license with MLB to sell MLB-branded frozen dessert products and confections, we sold pint size ice cream in grocery store-type packaging. In addition, under our confections product line, we sold gummi and chocolate candies. On December 18, 2020, we and our wholly owned subsidiary, BLF, entered into a letter agreement with ACG Global Solutions, Inc. and Game on Foods, Inc. (“GOF”), whereby for certain consideration, BLF sold, transferred, and assigned all of BLF’s rights, title, and interest in and to all of BLF’s assets to GOF.
Furthermore, during August 2019, we purchased all of the assets of a french fry business in the Middle East and during May 2020, we acquired a 51% interest of TAM, a Philippines-based maker of reusable N95 fabric masks and biohazard suits. On October 5, 2020, as a result of TAM’s failure of contractual performance and breach of contract, all obligations under the binding term sheet were rescinded and a demand made for immediate return of the cash consideration of $100,000, that we paid, plus fees and costs to be determined. As we were unsuccessful in collecting the $100,000, at October 31, 2020 we determined the $100,000 uncollectible and wrote-off the balance to loss on disposal of unconsolidated entity within our consolidated statement of operations.
Recent Developments
Eliot’s Adult Nut Butter
On September 1, 2020 (the “Closing Date”), we entered into an asset purchase agreement (the “APA”) with Eliot’s Adult Nut Butter, LLC (the “Seller” or “Eliot’s”) and the member owners of the Seller (the “Members”). Pursuant to the terms of the APA, on the Closing Date, the Seller sold and assigned substantially all of the assets, and certain specified liabilities, of the Seller to us. The aggregate purchase price of $400,000 for the purchased assets, plus the assumption of the assumed liabilities, will be paid by us as follows:
(i) $25,000 within six (6) months of the Closing Date;
(ii) $25,000 within twelve (12) months of the Closing Date;
(iii) issuance of $60,000 of our common stock to the Members based upon the closing market price on the Closing Date;
(iv) earn out payments (up to a maximum of $290,000) to be paid quarterly at a rate equal to the greater of (i) $1.26 per case sold or (ii) five percent (5%) of the per case wholesale price; provided that certain gross profit margin and EBITDA conditions are also met.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
In addition, in connection with the APA, on the Closing Date, Eliot’s entered into an employment agreement with the Founder of the Seller to serve as the President of Eliot’s.
Subsequent to the Closing Date, as a result of our and Sellers inability to agree upon advancement of Eliot’s business operations, effective February 1, 2021, we entered into a Mutual Rescission and Release Agreement (“Rescission Agreement”) with the Sellers, pursuant to which, among other things, all agreements between the parties including (i) the Asset Purchase Agreement dated September 1, 2020, (ii) the Assignment and Assumption Agreement dated September 1, 2020, (iii) the Bill of Sale dated September 1, 2020, (iv) the Employment Agreement by and between Eliot’s and Michael Kanter dated September 1, 2020, and (v) all related ancillary agreements (collectively, “Original Contracts”) were terminated and the parties released each other from all obligations arising from the Original Contracts.
Big League Foods
On December 18, 2020, we and our wholly owned subsidiary, Big League Foods, Inc. (“BLF”), entered into a letter agreement (the “Agreement”) with ACG Global Solutions, Inc. (“ACG”) and Game on Foods, Inc. (“GOF”), whereby for certain consideration, BLF agreed to sell, transfer, and assign all of BLF’s rights, title, and interest in and to all of BLF’s assets to GOF.
Financings
On December 18, 2020, we entered into an amendment (the “Special Amendment”) to the promissory note issued to ACG Global Solutions, Inc. (the “Note”), effective March 31, 2020, whereby amendments were made to (i) extend the maturity date of the Note to December 31, 2021 (the “Maturity Date”), (ii) modify the prepayment clause to whereby payment by us of $150,000 or more on or before the Maturity Date will cause the Note to be forgiven and considered paid in full, (iii) modify the event of default and note collateral clauses, and (iv) add additional remedies upon the occurrence of an event of default.
On January 4, 2021, we issued and sold a convertible promissory note in the principal amount of $95,000, which note accrues interest at a rate of 9% per annum (increasing to 22% per annum upon the occurrence of an event of default), matures on January 4, 2022, and is convertible into shares of our common stock at a conversion price as specified in the note, subject to adjustment. On January 7, 2021, the proceeds received from this note were used to prepay the convertible promissory note dated July 14, 2020.
On January 7, 2021, we prepaid a convertible promissory note, including principal, accrued interest, and prepayment amount as set forth within such convertible promissory note dated July 14, 2020. The convertible promissory note in the principal amount of $63,000 was issued and sold by us to an accredited investor under a securities purchase agreement dated July 14, 2020.
On January 13, 2021, we issued and sold a convertible promissory note in the principal amount of $88,000 (including a $4,000 original issuance discount), which note accrues interest at a rate of 8% per annum (increasing to 24% per annum upon the occurrence of an event of default), matures on January 13, 2022, and is convertible into shares of our common stock at a conversion price as specified in the note, subject to adjustment.
On February 1, 2021, we issued and sold a promissory note in the principal amount of $303,000 (including a $39,500 original issue discount), which note accrues interest at a rate of 12% per annum (increasing to 24% per annum upon the occurrence of an event of default, matures on February 1, 2022, and is only convertible into shares of our common stock upon an event of default at a conversion price as specified in the note, subject to adjustment. Payments shall be made in eight (8) installments each in the amount of $42,420 commencing on the fifth (5th) monthly anniversary following the issue date and continuing thereafter each thirty (30) days for eight (8) months.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
Results of Operations for the Years Ended October 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Our revenue increased to $21,747,361 for the year ended October 31, 2020, compared to $13,611,101 for the year ended October 31, 2019, an increase of $8,136,260 or 60%. The increase is the result of increased international and domestic revenue with existing and new customers, including an initial $820,000 biohazard gown order through our Pachyderm Labs subsidiary. We continue to reduce the order backlog with customers by continuing to increase sales to customers and through increased working capital funding that allows us to procure additional products for sale.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenue totaled $18,380,162 for the year ended October 31, 2020, compared to $11,546,413 for the year ended October 31, 2019, an increase of $6,833,749 or 59%. The increase is the result of higher revenue and related product costs.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses, which include salaries and benefits, stock-based compensation, selling and promotions expense, legal and professional fees, and general and administrative expenses increased to $12,813,667 for the year ended October 31, 2020, compared to $6,181,569 for the year ended October 31, 2019, an increase of $6,632,098, or 107%. The increase is primarily due to an increase of $8,426,873 in stock-based compensation expense related to performance warrants earned by our Chief Executive Officer and a restricted common stock grant to our Chief Financial Officer, coupled with higher expenses across all other categories, except legal and professional fees, to support the increase in revenue and higher expenses related to enhancements to our branded products. The increase in stock-based compensation expense is primarily the result of the 2020 Employment Agreement with the Company’s Chief Executive Officer providing a one-time grant of warrants to increase his ownership to 20% of the Company’s common stock on a fully diluted basis. There will be no future stock-based compensation expense related to this one-time grant of warrants as the entire related expense of $6,541,628 was recognized during the six months ended April 30, 2020.
Other Income (Expenses)
Our other income (expense), net decreased by $7,950,756 for the year ended October 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily the result of increases in (loss) gain on extinguishment/settlement of debt due to conversions of convertible notes payable, interest expense due to the full amortization of beneficial conversion features of certain amended convertible notes payable, and loss on equity issuances under S-1 registration statement due to the value of shares of common stock issued compared to the proceeds received by us. The decrease was partially offset by the result of no loss on legal settlements during the current year.
Net Loss
We generated a net loss of $15,670,193 for the year ended October 31, 2020, compared to a net loss of $2,389,850 for the year ended October 31, 2019, an increase of $13,280,343. The increase in net loss is primarily driven by the increase in operating expenses and other (expenses) income, partially offset by the increase in gross profit as disclosed above.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
Liquidity and Capital Resources; Anticipated Financing Needs
At October 31, 2020, we had $21,509 of cash on-hand, a decrease of $350,389 from $371,898 at October 31, 2019.
Net cash used in operating activities was $2,486,939 for the year ended October 31, 2020, an increase of $248,575 from $2,238,364 used during the year ended October 31, 2018. The increase in net cash used in operating activities was primarily due to a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses, coupled with increases in prepaid expenses and other assets, partially offset by a reduction in inventories.
Net cash used in investing activities was $242,223 for the year ended October 31, 2020, compared to net cash used in investing activities of $111,120 for the year ended October 31, 2019. The increase in net cash used in investing activities was primarily due to higher capital expenditures and an investment in an unconsolidated entity, partially offset by a decrease in cash paid for acquisitions in the current year compared to prior year.
We have financed our operations since inception primarily through proceeds from equity and debt financings and revenue derived from operations. During the year ended October 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $2,378,773 as compared to $2,692,828 during the year ended October 31, 2019. The decrease in net cash provided by financing activities was primarily due to lower net proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes payable and notes payable, partially offset by lower payments applied to convertible promissory notes and lower net proceeds from the sale of common stock. Our continued operations primarily depend upon our ability to raise additional capital from various sources including equity and debt financings, as well as our revenue derived from operations. We can give no assurances that any additional capital that we are able to obtain will be sufficient to meet our needs or will be on favorable terms. Based on our current plans, we believe that our cash provided from the above sources may not be sufficient to enable us to meet our planned operating needs for the next twelve months.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
A novel strain of coronavirus, COVID-19, surfaced during December 2019 and has spread around the world, including to the United States. During March 2020, COVID-19 was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. During certain periods of the pandemic thus far, a number of U.S. states and various countries throughout the world had been under governmental orders requiring that all workers remain at home unless their work was critical, essential, or life-sustaining. As a result of these governmental orders, we temporarily closed our domestic and international offices and required all of our employees to work remotely. Although these temporary office closures created minor disruption to our business operations, such disruptions to date have not been significant.
The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial condition and results of operations will depend on future developments, such as the ultimate duration and scope of the pandemic, its impact on our employees, customers, and vendors, in addition to how quickly normal economic conditions and operations resume and whether the pandemic impacts other risks disclosed in Item 1A “Risk Factors” within this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Even after the pandemic has subsided, we may continue to experience adverse impacts to our business as a result of any economic recession or depression that has occurred as a result of the pandemic. Therefore, we cannot reasonably estimate the impact at this time. We continue to actively monitor the pandemic and may determine to take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state, or local authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, vendors, and shareholders.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
Critical Accounting Policies
We have identified the policies below as critical to our understanding of the results of our business operations. We discuss the impact and any associated risks related to these policies on our business operations throughout Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations where such policies affect our reported and expected financial results.
In the ordinary course of business, we have made a number of estimates and assumptions in preparing our financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates and assumptions. The following critical accounting policies are those that are most important to the portrayal of our consolidated financial statements. For a summary of our significant accounting policies, including the critical accounting policies discussed below, refer to Note 2 - “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” included in the notes to consolidated financial statements for the year ended October 31, 2020 included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We consider the following accounting policies to be those most important to the portrayal of our results of operations and financial condition:
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”), Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Revenues are recognized when control is transferred to customers in amounts that reflect the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods. Revenue recognition is evaluated through the following five steps: (i) identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer; (ii) identification of the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determination of the transaction price; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognition of revenue when or as a performance obligation is satisfied.
Revenue is derived from the sale of consumable and non-consumable products. The Company recognizes revenue when obligations under the terms of a contract with the customer are satisfied. Product sales occur once control is transferred upon delivery to the customer. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for transferring products. The amount of consideration the Company receives and revenue the Company recognizes varies with changes in customer incentives the Company offers to its customers and their customers. In the event any discounts, sales incentives, or similar arrangements are agreed to with a customer, such amounts are estimated at time of sale and deducted from revenue. Sales taxes and other similar taxes are excluded from revenue (see Note 11).
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using an asset and liability approach to financial accounting and reporting for income taxes. Accordingly, deferred tax assets and liabilities arise from the difference between the tax basis of an asset or liability and its reported amount in the consolidated financial statements. Deferred tax amounts are determined using the tax rates expected to be in effect when the taxes will actually be paid or refunds received, as provided under currently enacted tax law. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. Income tax expense or benefit is the tax payable or refundable, respectively, for the period plus or minus the change in deferred tax assets and liabilities during the period. we have recorded a full valuation allowance for our net deferred tax assets as of October 31, 2020 and 2019 because realization of those assets is not reasonably assured.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
We will recognize a financial statement benefit of a tax position only after determining that the relevant tax authority would more likely than not sustain the position following an audit. For tax positions meeting the more-likely-than-not threshold, the amount recognized in the financial statements is the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the relevant tax authority.
We believe our income tax filing positions and deductions will be sustained upon examination and, accordingly, no reserves, or related accruals for interest and penalties has been recorded at October 31, 2020 and 2019.
Share-Based Compensation
We compute share based payments in accordance with the provisions of ASC Topic 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation and related interpretations. As such, compensation cost is measured on the date of grant at the fair value of the share-based payments. Such compensation amounts, if any, are amortized over the respective vesting periods of the grants.
Restricted stock awards are granted at the discretion of the compensation committee of our board of directors (the “Board of Directors”). These awards are restricted as to the transfer of ownership and generally vest over the requisite service periods (vesting on a straight-line basis). The fair value of a stock award is equal to the fair market value of a share of our common stock on the grant date.
We estimate the fair value of stock options and warrants by using the Black-Scholes option valuation model. The Black-Scholes option valuation model requires the development of assumptions that are inputs into the model. These assumptions are the expected stock volatility, the risk-free interest rate, the expected life of the option, the dividend yield on the underlying stock and the expected forfeiture rate. Expected volatility is calculated based on the historical volatility of our common stock over the expected term of the option. Risk-free interest rates are calculated based on continuously compounded risk-free rates for the appropriate term.
Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of equity-based payment awards requires the input of the subjective assumptions described above. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of equity-based payment awards represent management’s best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. We are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and recognize expense only for those shares expected to vest.
We account for share-based payments granted to non-employees in accordance with ASC 505-50, “Equity Based Payments to Non-Employees.” We determine the fair value of the stock-based payment as either the fair value of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity instruments issued, whichever is more readily determinable. If the fair value of the equity instruments issued is used, it is measured using the stock price and other measurement assumptions as of the earlier of either (1) the date at which a commitment for performance by the counterparty to earn the equity instruments is reached, or (2) the date at which the counterparty’s performance is complete.
Accounts Receivable
We regularly review outstanding receivables and provide for estimated losses through an allowance for doubtful accounts. In evaluating the level of established loss reserves, we make judgments regarding our customers’ ability to make required payments, economic events, and other factors. As the financial condition of these parties’ change, circumstances develop or additional information becomes available, adjustments to the allowance for doubtful accounts may be required. We maintain reserves for potential credit losses, and such losses traditionally have been within our expectations. At October 31, 2020 and 2019, we determined there was no requirement for an allowance for doubtful accounts.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Continued)
New Accounting Standards
Refer to Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recently adopted and to be adopted accounting standards.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.