ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. This section and other sections of this Annual Report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. See "Forward-Looking Statements" and Part I, Item 1A. "Risk Factors" included in this Annual Report.
(Dollar amounts in thousands except share and per share data or unless otherwise indicated)
Executive Summary
Business Overview
We serve the outdoor sports and recreation markets through a diverse portfolio of 34 well-recognized brands that provide consumers with a wide range of performance-driven, high-quality and innovative products, including sporting ammunition, golf rangefinders, hydration products, outdoor accessories, outdoor cooking solutions, and protective equipment for certain action sports. We serve a broad range of end consumers, including outdoor enthusiasts, hunters and recreational shooters, athletes, as well as law enforcement and military professionals. Our products are sold through a wide variety of mass, specialty and independent retailers and distributors, such as Academy, Amazon, Bass Pro Shops/Cabela's, Dick's Sporting Goods, Kiesler Police Supply, Nations Best Sports, Sports Inc., Sports South, Sportsman's Warehouse, Target, and Walmart. We also sell certain of our products directly to consumers through the relevant brand's website. We have a scalable, integrated portfolio of brands that allows us to leverage our deep customer knowledge, product development and innovation, supply chain and distribution, and sales and marketing functions across product categories to better serve our retail partners and end consumers.
Organizational Structure
We conduct our operations through two reportable segments which are defined based on the reporting and review process used by the chief operating decision maker, our Chief Executive Officer. As of March 31, 2021, our two segments were Outdoor Products and Shooting Sports:
•Shooting Sports generated approximately 68% of our sales in fiscal year 2021. Shooting Sports is comprised of ammunition and hunting and shooting accessories product lines. Ammunition products include centerfire ammunition, rimfire ammunition, shotshell ammunition and reloading components. Hunting and shooting accessories products include high-performance hunting arrows, game calls, hunting blinds, game cameras, decoys, reloading equipment, clay targets, premium gun care products, holsters, duty gear, bags, packs, and optics products such as binoculars, riflescopes, and telescopes.
•Outdoor Products generated approximately 32% of our sales in fiscal year 2021. Outdoor Products is comprised of sports protection, outdoor cooking, golf, and hydration product lines. Sports protection includes helmets, goggles, and accessories for cycling, snow sports, action sports and powersports. Outdoor cooking includes grills, stoves, and cookware. Golf products include laser rangefinders and other golf technology products. Hydration products include hydration packs and water bottles.
Financial Highlights and Notable Events
Fiscal Year 2021
•Annual sales were $2,225,522 and $1,755,871 for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Sales in the Shooting Sports segment increased $329,356 or 27.7% which was primarily driven by strong demand in the market across nearly all categories and improved pricing. Also contributing to the increase were sales of $44,583 related to our recent acquisitions. Outdoor Products sales increased $140,295 or 24.8%. The increase was driven by strong demand in our Action Sports, Outdoor Cooking, and Golf businesses. This strong demand was partially offset by retail store closures in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021 and continued supply chain interruptions.
•During fiscal year 2021, we acquired certain assets related to Remington Outdoor Company, Inc.’s ("Remington") ammunition and accessories businesses and HEVI-Shot Ammunition. Both of these businesses are included in the Shooting Sports segment and contributed $44,583 in sales since the acquisitions. See Note 7, Acquisitions and Divestitures, in the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
•Gross profit was $632,960 and $358,766 for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The 76.4% increase in gross profit was primarily caused by the increase in sales volumes and improved pricing as discussed above, as well as operating efficiencies and strong direct-to-consumer sales. The increases were partially offset by increased shipping, tariffs, and product costs.
•EBIT totaled $284,958 and $(132,236) for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase was primarily driven by the gross profit increase as described above, prior year goodwill and intangible impairment expenses, and pretax gain on divestiture in the current year. These were partially offset by higher incentive compensation accruals, loss on extinguishment of debt, and higher transaction and transition costs in the current year.
•The decrease in the current year tax rate to (2.6)% from 9.3% in the prior year ended March 31, 2020 is primarily due to the decrease in valuation allowance driven by earnings in the current year which permitted us to realize previously valued tax assets. Additional drivers were the recognition of the benefit of loss carrybacks to prior profitable years as permitted under IRS regulations recently issued under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) and the release of the uncertain tax positions in the current period caused by the expiration of statute of limitations.
•We are reporting $4.44 of diluted earnings per share (EPS) for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 as compared to diluted EPS of $(2.68) for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020.
•On March 31, 2021, we refinanced our 2018 ABL Revolving Credit Facility, which consisted of a $450,000 senior secured asset-based revolving credit facility, comprised of $20,000 in first-in, last-out (“FILO”) revolving credit commitments and $430,000 in non-FILO revolving credit commitments, by entering into the 2021 ABL Revolving Credit Facility consisting of a $450,000 senior secured asset-based revolving credit facility in non-FILO revolving credit commitments.
•On March 12, 2021, we redeemed in full all of the outstanding aggregate principal amount of the 5.875% Notes, equal to $350,000 aggregate principal amount, using a portion of the proceeds from the offering of 4.5% Notes. The 4.5% Notes mature March 15, 2029. The redemption price for the 5.875% Notes was approximately $355,100, equivalent to 101.46875% of the principal amount, plus accrued but unpaid interest. We recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of approximately $6,471 for the fiscal year ended 2021 as a result of this redemption, which represents the premium paid on early redemption and unamortized debt issuance costs.
•The balance on our 2021 ABL Revolving Credit Facility was $0 at the end of the year, and cash increased by $211,890 since the end of our last fiscal year.
Outlook
Shooting Sports Industry
Hunting and shooting-sports related products currently represent a majority of our sales. We design, source, manufacture, and sell ammunition and hunting and shooting related optics and accessories through our Federal, Remington, CCI, Speer, Bushnell and Primos brands, among others. Among these categories, we derive the largest portion of our sales from ammunition, which is a consumable, repeat purchase product.
Sales of hunting and shooting-sports related products, including ammunition, are heavily influenced by hunting and recreational shooting participation rates, civil unrest and the political environment. The market for shooting sports products softened dramatically following the 2016 U.S. presidential election but began to recover in the fourth quarter of our fiscal year 2020. During our fiscal year 2021, we saw a continuance of these participation trends in the industry and in our business with our end users seeking empowerment and personal protection. The extent and duration of this increase in demand for hunting and shooting-sports related products is uncertain. We expect that during our fiscal year 2022 demand for hunting and shooting-sports related products will be influenced by the continued participation trends, nationwide civil unrest, the COVID-19 pandemic, and their associated impacts on general economic and retail conditions.
We believe that these long-term participation trends support our expectation of continued increased demand for hunting and shooting-sports related products. Participation rates have remained strong despite the COVID-19 pandemic and nationwide civil unrest, and we are seeing an expanded demographic of users. This broadened end consumer base has resulted in a much larger total addressable market opportunity for the industry and for our company. We expect to see continued increases in participation as consumers look to local outdoor activities as a substitute for travel and other competing pursuits impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe we are well-positioned to succeed and capitalize on this demand given our scale and global operating platform, which we believe is particularly difficult to replicate in the highly regulated and capital-intensive ammunition manufacturing sector.
Outdoor Recreation Industry
The outdoor recreation industry represents a large and growing focus area of our business. We design, source, manufacture, and sell outdoor recreation products through our Bell, Giro, CamelBak, Camp Chef and Bushnell Golf brands, among others. These brands operate in highly competitive and global markets serving cycling, snow sports, hiking, camping, outdoor cooking, and golf enthusiasts.
During fiscal year 2021, our Outdoor Products brands experienced a challenging retail environment driven by a variety of factors, including the ongoing shift in consumer preferences to utilize online platforms, as well as other market pressures. Many of our brands have been able to respond and capitalize on the trend towards online shopping platforms, including our brands’ direct-to-consumer websites. We strive to create frictionless experiences for our consumers, and design our business model such that we are able to meet our consumers wherever they want to shop. We expect that these trends will offset the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on general economic and retail conditions. However, a return to widespread store closures, or COVID-19 pandemic related disruption, resulting in deterioration of general economic conditions may adversely affect the brands in our Outdoor Products segment in fiscal year 2022.
We believe that long-term outdoor participation trends combined with a larger base of participants supports our expectation of continued increased demand for the innovative outdoor recreation-related products produced by our Outdoor Products brands. Participation rates have remained strong and we are seeing an expanded demographic within our end users. We expect participation to continue to increase during the global recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic as consumers look to local outdoor activities as a substitute for travel and other competing pursuits. Our Outdoor Products brands hold a strong competitive position in the marketplace, and we intend to further differentiate our brands through focused research and development and marketing investments including increased use of social media and other digital marketing. Following significant investments in our brands’ e-commerce capabilities, both directly and through our E-Commerce Center of Excellence, our brands are also well-positioned to benefit from the ongoing shift in consumer shopping behavior to utilize online channels.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. In preparing the consolidated financial statements, we make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, sales, expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We re-evaluate our estimates on an on-going basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We review our estimates on an ongoing basis to ensure the estimates appropriately reflect changes in our business and the most recent information available.
We believe the critical accounting policies discussed below affect our most significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. For a complete discussion of all our significant accounting policies, see Note 1, Significant Accounting Policies, to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Revenue Recognition
The total amount of revenue we recognize for the sale of our products reflects various sales adjustments for discounts, returns, refunds, allowances, rebates, and other customer incentives. These sales adjustments can vary based on market conditions, customer preferences, timing of customer payments, volume of products sold, and timing of new product launches. These adjustments require management to make reasonable estimates of the amount we expect to receive from the customer. We estimate sales adjustments by customer or by product category on the basis of our historical experience with similar contracts with customers, adjusted as necessary to reflect current facts and circumstances and our expectations for the future. Sales taxes, firearms and ammunition excise tax, and other similar taxes are excluded from revenue.
Allowance for Estimated Credit Losses
We maintain an allowance for credit losses related to accounts receivable for future expected credit losses resulting from the inability or unwillingness of our customers to make required payments. We estimate the allowance based upon historical bad debts, current customer receivable balances, age of customer receivable balances, and the customers' financial condition and in relation to a representative pool of assets consisting of a large number of customers with similar risk characteristics. The allowance is adjusted as appropriate to reflect differences in current conditions as well as changes in forecasted macroeconomic conditions.
Inventories
Our inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. We evaluate the quantities of inventory held against past and future demand and market conditions to determine excess or slow-moving inventory. For each product category, we estimate the market value of the inventory comprising that category based on current and projected selling prices. If the projected market value is less than cost, we provide an allowance to reflect the lower value of the inventory. This methodology recognizes projected inventory losses at the time such losses are evident rather than at the time goods are actually sold. The
projected market value of the inventory may decrease due to consumer preferences, legislative changes, or loss of key contracts among other events.
Income Taxes
Provisions for federal, state, and foreign income taxes are calculated based on reported pre-tax earnings and current tax law. Such provisions differ from the amounts currently receivable or payable because certain items of income and expense are recognized in different time periods for financial reporting purposes than for income tax purposes. Significant judgment is required in determining income tax provisions and evaluating tax positions. We periodically assess our liabilities and contingencies for all periods that are currently open to examination or have not been effectively settled based on the most current available information. Where it is not more likely than not that our tax position will be sustained, we record the entire resulting tax liability and when it is more likely than not of being sustained, we record our best estimate of the resulting tax liability. As per our policy, any applicable interest and penalties related to these positions are also recorded in the consolidated financial statements. To the extent our assessment of the tax outcome of these matters changes, such change in estimate will impact the income tax provision in the period of the change.
Deferred tax assets are assessed to determine whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will be realized. Significant estimates are required for this analysis. If we determine it is not more likely than not that all of the deferred tax assets will be realized, a valuation allowance will be recorded. Changes in the amounts of valuation allowance are recorded in the tax provision in the period when the change occurs.
Accounting for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles
Goodwill-We test goodwill for impairment on the first day of the fourth fiscal quarter or upon the occurrence of events or changes in circumstances that indicate that the asset might be impaired. Goodwill is assigned to our reporting units, which are our operating segments, or components of an operating segment, that constitute a business for which discrete financial information is available, and for which segment management regularly reviews the operating results. Based on this analysis, we had six reporting units, as of the fiscal year 2021 testing date.
During the annual impairment review process we have the option to first perform a qualitative assessment (commonly referred to as “step zero”) over relative events and circumstances to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value or to perform a quantitative assessment (“step one”) where we estimate the fair value of each reporting unit using both an income and market approach. We completed a step zero assessment as of January 1, 2021, and concluded there were no indicators of impairment. See Note 11, Goodwill and Intangible Assets, for discussion and details.
When we perform a step one analysis to assess the recoverability of our goodwill, we determine the estimated fair value of each reporting unit and compare it to the carrying value of the reporting unit, including goodwill. When fair value is less than the carrying value of the net assets and related goodwill, an impairment charge is recognized for the excess. The fair value of each reporting unit is determined using both an income and market approach. The value estimated using a discounted cash flow model is weighted equally against the estimated value derived from the guideline company market approach method. This market approach method estimates the price reasonably expected to be realized from the sale of the reporting unit based on comparable companies.
In developing the discounted cash flow analysis, our assumptions about future revenues and expenses, capital expenditures, and changes in working capital are based on our plan, as reviewed by the Board of Directors, and assume a terminal growth rate thereafter. A separate discount rate is determined for each reporting unit and these cash flows are then discounted to determine the fair value of the reporting unit. The discounted cash flow analysis is derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs are not observable (Level 3 fair value measures).
Indefinite Lived Intangible Assets-Indefinite lived intangibles are not amortized and are tested for impairment annually on the first day of the fourth fiscal quarter or upon the occurrence of events or changes in circumstances that indicate that the assets might be impaired. We completed a step zero assessment as of January 1, 2021, and concluded there were not indicators of impairment on the majority of our indefinite lived intangibles. We completed a step one assessment as of January 1, 2021 related to our CamelBak indefinite lived tradename and concluded there was no impairment. See Note 11, Goodwill and Intangible Assets, for discussion and details.
Our identifiable intangibles with indefinite lives consist of certain trademarks and tradenames. When we complete a step one assessment, the impairment test consists of a comparison of the estimated fair value of the specific intangible asset with its carrying value. The estimated fair value of these assets is measured using the relief-from-royalty method which assumes that the asset has value to the extent that the owner is relieved of the obligation to pay royalties for the benefits received from them.
This method requires that we estimate the future revenue for the related brands and technology, the appropriate royalty rate, and the weighted average cost of capital. We base our fair values and estimates on assumptions we believe to be reasonable, but which are unpredictable and inherently uncertain. If the carrying amount of an asset is higher than its fair value, an impairment exists and the asset would be recorded at the estimated fair value.
Our assumptions used to develop the discounted cash flow analysis require us to make significant estimates regarding future revenues and expenses, projected capital expenditures, changes in working capital, and the appropriate discount rate. The projections also take into account several factors including current and estimated economic trends and outlook, costs of raw materials and other factors that are beyond our control. If the current economic conditions were to deteriorate, or if we were to lose significant business, causing a reduction in estimated discounted cash flows, it is possible that the estimated fair value of certain reporting units or tradenames could fall below their carrying value resulting in the necessity to conduct additional impairment tests in future periods. We continually monitor the reporting units and tradenames for impairment indicators and update assumptions used in the most recent calculation of the estimated fair value of a reporting unit or tradenames as appropriate.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1, Significant Accounting Policies, to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Annual Report for discussion of new accounting pronouncements.
Results of Operations
As of March 31, 2021, we had six operating segments which have been aggregated into two reportable segments, Shooting Sports and Outdoor Products. This is consistent with how our chief operating decision maker (CODM), our Chief Executive Officer, allocates resources and makes decisions.
Shooting Sports is comprised of our Ammunition and Hunting and Shooting operating segments. Outdoor Products is comprised of our Action Sports, Outdoor Cooking, Hydration, and Golf operating segments. The operating segments comprising our respective reportable segments share numerous commonalities, including similar core consumers, distribution channels, and supply chains.
Our CODM relies on internal management reporting that analyzes consolidated results to the net income level and operating segment's EBIT, which is defined as earnings (loss) before interest and income taxes. Certain corporate-related costs and other non-recurring costs are not allocated to the segments in order to present comparable results from period to period. These include impairment charges, restructuring related-costs, merger and acquisition costs, loss/gain on divestitures and other non-recurring items.
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) is intended to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of our management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and certain other factors that may affect our future results. The following information should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Fiscal Year 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year 2020
Our net sales, gross profit, and EBIT by reporting segment and by corporate and other (where applicable) are presented below (dollars in thousands):
Shooting Sports-The increase in sales was primarily driven by strong demand in the market across nearly all categories, and improved pricing. Acquisitions accounted for $44,583 of net sales in fiscal year 2021. These increases were partially offset by the sale of our Firearms Business in fiscal year 2020, which accounted for approximately $25,000 of net sales.
Outdoor Products-The increase in sales was driven by strong demand in our Action Sports, Outdoor Cooking, and Golf businesses. This strong demand was partially offset by retail store closures in our first quarter of fiscal year 2021 and continued supply chain interruptions.
Shooting Sports-The increase in gross profit was primarily driven by sales volume and pricing as described above and operating efficiencies. These increases were partially offset by the sale of our Firearms Business in fiscal year 2020.
Outdoor Products-The increase in our gross profit was primarily driven by sales volume as described above and strong direct-to-consumer sales, partially offset by increased shipping, tariff, and product costs.
Corporate and Other-The increase in corporate gross profit was due to prior year business restructuring costs, partially offset by inventory step-up expenses during the current year.
Shooting Sports-The increase in EBIT was primarily driven by the gross profit increase as described above, decreased travel and trade show expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic, benefits from prior year cost savings initiatives, partially offset by losses attributable to initial marketing and start-up costs at Remington, increased incentive compensation accruals and the sale of our Firearms Business in fiscal year 2020.
Outdoor Products-The increase in EBIT was primarily driven by the gross profit increase as described above, partially offset by increased incentive compensation accruals and higher selling and marketing costs.
Corporate and Other-The increase in EBIT was primarily driven by prior year goodwill and intangible impairment expenses of $155,588, pretax gain on divestiture of $18,467 in the current year, prior year held for sale asset impairment of $9,429 in our Firearms business, and a reduction of prior year restructuring expenses. These were partially offset by higher incentive compensation accrual, the loss on extinguishment of debt and higher transaction and transition costs in the current year.
Our net interest expense and income tax provision are presented below on a consolidated basis (dollars in thousands):
The decrease in interest expense was due to a decrease in our average debt balance and a decrease in debt issuance cost write offs.
The decrease in the current period tax rate is primarily due to the decrease in the valuation allowance driven by earnings in the current year which permitted us to realize previously valued tax assets. Additional drivers were the recognition of the benefit of loss carrybacks to prior profitable years as permitted under IRS regulations recently issued under the CARES Act and the release of the uncertain tax positions in the current period caused by the expiration of statute of limitations.
As of March 31, 2021, our deferred tax assets were primarily the result of capital loss carryforwards, tax loss and credit carryforwards, and other deferred tax assets. A valuation allowance of $22,528 and $72,065 was recorded against our gross deferred tax assets balance as of March 31, 2021 and March 31, 2020, respectively. For the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021,
we recorded a net valuation allowance release of $49,537 on the basis of management’s reassessment of the amount of its deferred tax assets that are more likely than not to be realized.
As of each reporting date, management considers new evidence, both positive and negative, that could affect its view of the future realization of deferred tax assets. As of March 31, 2021, we can demonstrate an estimate of objectively verifiable future income which is based on the prior 12 quarters financial results, as adjusted for the effects of non-recurring items (these items are not indicative of our ability to generate income in future years). In addition to the above, another source of future taxable income results from scheduling out the future reversals of existing deferred tax liabilities, which support our ability to utilize the existing deferred tax assets. The combination of the above sources of future taxable income support the net valuation allowance release on our ordinary federal deferred tax assets and a significant portion of the state deferred tax assets.
Our provision for income taxes includes federal, state and foreign income taxes. The effective tax rate for fiscal year 2021 of (2.6)% differs from the federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the impact of the decrease in the valuation allowance, the release of uncertain tax positions, and the impact of the CARES Act.
The effective tax rate for fiscal year 2020 of 9.3% differs from the federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the impact of the nondeductible goodwill impairment charge and the increase in valuation allowance offset by the release of the uncertain tax positions.
As of March 31, 2021 and 2020, the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits was $23,000 and $30,159, respectively, of which $20,283 and $27,503, respectively, would affect the effective tax rate, if recognized. The remaining balance is related to deferred tax items which only impact the timing of tax payments. Although the timing and outcome of audit settlements are uncertain, it is reasonably possible that a $7,334 reduction of the uncertain tax benefits will occur in the next 12 months. The settlement of these unrecognized tax benefits could result in earnings from $0 to $6,561. See Note 15, Income Taxes, to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for further details.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We manage our business to maximize operating cash flows as the primary source of liquidity. In addition to cash on hand and cash generated by operations, our sources of liquidity include committed credit facilities and access to the public debt and equity markets. We use our cash primarily to fund investments in our existing businesses and for debt payments, acquisitions, and other activities.
Cash Flow Summary
Our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities, as reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows are summarized as follows:
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities increased $268,629. The change from the prior-year period was primarily driven by increased net income, timing of vendor payments, and the deferral of certain employer payroll tax payments under the CARES Act. The increases were partially offset by additional inventory purchases in the current fiscal year.
Investing Activities
The increase in net cash used for investing activities was driven by a decrease in proceeds from divestitures, increases in cash used for acquisition of businesses, and increased capital expenditures in the current fiscal year.
Financing Activities
Net cash used for financing activities decreased $168,418. The improvements were primarily driven by net proceeds from the issuance of our 4.5% Notes and redemption of our 5.875% Notes in fiscal year 2021, partially offset by increased net payments on our line of credit during the current fiscal year.
Liquidity
In addition to our normal operating cash requirements, our principal future cash requirements will be to fund capital expenditures, debt repayments, employee benefit obligations, share repurchases, and any strategic acquisitions. Our short-term cash requirements for operations are expected to consist mainly of capital expenditures to maintain production facilities and working capital requirements. During fiscal year 2021, we refinanced our 2018 ABL Revolving Credit Facility and outstanding debt securities. Our debt service requirements over the next two years consist of required interest payments due under our 4.5% Notes, as discussed further below. We also intend to fund the 2021 Share Repurchase Program of up to $100 million over the next two years, which was approved subsequent to the end of the fiscal year to mainly offset dilution. This amount is currently well below the covenants that limit our stock buyback.
Based on our current financial condition, management believes that our cash position, combined with anticipated generation of cash flows and the availability of funding, if needed, under our 2021 ABL Revolving Credit Facility, access to debt and equity markets, as well as other potential sources of funding including additional bank financing, will be adequate to fund future growth to service our currently anticipated long-term debt and pension obligations, make capital expenditures over the next 12 months and fund the 2021 Share Repurchase Program as described above.
There can be no assurance that the cost or availability of future borrowings, if any, will not be materially impacted by capital market conditions, including any disruptions to capital markets as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, or our future financial condition and performance. Furthermore, because our 2021 ABL Revolving Credit Facility is secured in large part by receivables from our customers, a sustained deterioration in general economic conditions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic that adversely affects the creditworthiness of our customers could have a negative effect on our future available liquidity under the 2021 ABL Revolving Credit Facility.
Long-Term Debt and Credit Agreements
As of March 31, 2021, we had actual total indebtedness of $500,000, which consisted of the following:
Our total debt as a percentage of total capitalization (total debt and stockholders' equity) was 40% as of March 31, 2021.
See Note 13, Long-term Debt, to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 included in this Annual Report for a detailed discussion of our indebtedness.
Covenants
2021 ABL Revolving Credit Facilities-Our 2021 ABL Revolving Credit Facility imposes restrictions on us, including limitations on our ability to pay cash dividends, incur debt or liens, redeem or repurchase Vista Outdoor stock, enter into transactions with affiliates, make investments, merge or consolidate with others or dispose of assets. In addition, the 2021 Credit Facility contains a financial covenant that the Excess Availability under the ABL Revolving Credit Facility cannot fall below the greater of (a) 10% of the borrowing base, and (b) $42,500. If we do not comply with the covenants in the 2021 ABL Revolving Credit Facility, the lenders may, subject to customary cure rights, require the immediate payment of all amounts outstanding under the 2021 ABL Revolving Credit Facility.
The 2021 ABL Revolving Credit Facility and the indenture governing the 4.5% Notes contain cross-default provisions so that noncompliance with the covenants within one debt agreement could also cause a default under another debt agreement. As of March 31, 2021, we were in compliance with the covenants of all of our debt agreements. However, we cannot provide assurance that we will be able to comply with such financial covenants in the future due to various risks and uncertainties some of which may be beyond our control. Any failure to comply with the restrictions in the 2021 ABL Revolving Credit Facility may prevent us from drawing under the 2021 ABL Revolving Credit Facility and may result in an event of default under the 2021 ABL Revolving Credit Facility, which default may allow the creditors to accelerate the related indebtedness and the indebtedness under our 4.5% Notes and proceed against the collateral that secures such indebtedness. We may not have sufficient liquidity to repay the indebtedness in such circumstances.
4.5% Notes-The indenture governing the 4.5% Notes contains covenants that, among other things, limit our ability to incur or permit to exist certain liens, sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of assets, consolidate, amalgamate, merge or sell all or substantially all of our assets, enter into transactions with affiliates, enter into agreements restricting our subsidiaries’ ability to
pay dividends, incur additional indebtedness, pay dividends or make other distributions or repurchase or redeem our capital stock, prepay, redeem or repurchase certain debt and make loans and investments.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
The following tables summarize our contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of March 31, 2021:
(1)Includes interest based on outstanding debt as of March 31, 2021.
(2)Does not include future expected sublease income of $222.
(3)Pension benefit obligation has been excluded from the Contractual Obligations table (see Note 14, Employee Benefit Plans, to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report).
The total liability for uncertain tax positions as of March 31, 2021 was approximately $23,000 (see Note 15, Income Taxes, to the consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8, of this Annual Report), $0 of which could be paid within 12 months. We are unable to provide a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of future payments relating to the non-current uncertain tax position obligations.
Contingencies
Litigation
From time-to-time, we are subject to various legal proceedings, including lawsuits, which arise out of and are incidental to, the conduct of our business. We do not consider any of such proceedings that are currently pending, individually or in the aggregate, to be material to our business or likely to result in a material adverse effect on our operating results, financial condition, or cash flows.
Environmental Liabilities
Our operations and ownership or use of real property are subject to a number of federal, state, and local environmental laws and regulations, as well as applicable foreign laws and regulations, including those governing the discharge of hazardous materials, remediation of contaminated sites, and restoration of damage to the environment. We are obligated to conduct investigation and/or remediation activities at certain sites that we own or operate or formerly owned or operated.
Certain of our former subsidiaries have been identified as PRPs, along with other parties, in regulatory agency actions associated with hazardous waste sites. As a PRP, those former subsidiaries may be required to pay a share of the costs of the investigation and clean-up of these sites. In that event, we would be obligated to indemnify those subsidiaries for those costs. While uncertainties exist with respect to the amounts and timing of the ultimate environmental liabilities, based on currently available information, we do not currently expect that these potential liabilities, individually or in the aggregate, will have a material adverse effect on our operating results, financial condition, or cash flows.
We could incur substantial additional costs, including cleanup costs, resource restoration, fines, and penalties or third-party property damage or personal injury claims, as a result of violations or liabilities under environmental laws or non-compliance with environmental permits. While environmental laws and regulations have not had a material adverse effect on our operating results, financial condition, or cash flows in the past, and we have environmental management programs in place to mitigate these risks, it is difficult to predict whether they will have a material impact in the future.
See Note 16, Commitments and Contingencies, to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information.
Dependence on Key Customers; Concentration of Credit
No customer contributed more than 10% of sales during fiscal year 2021; however, Walmart accounted for approximately 13% and 14% of our total fiscal years 2020 and 2019 sales, respectively. No other single customer contributed more than 10% of our sales in fiscal years 2020 and 2019.
If a key customer fails to meet payment obligations, our operating results and financial condition could be adversely affected.
Inflation and Commodity Price Risk
In management’s opinion, inflation has not had a significant impact upon the results of our operations. However, we have been impacted by changes in the prices of raw materials used in production as well as changes in oil and energy costs. In particular, the prices of commodity metals, such as copper, zinc, and lead continue to be volatile. These prices generally impact our Shooting Sports Segment. See Note 4, Derivative Financial Instruments, to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information.
We have a strategic sourcing, pricing and hedging strategy to mitigate risk from commodity price fluctuation. We will continue to evaluate the need for future price changes in light of these trends, our competitive landscape, and our financial results. If our sourcing and pricing strategy is unable to offset impacts of the commodity price fluctuations, our future results from operations and cash flows would be materially impacted.