Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K (Annual Report or Report) includes forward-looking statements. All statements contained in this Annual Report other than statements of historical fact, including statements regarding our future results of operations and financial position, our business strategy and plans, and our objectives for future operations, are forward- looking statements. The words “believe,” “may,” “estimate,” “continue,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “expect” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. We have based these forward- looking statements largely on our current expectations and projections about future events and trends that we believe may affect our financial condition, results of operations, business strategy, short-term and long-term business operations and objectives, and financial needs. These forward-looking statements are subject to a number of risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our business is subject to significant risks including, but not limited to, our ability to obtain additional financing, the results of our research and development efforts, the results of nonclinical and clinical testing, the effect of regulation by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and other agencies, the impact of competitive products, product development, commercialization and technological difficulties, the effect of our accounting policies, and other risks as detailed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report. Further, even if our product candidates appear promising at various stages of development, our share price may decrease such that we are unable to raise additional capital without significant dilution or other terms that may be unacceptable to our management, Board of Directors (our Board) and stockholders.
Moreover, we operate in a very competitive and rapidly changing environment. New risks emerge from time to time. It is not possible for our management or Board to predict all risks, nor can we assess the impact of all factors on our business or the extent to which any factor, or combination of factors, may cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements we may make. In light of these risks, uncertainties and assumptions, the future events and trends discussed in this Annual Report may not occur and actual results could differ materially and adversely from those anticipated or implied in the forward-looking statements.
You should not rely upon forward-looking statements as predictions of future events. The events and circumstances reflected in the forward-looking statements may not be achieved or occur. Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements. We are under no duty to update any of these forward-looking statements after the date of this Annual Report or to conform these statements to actual results or revised expectations. If we do update one or more forward-looking statements, no inference should be drawn that we will make additional updates with respect to those or other forward-looking statements.
Business Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company committed to developing and commercializing differentiated new generation medications that go beyond the current standard of care for widespread anxiety, depression and other central nervous system (CNS) disorders. Our CNS pipeline includes three CNS product candidates, PH94B Nasal Spray, PH10 Nasal Spray and AV-101, each with a differentiated profile, favorable safety results observed in all clinical studies to date and therapeutic potential in multiple CNS indications. PH94B Nasal Spray (PH94B) is being developed for multiple anxiety disorders. We recently initiated our PH94B Phase 3 development program, which we refer to as the PALISADE program, with PALISADE-1, a U.S., multi-center, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase 3 clinical study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of PH94B for the acute treatment of anxiety in adults with social anxiety disorder (SAD), as well as preparations for the additional studies required to support our potential U.S. New Drug Application (NDA) for that indication should the PALISADE Phase 3 program be successful. We are also preparing for exploratory Phase 2A clinical studies of PH94B in adults experiencing several other anxiety disorders. PH10 Nasal Spray (PH10) is being developed as a stand-alone treatment for multiple depression disorders. Exploratory Phase 2A clinical development of PH10 for major depressive disorder (MDD) has been completed. We are now preparing for planned Phase 2B clinical development of PH10 for this indication. We are preparing for a Phase 1B clinical study of AV-101 in combination with probenecid to assess potential future Phase 2A clinical development of the combination for MDD or certain neurological indications. Our goal is to become a biopharmaceutical company that develops and commercializes innovative CNS therapies for highly prevalent neuropsychiatry and neurology indications where current treatments options are inadequate to meet the needs of millions of patients in markets worldwide.
Our Product Candidates
PH94B is a synthetic investigational neurosteroid developed from proprietary compounds called pherines. With its novel mechanism of action, PH94B is an odorless nasal spray administered at microgram-level doses to achieve rapid-onset anti-anxiety, or anxiolytic, effects. The pharmacological activity of PH94B is fundamentally differentiated from that of all FDA-approved anti-anxiety drugs, including all antidepressants approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment of SAD, as well as all benzodiazepines and beta blockers prescribed on an off-label basis. PH94B engages peripheral chemosensory receptors in nasal passages that trigger a subset of neurons in the main olfactory bulbs (OB) at the base of the brain. The OB neurons then stimulate inhibitory GABAergic neurons in the limbic amygdala, decreasing the activity of the sympathetic nervous system, and facilitating fear extinction activity of the limbic-hypothalamic system, the main fear and anxiety center in the brain, as well as in other parts of the brain. Importantly, PH94B does not require systemic uptake and distribution to produce its rapid-onset anti-anxiety effects. Our ongoing PALISADE Phase 3 program for PH94B is designed to further demonstrate its potential as a fast-acting, non-sedating, non-addictive acute treatment of anxiety in adults with SAD. We believe PH94B also has potential to be developed as a novel treatment for adjustment disorder with anxiety, postpartum anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder, procedural anxiety, panic and other anxiety disorders. PH94B has been granted Fast Track designation status by the FDA for development for the acute treatment of SAD.
PH10 is a synthetic investigational neurosteroid, which also was developed from proprietary compounds called pherines. Its novel, rapid-onset mechanism of action (MOA) is fundamentally differentiated from the MOA of all current treatments for MDD and other depression disorders. PH10 is self-administered at microgram-level doses as an odorless nasal spray. PH10 activates nasal chemosensory cells in the nasal passages, connected to neural circuits in the brain that produce antidepressant effects. Specifically, PH10 engages peripheral chemosensory receptors in the nasal passages that trigger a subset of neurons in the main OB that stimulate neurons in the limbic amygdala. This is turn increases activity of the limbic-hypothalamic sympathetic nervous system and increases the release of catecholamines. Importantly, unlike all currently approved oral antidepressants (ADs), PH10 does not require systemic uptake and distribution to produce rapid-onset of antidepressant effects. In all clinical studies to date, PH10 has not caused psychological side effects (such as dissociation and hallucinations) or safety concerns that may be associated with rapid-onset ketamine-based therapy (KBT), including intravenous ketamine or intranasal ketamine (esketamine). We believe PH10 has potential to be a new stand-alone treatment for MDD and several other depression disorders.
AV-101 (4-Cl-KYN) targets the NMDAR (N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor), an ionotropic glutamate receptor in the brain. Abnormal NMDAR function is associated with numerous CNS diseases and disorders. AV-101 is an oral prodrug of 7-chloro-kynurenic acid (7-Cl-KYNA), which is a potent and selective full antagonist of the glycine co-agonist site of the NMDAR that inhibits the function of the NMDAR. However, unlike ketamine and many other NMDAR antagonists, 7-Cl-KYNA is not an ion channel blocker. At doses administered in all studies to date, AV-101 has been observed to be well tolerated and has not exhibited dissociative or hallucinogenic psychological side effects or safety concerns. In light of these observations and findings from preclinical studies, we believe that AV-101, in combination with FDA-approved probenecid, has potential to become a new oral treatment alternative for certain CNS indications involving the NMDAR. We are currently preparing to evaluate AV-101 in combination with probenecid in a Phase 1B clinical study. The FDA has granted Fast Track designation for development of AV-101 as a potential adjunctive treatment for MDD and as a non-opioid treatment for neuropathic pain (NP).
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We consider certain accounting policies related to revenue recognition, determination of right of use assets under lease transactions and related lease obligations, impairment of long-lived assets, research and development, stock-based compensation, warrant liability and income taxes to be critical accounting policies that require the use of significant judgments and estimates relating to matters that are inherently uncertain and may result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with United States generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements. These estimates include, but are not limited to, those relating to stock-based compensation, revenue recognition, research and development expenses, determination of right of use assets under lease transactions and related lease obligations, and the assumptions used to value warrants, warrant modifications, and useful lives for property and equipment and related depreciation calculations. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
Revenue Recognition
We have historically generated revenue principally from collaborative research and development arrangements, licensing and technology access fees and government grants. We adopted Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) and its related amendments, collectively referred to as ASC (Accounting Standards Codification) Topic 606, as of April 1, 2018, using the modified retrospective transition method.
Under ASC Topic 606, we recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of Topic 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price, including variable consideration, if any; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration to which we are entitled in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to a customer.
Once a contract is determined to be within the scope of Topic 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations. Arrangements that include rights to additional goods or services that are exercisable at a customer’s discretion are generally considered options. We assess whether these options provide a material right to the customer and if so, they are considered performance obligations. The exercise of a material right may be accounted for as a contract modification or as a continuation of the contract for accounting purposes.
We assess whether each promised good or service is distinct for the purpose of identifying the performance obligations in the contract. This assessment involves subjective determinations and requires judgments about the individual promised goods or services and whether such are separable from the other aspects of the contractual relationship. Promised goods and services are considered distinct provided that: (i) the customer can benefit from the good or service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer (that is, the good or service is capable of being distinct) and (ii) our promise to transfer the good or service to the customer is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract (that is, the promise to transfer the good or service is distinct within the context of the contract). In assessing whether a promised good or service is distinct in the evaluation of a collaboration arrangement subject to Topic 606, we consider factors such as the research, manufacturing and commercialization capabilities of the collaboration partner and the availability of the associated expertise in the general marketplace. We also consider the intended benefit of the contract in assessing whether a promised good or service is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract. If a promised good or service is not distinct, we are required to combine that good or service with other promised goods or services until we identify a bundle of goods or services that is distinct.
The transaction price is then determined and allocated to the identified performance obligations in proportion to their standalone selling prices (SSP) on a relative SSP basis. SSP is determined at contract inception and is not updated to reflect changes between contract inception and satisfaction of the performance obligations. Determining the SSP for performance obligations requires significant judgment. In developing the SSP for a performance obligation, we consider applicable market conditions and relevant Company-specific factors, including factors that were contemplated in negotiating the agreement with the customer and estimated costs. In certain circumstances, we may apply the residual method to determine the SSP of a good or service if the standalone selling price is considered highly variable or uncertain. We validate the SSP for performance obligations by evaluating whether changes in the key assumptions used to determine the SSP will have a significant effect on the allocation of arrangement consideration between multiple performance obligations.
If the consideration promised in a contract includes a variable amount, we estimate the amount of consideration to which we will be entitled in exchange for transferring the promised goods or services to a customer. We determine the amount of variable consideration by using the expected value method or the most likely amount method. We include the unconstrained amount of estimated variable consideration in the transaction price. The amount included in the transaction price is constrained to the amount for which it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the estimated variable consideration included in the transaction price and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis in the period of adjustment.
If an arrangement includes development and regulatory milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our control or the licensee’s control, such as regulatory approvals, are generally not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received.
In determining the transaction price, we adjust consideration for the effects of the time value of money if the timing of payments provides us with a significant benefit of financing. We do not assess whether a contract has a significant financing component if the expectation at contract inception is such that the period between payment by the licensee and the transfer of the promised goods or services to the licensee will be one year or less. For arrangements with licenses of intellectual property that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize royalty revenue and sales-based milestones at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied.
We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) each performance obligation is satisfied at a point in time or over time, and if over time, based on the use of an output or input method.
Right of use assets and lease obligations
We adopted Accounting Standards Update No. 2016-02, “Leases (Topic 842)” (ASU 2016-02) effective April 1, 2019. ASU 2016-02 requires that we determine, at the inception of an arrangement, whether the arrangement is or contains a lease, based on the unique facts and circumstances present. Operating lease assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term (Right of use assets) and operating lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Right of use assets and operating lease liabilities are recognized at the commencement date of the lease based upon the present value of lease payments over the lease term. When determining the lease term, we include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain, at inception, that we will exercise that option. The interest rate implicit in lease contracts is typically not readily determinable; accordingly, we use our incremental borrowing rate, which is the rate that would be incurred to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment, based upon the information available at the commencement date. The lease payments used to determine our operating lease assets may include lease incentives, stated rent increases and escalation clauses linked to rates of inflation, when determinable, and are recognized in determining our Right of use assets. Our operating lease is reflected in the right-of-use asset - operating lease; operating lease obligation - current portion; and operating lease obligation - non-current portion in our consolidated balance sheets.
Lease expense for minimum lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. As a result of our adoption of ASU 2016-02, we no longer recognize deferred rent on the consolidated balance sheet. Short-term leases, defined as leases that have a lease term of 12 months or less at the commencement date, are excluded from this treatment and are recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. Variable lease payments are amounts owed by us to a lessor that are not fixed, such as reimbursement for common area maintenance costs for our facility lease; and are expensed when incurred.
Financing leases, formerly referred to as capitalized leases, are treated similarly to operating leases except that the asset subject to the lease is included in the appropriate fixed asset category, rather than recorded as a Right of use asset, and depreciated over its estimated useful life, or lease term, if shorter.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with ASC 360-10, Property, Plant & Equipment-Overall, we review long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of property and equipment may not be recoverable. Determination of recoverability is based on an estimate of undiscounted future cash flows resulting from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition. In the event that such cash flows are not expected to be sufficient to recover the carrying amount of the assets, we write down the assets to their estimated fair values and recognize the loss in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses are composed of both internal and external costs. Internal costs include salaries and employment-related expenses, including stock-based compensation expense, of scientific personnel and direct project costs. External research and development expenses consist primarily of costs associated with clinical and nonclinical development of PH94B, PH10, and AV-101, stem cell research and development costs, and costs related to the application and prosecution of patents related to AV-101, PH94B, PH10 and our stem cell technology platform. All such costs are charged to expense as incurred.
We also record accruals for estimated ongoing clinical trial costs. Clinical trial costs represent costs incurred by contract research organizations (CROs) and clinical trial sites. Progress payments are generally made to CROs, clinical sites, investigators and other professional service providers. We analyze the progress of the clinical trial, including levels of subject enrollment, invoices received and contracted costs when evaluating the adequacy of accrued liabilities. Significant judgments and estimates must be made in determining the clinical trial accrual in any reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates under different assumptions. Revisions are charged to research and development expense in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become known.
Costs incurred in obtaining product or technology licenses are charged immediately to research and development expense if the product or technology licensed has not achieved regulatory approval or reached technical feasibility and has no alternative future uses. In September 2018, we acquired an exclusive license to develop and commercialize PH94B and an option to acquire a license to develop and commercialize PH10 by issuing an aggregate of 1,630,435 unregistered shares of our common stock having a fair market value of $2,250,000. In October 2018, we exercised our option to acquire an exclusive license to develop and commercialize PH10 by issuing 925,926 shares of our unregistered common stock having a fair market value of $2,000,000. Since, at the date of each acquisition, neither product candidate had achieved regulatory approval and each requires significant additional development and expense, we recorded the costs related to acquiring the licenses and the option as research and development expense.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize compensation cost for all stock-based awards to employees and non-employee consultants based on the grant date fair value of the award. We record stock-based compensation expense over the period during which the employee or other grantee is required to perform services in exchange for the award, which generally represents the scheduled vesting period. We have not granted restricted stock awards to employees or consultants nor do we have any awards with market or performance conditions. Prior to our April 1, 2019 adoption of ASU 2018-07, Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718), Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting (ASU 2018-07), we historically re-measured the fair value of option grants to non-employees as they vested and any resulting increase in value was recognized as an expense during the period over which the services were performed. Under ASU 2018-17, expense recognition for grants to non-employees follows the same methodology as for employees. Noncash expense attributable to compensatory grants of our common stock to non-employees is determined by the quoted market price of the stock on the date of grant and is either recognized as fully-earned at the time of the grant or expensed ratably over the term of the related service agreement, depending on the terms of the specific agreement.
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock-based awards as of the grant date. The Black-Scholes model is complex and dependent upon key data input estimates. The primary data inputs with the greatest degree of judgment are the expected term of the stock options and the estimated volatility of our stock price. The Black-Scholes model is highly sensitive to changes in these two inputs. The expected term of the options represents the period of time that options granted are expected to be outstanding. We use the simplified method in accordance with guidance provided by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to estimate the expected term as an input into the Black-Scholes option pricing model. We determine expected volatility using the historical method, which, because of the relatively limited period during which our stock has been publicly traded on a major exchange and its historically limited trading volume, is based on the historical daily trading data of the common stock of a peer group of public companies over the expected term of the option.
Warrants Issued in Connection with Equity Financing
We generally account for warrants issued in connection with equity financings as a component of equity, unless there is a deemed possibility that we may have to settle the warrants in cash or the warrants contain other features requiring them to be treated as liabilities. For warrants issued with the possibility of cash settlement or otherwise requiring liability treatment, we record the fair value of the issued warrants as a liability at each reporting period and record changes in the estimated fair value as noncash gain or loss in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability approach for financial reporting purposes. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce the deferred tax assets to an amount expected to be realized.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information on recent accounting pronouncements.
Financial Operations Overview and Results of Operations
Net Loss
Although we entered into the AffaMed Agreement in June 2020 and the Bayer Agreement in December 2016, we have not yet achieved recurring revenue-generating status in amounts sufficient to sustain our operations and enable our strategic business plans from any of our product candidates or technologies. Since inception, we have devoted substantial time and effort to developing AV-101 for multiple CNS indications, including manufacturing research, process development and production of AV-101 drug substance and finished drug product, preclinical efficacy and safety studies, and clinical efficacy and safety studies in CNS indications. Since acquiring our exclusive worldwide licenses to PH94B and PH10 in 2018, we have devoted substantial resources focused on research, development and commercialization of PH94B and PH10, including initiatives to advance manufacturing research, process development and production programs for drug substance and finished drug product, additional preclinical safety studies, and clinical efficacy and safety studies in multiple neuropsychiatry indications. Also, from-time-to-time, we have devoted resources to VistaStem’s stem cell technology research and development, bioassay development and small molecule drug rescue initiatives, as well as creating, protecting and patenting intellectual property (IP) related to our product candidates and stem cell technologies, with the corollary initiatives of recruiting and retaining personnel and raising working capital. As of March 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $242.8 million. Our net loss for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 was approximately $17.9 million and $20.8 million, respectively. We expect losses to continue for the foreseeable future, primarily as we engage in further research, development and commercialization activities related to PH94B, PH10 and AV-101, and pursue VistaStem’s potential drug rescue, drug development and CT and RM opportunities.
Summary of the Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2021
On December 22, 2020, we completed a transformative $100 million underwritten public offering (the December 2020 Public Offering) of our securities, consisting of shares of our common stock and shares of our newly created Series D Convertible Preferred Stock (Series D Preferred). After deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us, we received net proceeds of approximately $93.6 million from the sale of our securities in the December 2020 Public Offering. Combined with financing and development and commercialization partnering transactions completed earlier in our fiscal year, aggregating approximately an additional $25 million, the proceeds from the December 2020 Public Offering have provided us with working capital to advance an important stream of potential catalysts across our CNS pipeline, including, among others, our Phase 3 development program for PH94B for the acute treatment of anxiety in adults with social anxiety disorder (SAD) and, upon successful Phase 3 development, submission of our New Drug Application to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and potential U.S. market approval of PH94B.
From an operational perspective, during our fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 (Fiscal 2021), we continued to advance our manufacturing, preclinical and clinical development, and regulatory initiatives necessary for our Phase 3 clinical development of PH94B as a potential acute treatment of anxiety in adults with SAD, PH10 as a potential stand-alone treatment of MDD and AV-101 in combination with probenecid as a potential treatment for NMDAR-focused indications. During the quarter ended March 31, 2021, and thereafter, following the completion of the December 2020 Public Offering, we increased our headcount with the addition of twelve additional employees with significant expertise in various disciplines including manufacturing, regulatory affairs, clinical development, commercial affairs and administrative functions. Further, we accelerated our planning for clinical trials for both PH94B and PH10, culminating in the start of the PALISADE-1 Phase 3 clinical study in late-May 2021. The PALISADE-1 Phase 3 clinical study is part of our PH94B PALISADE Phase 3 program for the acute treatment of anxiety in adult patients with SAD. Throughout Fiscal 2021, we continued to expand our regulatory and intellectual property foundation to support broad clinical development and, ultimately, commercialization of our CNS product candidates in the U.S. and foreign markets.
Throughout Fiscal 2021 and through the date of this Report, a strain of SARS-CoV-2, commonly referred to as COVID-19, has spread to many countries in the world and the outbreak was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. The U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services also declared a public health emergency in the U.S. in response to the outbreak. From time to time during the COVID-19 pandemic, our operations and those of our CROs and CMOs have been and still may be impacted by shelter-in-place orders, social distancing measures, travel bans and restrictions, and certain business and government closures or reductions in service. Our headquarters operations have been significantly curtailed and our employees have worked remotely since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. From time to time since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have experienced delays in the delivery of supplies of active pharmaceutical product (API) or other key materials required to continue development of PH94B and PH10. Future unexpected delays may result in a significant, material delay or disruption to our current clinical development plans, programs, and operations.
During our fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2020, we completed a successful and positive meeting with the FDA regarding Phase 3 clinical development of PH94B for the acute treatment of anxiety in adult patients with SAD, reaching consensus with the FDA on key aspects of the design of our Phase 3 clinical trials of PH94B, which studies will be randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, studies involving a single-event, laboratory-simulated public speaking challenge in adult subjects with SAD. As noted earlier, the initial Phase 3 clinical trial of PH94B, PALISADE-1, commenced in late-May 2021. Dr. Michael Liebowitz, Professor of Clinical Psychiatry at Columbia University, director of the Medical Research Network in New York City, and creator of the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale (LSAS), is the Principal Investigator of PALISADE-1. Target enrollment for PALISADE-1 (completed patients) is approximately 208 adult patients with SAD. As in the statistically significant (p=0.002) public speaking component of the Phase 2 study, the patient-reported Subjective Units of Distress Scale (SUDS) will be used to assess the primary efficacy endpoint in PALISADE-1. Throughout Fiscal 2021, we have been actively engaged in formalizing processes and procedures for the manufacture of PH94B for the PALISADE Phase 3 program and Phase 2 programs in other anxiety indications, and of PH10 for our planned Phase 2B clinical study of PH10 in MDD and other Phase 2 and nonclinical studies of PH10.
In June 2020, we entered into a strategic licensing and collaboration agreement for the clinical development and commercialization of PH94B (the EverInsight Agreement) with EverInsight Therapeutics Inc. (EverInsight), a biopharmaceutical company focused on developing and commercializing transformative pharmaceutical products for patients in Greater China and other parts of Asia. Subsequent to entering into the EverInsight Agreement, in October 2020, EverInsight merged with AffaMed Therapeutics, Inc., which as a combined, complementary entity is focusing on developing and commercializing therapeutics to address ophthalmologic and CNS disorders in Greater China and beyond. Accordingly, we are now referring to EverInsight and the EverInsight Agreement as AffaMed and the AffaMed Agreement, respectively. Under the terms of the AffaMed Agreement, AffaMed is responsible for clinical development, regulatory submissions and commercialization of PH94B for the treatment of SAD, and potentially other anxiety-related indications, in key markets in Asia, including markets in Greater China, South Korea and Southeast Asia (collectively, the Territory). Under the terms of the AffaMed Agreement, in August 2020, we received a non-dilutive upfront license fee payment of $5.0 million from AffaMed. Upon successful development and commercialization of PH94B in the Territory, we are eligible to receive up to $172 million in additional development and commercial milestone payments, plus royalties on commercial sales of PH94B in the Territory. After payment of sublicense fees to Pherin Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (Pherin) pursuant to our PH94B license from Pherin, and payment of consulting fees related to consummation of the AffaMed Agreement, we received net cash proceeds of approximately $4.655 million.
In December 2020, we sold 63,000,000 shares of our common stock in at a public offering price of $0.92 per share and 2,000,000 shares of our Series D Preferred at a public offering price of $21.16 per share, resulting in gross proceeds to us of $100 million (the December 2020 Public Offering). Net proceeds to us from the securities sold in the December 2020 Public Offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us, was approximately $93.6 million. Earlier in Fiscal 2021, in August 2020, we sold, in an underwritten public offering (the August 2020 Public Offering), an aggregate of 15,625,000 shares of our common stock for a public offering price of $0.80 per share, resulting in gross proceeds to us of $12,500,000. We also granted to the underwriter an over-allotment option to purchase up to an additional 2,343,750 shares at a public offering price of $0.80 per share, which option was exercised with respect to 2,243,250 shares (the Exercised Option Shares). The sale of the Exercised Option Shares resulted in additional gross proceeds to us of $1,794,600. Aggregate net proceeds to us from the August 2020 Public Offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us, was approximately $12.9 million.
To satisfy our obligations under the common stock purchase and registration rights agreements that we entered into with Lincoln Park Capital Fund (Lincoln Park) in March 2020, we filed a Registration Statement on Form S-1 (the LPC Registration Statement) with the SEC on March 31, 2020 (Registration No. 333-237514), which the SEC declared effective on April 14, 2020 (the Commencement Date). Subsequent to the Commencement Date and through July 2020, we sold 6,301,995 registered shares of our common stock to Lincoln Park and received aggregate cash proceeds of $2,891,200. We have not sold any additional shares to Lincoln Park under these agreements since July 2020. We terminated the stock purchase agreement with Lincoln Park effective on June 25, 2021.
As a matter of course, we continue to minimize, to the greatest extent possible, cash commitments and expenditures for both internal and external research and development and general and administrative services. To further advance the nonclinical and clinical development of PH94B, PH10 and AV-101, as well as support our operating activities, we continue to carefully manage our routine operating costs, including our internal employee related expenses, as well as external costs relating to regulatory consulting, contract research and development, investor relations and corporate development, legal, acquisition and protection of intellectual property, public company compliance and other professional services and internal costs.
Comparison of Fiscal Years Ended March 31, 2021 and
The following table summarizes the results of our operations for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 (amounts in thousands).
Revenue
We recognized $1,089,500 in sublicense revenue pursuant to the AffaMed Agreement in Fiscal 2021 compared to none in the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 (Fiscal 2020). As noted earlier, in June 2020, we entered into the AffaMed Agreement, pursuant to which we received a non-dilutive upfront license fee payment of $5.0 million in August 2020. We initially recorded this payment as deferred revenue and we are recognizing it as revenue on a straight-line basis over the period in which we expect to perform the services required under the AffaMed Agreement. We currently estimate that we will complete our performance obligations at the end of calendar 2023. While we may potentially receive additional cash payments and royalties in the future under the AffaMed Agreement in the event certain performance-based milestones and commercial sales are achieved, there can be no assurance that the AffaMed Agreement will provide additional revenue beyond that noted or cash payments to us in the near term, or at all.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development (R&D) expense decreased from $13.4 million in Fiscal 2020 to $12.5 million in Fiscal 2021, primarily due to the completion of the Elevate Study of AV-101 in Fiscal 2020, noticeably offset by increased developmental expenses in Fiscal 2021 for PH94B and PH10. Expenses related to the Elevate Study and other AV-101 related nonclinical activities decreased by approximately $5.9 million in Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020, while expenses for PH94B and PH10 preclinical and clinical readiness initiatives increased by $5.2 million in Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020. Salaries and benefits expense increased in Fiscal 2021 as a result of the addition of six new senior-level employees during the third and fourth quarters of Fiscal 2021 and bonus payments made in the third quarter of Fiscal 2021. Noncash research and development expenses, primarily stock-based compensation and equipment depreciation in both periods, accounted for approximately $841,000 and $1,380,000 in Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively.
The following table indicates the primary components of R&D expense for each of the periods (amounts in thousands):
The increase in salaries and benefits expense in Fiscal 2021 reflects (i) the impact of bonus payments made to our Chief Medical Officer (CMO), Chief Scientific Officer (CSO), and members of our scientific staff in December 2020, (ii) modest salary increases to those officers and employees effective in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021; and (iii) the addition of six officer-level employees between December 2020 and March 2021. There were no changes in base compensation levels for our CMO, CSO, or other members of our scientific staff between April 2019 and December 2020 and no bonus expense or payments during that same period.
Current year stock-based compensation expense reflects the amortization of option grants made to our CMO, CSO, members of our scientific staff, our new senior-level employees and certain clinical and scientific consultants since June 2016, all earlier outstanding grants having become fully vested and amortized during Fiscal 2021 or earlier. Grants awarded after March 31, 2020, including those granted during Fiscal 2021, account for approximately $348,700 of expense in Fiscal 2021, offset by an expense reduction of approximately $814,400 attributable to certain options granted between June 2016 and January 2019 that became fully vested and amortized during Fiscal 2021 or earlier. Fiscal 2021 stock compensation expense is further reduced by approximately $79,500 due to the absence of the impact of immediate vesting attributable to certain options granted in May 2019 or fully vesting prior to March 31, 2020. Except for grants to new employees, expense attributable to recent option grants is generally being amortized over two-year to three-year vesting periods, with essentially all of the grants made since May 2019, including those made in Fiscal 2021, being 25% vested and expensed upon grant, in accordance with the terms of the respective grants. Grants to new employees generally vest 25% on the first anniversary of the grant date and ratably monthly over the next three years.
Consulting and other professional services reflects fees incurred, generally on an as-needed basis, for project-based scientific, nonclinical and clinical development and regulatory advisory and analytical services rendered to us by third parties, including by members of our Scientific Advisory Board and CNS Clinical and Regulatory Advisory Board, especially in support of our PH94B and PH10 development initiatives. Fiscal 2021 expense reflects a reduction of $110,000 in development support payments to Pherin which terminated in April 2020 under the terms of our PH94B and PH10 license agreements and a $95,000 reduction in analytical and other services in support of PH94B and PH10 development compared to Fiscal 2020, a portion of which is attributable to the conversion of a consultant to an employee in Fiscal 2021.
Technology license and royalties expense primarily reflects legal counsel and other costs related to patent prosecution and protection pursuant to our stem cell technology license agreements, our AV-101 patents, or patents that we have elected to pursue for commercial purposes, as well as recurring annual license fees. These costs do not occur ratably throughout the year or between years. In both periods, this expense includes legal counsel and other costs we have incurred to advance various patent applications in the U.S. and numerous foreign countries, primarily with respect to AV-101 and our stem cell technology platform, but also nominally with respect to our PH94B and PH10 intellectual property portfolios during Fiscal 2021.
AV-101 project expense for Fiscal 2020 reflects the costs of actively conducting the Elevate Study in MDD, including various CROs, investigator and clinical site costs, and determination of topline study results, as well as CRO support services for AV-101 projects for indications other than MDD, and, to lesser extent, expense incurred to manufacture additional quantities of AV-101 for use in potential future clinical development of AV-101 in a number of potential CNS indications. AV-101 project expense for Fiscal 2021 primarily reflects the cost of certain preclinical studies related to the use of AV-101 with probenecid and certain AV-101 manufacturing stability studies, and costs incurred to finalize the results of the Elevate Study for regulatory submission.
PH94B and PH10 project expenses for both Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020 reflect research and development and manufacturing and regulatory initiatives necessary to facilitate Phase 3 clinical development and readiness of PH94B for acute treatment of anxiety in adults with SAD and Phase 2B development of PH10 for MDD. Manufacturing, formulation and analysis of sufficient quantities of drug substance and drug product have been the key initiatives during Fiscal 2021 for advancing the further clinical development of both PH94B and PH10, with costs for PH94B significantly exceeding those for PH10 in Fiscal 2021 and in comparison to those of Fiscal 2020. From time to time during Fiscal 2021, production, logistics and analytical processes for both of these product candidates were delayed due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Stem cell and other project related expenses reflects costs associated with drug rescue applications of our stem cell technology in both years. These expenses are typically incurred by our in-house scientific personnel. As a result of shelter-in-place and remote working requirements related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, such expenses were reduced to an insignificant level during Fiscal 2021.
Rent expense for both Fiscal 2020 and Fiscal 2021 reflects our implementation of ASC 842 effective April 1, 2019 and the requirement to recognize, as an operating lease related to our South San Francisco office and laboratory facility, a right-of-use asset and a lease liability, both of which must be amortized over the expected lease term. The underlying lease reflects commercial property rents prevalent in the South San Francisco real estate market at the time of our November 2016 lease amendment extending the lease of our headquarters facilities in South San Francisco by five years from July 31, 2017 to July 31, 2022. We allocate total rent expense for our South San Francisco facility between research and development expense and general and administrative expense based generally on square footage dedicated to each function. Following our implementation of ASC 842, the modest increase in rent expense between periods is primarily related to Fiscal 2021 increases in such items as common area maintenance fees, taxes and insurance which are generally assessed to us by our landlord.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative (G&A) expense decreased to approximately $6.5 million in Fiscal 2021 from approximately $7.4 million in Fiscal 2020. Cash compensation in Fiscal 2021 increased by approximately $0.7 million while noncash stock-based compensation decreased by approximately $1.0 million in Fiscal 2021. Further, during Fiscal 2020 we modified certain outstanding warrants and recognized non-cash warrant modification expense of $826,900. Noncash G&A expense, approximately $1,731,000 for Fiscal 2021, decreased from approximately $3,543,000 for Fiscal 2020, primarily due to the decreases in stock-based compensation and warrant modifications noted above and the noncash components of investor and public relations expense in Fiscal 2020 attributable to the amortization of the fair value of common stock or warrants granted to service providers.
The following table indicates the primary components of G&A expense for each of the periods (amounts in thousands):
The increase in salaries and benefits expense for Fiscal 2021 primarily reflects the impact of (i) bonus payments made to our Chief Executive Officer (CEO), Chief Financial Officer (CFO), Vice President-Corporate Development (VP-Corporate Development) and a non-officer member of our administrative staff in December 2020; (ii) modest salary increases to those officers and employee effective in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021; and (iii) the addition of three senior-level employees during February 2021 and March 2021. There were no changes in base compensation levels for our CEO, CFO, or VP-Corporate Development between April 2019 and December 2020 and no bonus expense or payments to them during that same period.
Current year stock-based compensation expense reflects the amortization of option grants made to our CEO, CFO, VP Corporate Development, administrative staff, independent members of our Board and certain consultants since June 2016, all earlier outstanding grants having become fully vested and amortized during Fiscal 2021 or earlier. Grants awarded after March 31, 2020 account for approximately $677,000 of expense in Fiscal 2021, offset by an expense reduction of approximately $1,515,000 attributable to certain options granted between June 2016 and January 2019 that became fully vested and amortized during Fiscal 2021 or earlier. Fiscal 2021 stock compensation expense is further reduced by approximately $141,700 due to the absence of the impact of immediate vesting attributable to certain options granted in May 2019 or fully vesting prior to March 31, 2020. Except for grants to new employees, expense attributable to recent option grants is generally being amortized over two-year to three-year vesting periods, with essentially all of the grants made since May 2019, including those made in Fiscal 2021, being 25% vested and expensed upon grant, in accordance with the terms of the respective grants. Grants to new employees generally vest 25% on the first anniversary of the grant date and ratably monthly over the next three years.
Board fees and other consulting services represent, in both periods, fees paid as consideration for Board and Board Committee services to the independent members of our Board of Directors and, additionally in the current year, other consulting service fees related to commercial analyses of both PH94B and PH10.
Legal, accounting and other professional fees for Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020 includes expense related to routine corporate legal fees as well as the accounting expense related to the annual audit of our prior year financial statements and the three quarterly reviews of our current year financial statements. In Fiscal 2021, we incurred additional consulting fees related to revenue recognition accounting for the AffaMed Agreement and, in Fiscal 2020, we incurred fees attributable to services provided by an international business development consultant.
Investor and public relations expense includes the fees of our various external service providers for a broad spectrum of investor relations, public relations and social media services, and well as market awareness and strategic advisory and support functions and initiatives that, in Fiscal 2020, included numerous in-person meetings in multiple U.S. and certain foreign markets and other communication activities focused on expanding global market awareness of the Company, our CNS product candidate pipeline and technologies and our research and development programs, including among registered investment professionals and investment advisors, individual and institutional investors, and prospective strategic collaborators for development and commercialization of our product candidates in major pharmaceutical markets worldwide. During Fiscal 2021, we curtailed the number and scope of external service providers engaged in these activities compared to the prior year. Further, in Fiscal 2020, in addition to cash fees and expenses we incurred for such activities, we recognized approximately $105,900 of noncash expense attributable to the amortization of the fair value of stock and warrants granted in previous periods to various corporate development, investor relations, and market awareness service providers. No such noncash expense was incurred in Fiscal 2021.
The increase in insurance expense for Fiscal 2021 is primarily attributable to the market-rate increase in the premium for our directors and officers liability insurance upon renewal of our policy in May 2020.
In Fiscal 2020, travel expense reflects costs associated with in-person management presentations and meetings held in multiple U.S. markets and certain international markets with existing and potential individual and institutional investors, investment professionals and advisors, media, and securities analysts, as well as various investor relations, market awareness and corporate development and partnering initiatives and in monitoring the progress of our Elevate Study. As a result of periodic shelter-in-place restrictions and travel and workplace precautions and restrictions associated with the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, during Fiscal 2021, such meetings have occurred remotely without requiring in-person business travel by our executives.
Rent expense for both periods presented reflects our implementation of ASC 842 effective April 1, 2019 and the requirement to recognize, as an operating lease related to our South San Francisco office and laboratory facility, a right-of-use asset and a lease liability, both of which must be amortized over the expected lease term. The underlying lease reflects commercial property rents prevalent in the South San Francisco real estate market at the time of our November 2016 lease amendment extending the lease of our headquarters facilities in South San Francisco by five years from July 31, 2017 to July 31, 2022. We allocate total rent expense for our South San Francisco facility between research and development expense and general and administrative expense based generally on square footage dedicated to each function. Following our implementation of ASC 842, increases or decreases in rent expense between periods are primarily related to changes in such items as common area maintenance fees, taxes and insurance which are generally assessed to us by our landlord.
Beginning in the second quarter of Fiscal 2021, we began to amortize the deferred contract acquisition costs related to our acquisition of the AffaMed Agreement, composed of the cash payments of $220,000 for sublicense fees which we were obligated to make pursuant to our PH94B license from Pherin, and $125,000 of cash fees and $125,000 fair value of common stock issued for consulting services, in each case exclusively related to our acquisition of the AffaMed Agreement. The contract acquisition costs are amortized over the expected term of the services to be provided under the AffaMed Agreement. During Fiscal 2021, we amortized $102,400 of contract acquisition costs.
During Fiscal 2020, we completed three warrant modifications resulting in an aggregate of $826,900 of noncash warrant modification expense as described below.
●
On December 4, 2019, we modified outstanding warrants previously issued as a part of completed private placements to purchase an aggregate of approximately 6.6 million unregistered shares of our common stock to temporarily reduce, for a period of two years or until the expiration of the warrant, if sooner, the exercise price of such warrants to $0.50 per share, in order to more closely align the exercise price of the warrants with the then-current trading price of our common stock. Following the two-year period during which the exercise price is reduced, the exercise price will revert to its pre-modification price. We determined that this modification increased the fair value of the modified warrants by $702,500, which we recorded as warrant modification expense.
●
Also, on December 4, 2019, we issued additional warrants (the Additional Warrants) to purchase an aggregate of 325,000 additional shares of our common stock to the participants in our fall 2019 private placement of shares of common stock and warrants to increase the number of unregistered shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of the warrants from 50% to 100% of the number of shares issued in the private placement. The Additional Warrants are exercisable through March 31, 2024 at an exercise price of $0.50 per share. We determined that the fair value of the Additional Warrants was $88,800, which we also recognized as noncash warrant modification expense.
●
Further, on December 19, 2019, we modified additional outstanding warrants previously issued as a part of a completed private placement to purchase a total of 80,431 shares of our unregistered common stock to permanently reduce the exercise price of such warrants to $0.805 per share and to extend the term of such warrants through December 31, 2022, in order to more closely align the exercise price of the warrants with the then-current trading price of our common stock and to provide additional time for the holders to exercise the warrants. We determined that these modifications increased the fair value of the subject warrants by $35,600, which we also recognized as noncash warrant modification expense.
The shares underlying the modified warrants and the Additional Warrants were included in a Registration Statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-237968) that was declared effective by the Commission on May 13, 2020.
Interest and Other Income, Net
Interest income, net totaled $1,600 for Fiscal 2021 compared to interest income, net of $30,100 for Fiscal 2020. The following table indicates the primary components of interest income and expense for each of the periods (amounts in thousands):
In both periods, interest income relates to cash deposits in interest-bearing cash equivalent accounts. Although cash balances were generally higher during Fiscal 2021, the decline in market interest rates during Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020 resulted in reduced interest income. Interest expense in both periods relates to interest paid on insurance premium financing notes and on our financing lease of office equipment subject to ASC 842, and in Fiscal 2021, to interest accrued on our Payroll Protection Program loan prior to its voluntary repayment, including interest, in December 2020.
We recognized $1,385,600 and $1,263,600 in Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively, representing the 10% cumulative dividend accrued on outstanding shares of our Series B 10% Convertible Preferred Stock (Series B Preferred) as an additional deduction in arriving at net loss attributable to common stockholders in the Consolidated Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Loss included in Item 8, Part II of this Annual Report. In December 2020, one holder of Series B Preferred converted 28,571 shares of Series B Preferred into an equal number of unregistered shares of our common stock and we issued an additional 160,062 unregistered shares of our common stock in payment of $124,600 of accrued dividends.
The Series D Preferred that we issued in the December 2020 Public Offering contained a beneficial conversion feature (a BCF), which arises when a debt or equity security is issued with an embedded conversion option that is deemed beneficial to the investor, that is, in-the-money, at inception because the conversion option has an effective conversion price that is less than the market price of the underlying stock at the commitment date (with respect to the Series D Preferred, the date the security was actually issued rather than the date the agreement to do so was entered into, referred to as the Commitment Date). In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 470-20, Debt- Debt with Conversion and Other Options (ASC 470-20), an embedded BCF is required to be recognized separately by allocating a portion of the proceeds equal to the intrinsic value of the feature to additional paid-in capital. ASC 470-20 also provides that the intrinsic value is to be calculated as of the Commitment Date. The Series D Certificate of Designation provides that the Series D Preferred has a conversion price of $0.92 per share on an as-converted basis the (Conversion Price). The Conversion Price compared to the closing price of $1.42 per share of our common stock on the Commitment Date results in a difference of $0.50 per share. That difference multiplied by the 46 million shares of our common stock issuable upon conversion of the Series D Preferred resulted in an aggregate BCF of $23.0 million. We did not recognize the impact of the BCF at December 31, 2020 because the Series D Preferred was not convertible into common stock prior to the Approval Date (the date of our Special Meeting of Stockholders held on March 5, 2021). Following approval by our stockholders of the Charter Amendment at the Special Meeting in March 2021, the contingency of the BCF was eliminated and we recognized the BCF as a noncash charge in arriving at net loss attributable to common stockholders in our Consolidated Statement of Operations and Comprehensive Loss for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 and as a corresponding increase in additional paid-in capital in our Consolidated Statement of Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit). The recognition of the BCF on the Series D Preferred had no impact in aggregate on our stockholders’ equity or on our cash position.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception in May 1998 through March 31, 2021, we have financed our operations and technology acquisitions primarily through the issuance and sale of our equity and debt securities for cash proceeds of approximately $197.8 million, as well as from an aggregate of approximately $22.7 million of government research grant awards (excluding the fair market value of government sponsored and funded clinical trials), strategic collaboration payments, intellectual property licensing and other revenues. Additionally, we have issued equity securities with an approximate value at issuance of $38.2 million in noncash acquisitions of product licenses and in settlements of certain liabilities, including liabilities for professional services rendered to us or as compensation for such services.
Recent Developments
Jefferies ATM. On May 14, 2021, we entered into an Open Market Sale AgreementSM (the Sales Agreement) with Jefferies LLC, as sales agent (Jefferies), with respect to an at-the-market offering program under which we may offer and sell, from time to time, shares of our common stock with an aggregate offering price of up to $75.0 million through Jefferies as our sales agent. As of the date of this Report, we have not completed any sales under the Sale Agreement.
December 2020 Public Offering. In December 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement (the December 2020 Underwriting Agreement) pursuant to which we sold 63,000,000 shares of our common stock in the December 2020 Public Offering at a public offering price of $0.92 per share and 2,000,000 shares of Series D Preferred at a public offering price of $21.16 per share, resulting in gross proceeds to us of $100 million. Net proceeds to us from the securities sold in the December 2020 Public Offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us, was approximately $93.6 million. Following approval by our stockholders of the Charter Amendment at the Special Meeting in March 2021 and through the date of this Annual Report, we issued 46 million shares of our common stock upon conversion of all outstanding shares of Series D Preferred issued in the December 2020 Public Offering.
August 2020 Public Offering. In August 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement pursuant to which we sold, in the August 2020 Public Offering an underwritten public offering (the August 2020 Public Offering), an aggregate of 15,625,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $0.80 per share, resulting in gross proceeds to us of $12,500,000. Under the terms of the August 2020 Underwriting Agreement, we granted to the underwriter an over-allotment option (the Over-Allotment Option) to purchase up to an additional 2,343,750 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $0.80 per share. The underwriter exercised the Over-Allotment Option with respect to 2,243,250 shares (the Exercised Option Shares), resulting in additional gross proceeds to us of $1,794,600. Aggregate net proceeds to us from the August 2020 Public Offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us, was approximately $12.9 million.
AffaMed Agreement. In June 2020, we entered into the AffaMed Agreement, a strategic licensing and collaboration agreement for the clinical development and commercialization of PH94B for acute treatment of anxiety in adults with SAD and other potential anxiety-related disorders, with EverInsight, now operating as AffaMed Therapeutics. Under the terms of the AffaMed Agreement, AffaMed agreed to make a non-dilutive upfront license payment of $5.0 million to us, which we received in August 2020. The $5.0 million upfront license payment resulted in net cash proceeds to us of approximately $4.655 million after the sublicense payment we agreed to make to Pherin pursuant to our PH94B license from Pherin, and payment for consulting services related to the AffaMed Agreement.
LPC Agreement. Additionally, on March 24, 2020, we entered into the LPC Agreement with Lincoln Park, pursuant to which Lincoln Park committed to purchase up to $10,250,000 of our common stock at market-based prices over a period of 24 months. To satisfy our obligations under the registration rights agreement, we filed the LPC Registration Statement, which the SEC declared effective on April 14, 2020 (Registration No. 333-237514). Subsequent to the effectiveness of the LPC Registration Statement and through July 2020, we sold 6,301,995 registered shares of our common stock to Lincoln Park and received gross cash proceeds of $2,891,200. We have not sold any shares of our common stock pursuant to the Lincoln Park Agreement since July 2020.
Warrant Exercises. Further, between December 2020 and March 31, 2021, certain holders of outstanding warrants exercised such warrants to purchase an aggregate of 6,396,302 shares of our common stock and we received cash proceeds of $4,924,800 from such exercises. Since March 31, 2021 and through the date of this Annual Report, holders of outstanding warrants have exercised warrants to purchase an additional 1,508,768 shares of our common stock and we have received cash proceeds of approximately $1,105,700, resulting in aggregate cash proceeds of $6,030,500 received from warrant exercises between December 2020 and the date of this Annual Report.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
During Fiscal 2021, we received approximately $119 million in net cash proceeds from the transactions described above. At March 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $103.1 million, which we believe is sufficient to fund our planned operations for well beyond the twelve months following the issuance of the financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report, and indicating our ability to continue as a going concern. Nevertheless, we have not yet developed products that generate recurring revenue and, assuming successful completion of our planned clinical and nonclinical programs, we will need to invest substantial additional capital resources to commercialize any of them.
During the next twelve months, we plan to (i) continue PALISADE-1 and prepare for and initiate multiple studies in our PALISADE Phase 3 program for development and commercialization of PH94B as an acute treatment of anxiety in adult patients with SAD, (ii) prepare for and initiate multiple small exploratory Phase 2A studies of PH94B in additional anxiety disorders, (iii) prepare for and initiate a Phase 2B clinical study of PH10 as a potential stand-alone treatment for MDD, (iv) prepare for and initiate a Phase 1B clinical study of AV-101 in combination with probenecid to enable assessment of potential exploratory Phase 2A development of the combination in MDD and certain neurological disorders, and (v) conduct nonclinical studies involving PH94B, PH10 and AV-101.
Although we believe our current cash position is sufficient to fund our planned operations for well beyond the next twelve months, when necessary and advantageous, we may raise additional capital through the sale of our equity securities in one or more (i) public offerings (ii) private placements to accredited investors, and/or (iii) in strategic licensing and development collaborations involving one or more of our drug candidates in markets outside the United States, similar to the AffaMed Agreement. Subject to certain restrictions, our Registration Statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-254299) (the S-3 Registration Statement), which became effective on March 26, 2021 remains available for future sales of our equity securities under the Sales Agreement with Jefferies, or in one or more public offerings from time to time. While we may make additional sales of our equity securities under the S-3 Registration Statement, we do not have an obligation to do so.
In addition to the potential sale of our equity securities, we may also seek to enter research, development and/or commercialization collaborations similar to the AffaMed Agreement and the Bayer Agreement to provide funding, including non-dilutive funding, for development of one or more of our CNS product candidate programs. We may also seek additional government grant awards or agreements similar to our prior agreement with the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH), Baylor University and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs in connection with certain government-sponsored studies of AV-101. Such strategic collaborations may provide non-dilutive resources to advance our strategic initiatives while reducing a portion of our future cash outlays and working capital requirements. We may also pursue intellectual property arrangements similar to the AffaMed Agreement and the Bayer Agreement with other parties. Although we may seek additional collaborations that could generate revenue and/or provide non-dilutive funding for development of our product candidates, as well as new government grant awards and/or agreements, no assurance can be provided that any such collaborations, awards or agreements will occur in the future.
Our future working capital requirements will depend on many factors, including, without limitation, potential impacts related to the continuing COVID-19 pandemic, the scope and nature of opportunities related to our success and the success of certain other companies in nonclinical and clinical trials, including our development and commercialization of our current product candidates and various applications of our stem cell technology platform, the availability of, and our ability to obtain, government grant awards and agreements, and our ability to enter into collaborations on terms acceptable to us. To further advance the clinical development of PH94B, PH10, and AV-101 and, to a lesser extent, our stem cell technology platform, as well as support our operating activities, we plan to continue to carefully manage our routine operating costs, including our employee headcount and related expenses, as well as costs relating to regulatory consulting, contract manufacturing, research and development, investor and public relations, business development, legal, intellectual property acquisition and protection, public company compliance and other professional services and operating costs.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, there can be no assurance that our current strategic collaborations under the AffaMed Agreement and/or the Bayer Agreement will generate revenue from future potential milestone payments, or that future financings or government or other strategic collaborations will be available to us in sufficient amounts, in a timely manner, or on terms acceptable to us, if at all. If we are unable to obtain additional financing on a timely basis when needed, our business, financial condition, and results of operations may be harmed, the price of our stock may decline, we may be required to reduce, defer, or discontinue certain of our research and development activities and we may not be able to continue as a going concern. As noted above, the Consolidated Financial Statements included in part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report do not include any adjustments that might result from the negative outcome of this uncertainty.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The following table summarizes changes in cash and cash equivalents for the fiscal years stated (in thousands):
The decrease in cash used in operations results primarily from increased spending on PH94B and PH10 nonclinical development, manufacturing advancements, and, for PH94B in particular, Phase 3-enabling initiatives as a part of our preparations for the PALISADE Phase 3 program, combined with expansion of our infrastructure by the addition of experienced senior-level executives in manufacturing, clinical and regulatory disciplines in the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2021, offset by the impact of the completion of the Elevate Study, which commenced at the end of the first calendar quarter of 2018 and was operationally completed during the third fiscal quarter of Fiscal 2020. Additionally, cash used in operations during Fiscal 2021 was reduced by the August 2020 receipt of the $5.0 million nondilutive upfront payment from EverInsight under the AffaMed Agreement. Cash used in investing activities in Fiscal 2021 primarily reflects the purchase of certain manufacturing equipment acquired for use by our contract development and manufacturing organization in connection with the production of PH94B drug product. Cash provided by financing activities in Fiscal 2021 primarily reflects net cash proceeds to us from sales of our common stock and Series D Preferred stock pursuant to the December 2020 Public Offering and from sales of our common stock pursuant to the August 2020 Public Offering, the LPC Agreement and the Spring 2020 Private Placement, as well as from the exercise of outstanding warrants, net of routine insurance premium financing note and financing lease payments. We received a Payroll Protection Program loan in April 2020 and voluntarily repaid all principal and accrued interest on the loan in December 2020, following the completion of the December 2020 Public Offering. Cash provided by financing activities in Fiscal 2020 reflects the cash proceeds from our Fall 2019 Private Placement, our Fall 2019 Warrant Offering, the exercise of certain warrants following the modification of their exercise prices, proceeds from our January 2020 Registered Direct Offering and initial transactions under the LPC Agreement, net of routine payments on our insurance premium financing notes and lease.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Other than contractual obligations incurred in the normal course of business, we do not have any off-balance sheet financing arrangements or liabilities, guarantee contracts, retained or contingent interests in transferred assets or any obligation arising out of a material variable interest in an unconsolidated entity. VistaStem has two inactive, wholly owned subsidiaries, Artemis Neuroscience, Inc., a Maryland corporation, and VistaStem Canada, Inc., an Ontario corporation.