ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes thereto included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in those forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Forward-Looking Statements
The information in this discussion contains forward-looking statements and information within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act, which are subject to the “safe harbor” created by those sections. The words “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “expects,” “intends,” “may,” “plans,” “projects,” “will,” “should,” “could,” “predicts,” “potential,” “continue,” “would” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements, although not all forward-looking statements contain these identifying words. We may not actually achieve the plans, intentions or expectations disclosed in our forward-looking statements and you should not place undue reliance on our forward-looking statements. Actual results or events could differ materially from the plans, intentions and expectations disclosed in the forward-looking statements that we make. The forward-looking statements are applicable only as of the date on which they are made, and we do not assume any obligation to update any forward-looking statements. All forward-looking statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are made based on our current expectations, forecasts, estimates and assumptions, and involve risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause results or events to differ materially from those expressed in the forward-looking statements. In evaluating these statements, you should specifically consider various factors, uncertainties and risks that could affect our future results or operations. These factors, uncertainties and risks may cause our actual results to differ materially from any forward-looking statement set forth in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should carefully consider these risk and uncertainties described and other information contained in the reports we file with or furnish to the SEC before making any investment decision with respect to our securities. All forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by this cautionary statement.
Business Overview
VirTra, Inc. (the “Company,” “VirTra,” “we,” “us” and “our”) is a global provider of judgmental use of force training simulators, firearms training simulators and driving simulators for the law enforcement, military, educational and commercial markets. The Company’s patented technologies, software, and scenarios provide intense training for de-escalation, judgmental use-of-force, marksmanship and related training that mimics real-world situations. VirTra’s mission is to save and improve lives worldwide through practical and highly-effective virtual reality and simulator technology.
The VirTra firearms training simulator allows marksmanship and realistic scenario-based training to take place on a daily basis without the need for a shooting range, protective equipment, role players, or a scenario-based training site. We have developed a higher standard in simulation training including capabilities such as: multi-screen, video-based scenarios, unique scenario authoring ability, superior training scenarios, the patented Threat-Fire™ shoot-back system, powerful patented gas-powered simulated recoil kits, and more. The simulator also allows students to receive immediate feedback from the instructor without the potential for sustaining injuries by the instructor or the students. The instructor is able to teach and re-mediate critical issues, while placing realistic stress on the students due to the realism and safe training environment created by the VirTra simulator.
VirTra’s Driver Training Simulator is a vehicle-based simulator, complete with next-generation graphics, motion and a variety of other features. The system is designed to provide safe, reliable environment for efficient skill transfer for all law enforcement driver training. In addition, the driving rig adds realism with vibration and motion while the modern physics-based rendering engine provides not only photo-realistic realism but critical hazards such as dust storms, rain, and sun glare. VirTra’s Driver Training Simulator provides an extensive and realistic range of training environments that allow for initial driver familiarization and orientation to advanced concepts, high-risk pursuits and defensive driving drills.
We also are engaged in licensing our technology to That’s Eatertainment Corp. (“TEC”), a developer and operator of a combined dining and entertainment concept centered on an indoor shooting experience. Mitchell Saltz, who was a member of our Board of Directors until his passing in October 2020, was the former Chairman of the Board and majority stockholder of TEC. Accordingly, until October 2020, TEC was a related party.
Business Strategy
We have four main customer groups, namely, law enforcement, military, educational (includes colleges and police academies) and civilian. These are very different markets and require different sales and marketing programs as well as personnel. Our focus is to expand the market share and scope of our training simulators sales to these identified customer groups by pursuing the following key growth strategies:
● Build Our Core Business. Our goal is to profitably grow our market share by continuing to develop, produce and market the most effective simulators possible. Through disciplined growth in our business, we have achieved a solid balance sheet by increasing our working capital and limiting our bank debt. We plan to add staff to our experienced management team as needed to meet the expected increase in demand for our products and services as we invest in potential growth.
● Increase Total Addressable Market. We plan to increase the size of our total addressable market. This effort will focus on new marketing and new product and/or service offerings for the purpose of widening the number of types of customers who might consider our products or services uniquely compelling.
● Broaden Product Offerings. Since formation in 1993, our company has had a proud tradition of innovation in the field of simulation and virtual reality. We plan to release revolutionary new products and services as well as to continue incremental improvements to existing product lines. In some cases, the Company may enter a new market segment via the introduction of a new type of product or service.
● Partners and Acquisitions. We try to spend our time and funds wisely and not tackle tasks that can be done more efficiently with partners. For example, international distribution is often best accomplished through a local distributor or agent. We are also open to the potential of acquiring additional businesses or of being acquired ourselves, based on what is expected to be optimal for our long-term future and our stockholders.
Product Offerings
Our simulator products include the following:
● V-300™ Simulator - a 300° wrap-around screen with video capability is the higher standard for simulation training
○ The V-300™ is the higher standard for decision-making simulation and tactical firearms training. Five screens and a 300-degree immersive training environment ensures that time in the simulator translates into real world survival skills. The system reconfigures to support 15 individual firing lanes.
○ A key feature of the V-300™ shows how quickly judgment decisions have to be made, and if they are not made immediately and quickly, it can lead to the possible loss of lives. This feature, among others, supports our value proposition to our customers that best practices is being prepared enough for the surprises that could be around every corner and the ability to safely neutralize any life-threatening encounters.
● V-180™ Simulator - a 180° screen with video capability is for smaller spaces or smaller budgets
○ The V-180™ is the higher standard for decision-making simulation and tactical firearms training. Three screens and a 180-degree immersive training environment ensures that time in the simulator translates into real world survival skills.
● V-100™ Simulator & V-100™ MIL - a single-screen based simulator systems
○ The V-100™ is the higher standard among single-screen firearms training simulators. Firearms training mode supports up to 4 individual firing lanes at one time. The optional Threat-Fire™ device safely simulates enemy return fire with an electric impulse (or vibration version), reinforcing performance under pressure. We offer an upgrade path, so a V-100™ firearms training and force options simulator can affordably grow into an advanced multi-screen trainer in upgraded products that we offer customers for future purchase.
○ The V-100™ MIL is sold to various military commands throughout the world and can support any local language. The system is extremely compact and can even share space with a standard classroom or fits into almost any existing facility. If a portable firearms simulator is needed, this model offers the most compact single-screen simulator on the market today - everything organized into one standard case. The V-100™ MIL is the higher standard among single-screen small arms training simulators. Military Engagement Skills mode supplies realistic scenario training taken from real world events.
○ The V-ST PRO™ a highly-realistic single screen firearms shooting and skills training simulator with the ability to scale to multiple screens creating superior training environments. The system’s flexibility supports a combination of marksmanship and use of force training on up to 5 screens from a single operator station. The V-ST PRO™ is also capable of displaying 1 to 30 lanes of marksmanship featuring real world, accurate ballistics.
● VirTra Driving Sim is a vehicle-based simulator, complete with next-generation graphics, motion and a variety of other features. The system is designed to provide safe, reliable environment for efficient skill transfer for all law enforcement driver training.
● Virtual Interactive Coursework Training Academy (V-VICTA)™ enables law enforcement agencies, to effectively teach, train, test and sustain departmental training requirements through nationally accredited coursework and training scenarios using our simulators.
● Subscription Training Equipment Partnership (STEP)™ is a program that allows agencies to utilize VirTra’s simulator products, accessories, and V-VICTA interactive coursework on a subscription basis.
● V-Author™ Software allows users to create, edit, and train with content specific to agency’s objectives and environments. V-Author™ is an easy to use application capable of almost unlimited custom scenarios, skill drills, targeting exercises and firearms course-ware proven to be highly effective for users of VirTra simulation products.
● Simulated Recoil Kits - a wide range of highly realistic and reliable simulated recoil kits/weapons
● Return Fire Device - the patented Threat-Fire™ device which applies real-world stress on the trainees during simulation training.
● TASER©, OC spray and low-light training devices that interact with VirTra’s simulators for training.
Recent Developments
During March 2020, a global pandemic was declared by the World Health Organization related to the rapidly growing outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19). The pandemic has significantly impacted the economic conditions in the U.S., accelerating during half of March and April as federal, state and local governments react to the public health crisis, creating significant uncertainties in the U.S. economy. On March 30, 2020, the Governor for the State of Arizona issued a stay-at-home order which expired on May 15, 2020, upon which Arizona entered Phase I of reopening. The Company carefully reviewed all rules and regulations of the government orders and determined it met the requirements of an essential business to remain open. The Company had the majority of its staff begin working remotely in mid-March, with only essential personnel continue working at the manufacturing and production facilities and currently remains in Arizona’s Phase I of reopening. This situation is rapidly changing and additional impacts to the business may arise that we are not aware of currently. While the disruption is currently expected to be temporary, there is uncertainty around the duration. The ultimate impact of the pandemic on the Company’s results of operations, financial position, liquidity or capital resources cannot be reasonably estimated at this time. To date, the COVID-19 restrictions have resulted in reduced customer shipments and customer system installations. These recent developments are expected to result in lower recognized revenue and possibly lower gross margin when they occur. To date, there have been no order cancellations; rather, there have only been delays in when orders ship or installations occur and all delayed orders remain in backlog. Although not a material component of our company, a significant adverse change in the business climate could continue to affect the value of the Company’s long-term investment in TEC, including the long-term note receivable from TEC. Any future impact cannot be reasonably estimated at this time. The Company is no longer investing in Certificates of Deposits as a precautionary measure to increase its liquid cash position and preserve financial flexibility considering uncertainty in the U.S. and global markets resulting from COVID-19. Additionally, the Company’s stock repurchase program was suspended as a result of interim rulings for public-company recipients of a PPP loan under the CARES Act. The stock repurchase suspension will remain in effect for the duration of the outstanding PPP loan.
  
Results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
Revenues. Revenues were $19,087,631 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $18,711,923 for the same period in 2019, representing an increase of $375,708 or 2.0%. The increase was the result of slight increases in sales of simulators, STEP sales, accessories, curriculum and training, and recurring extended warranty revenue in 2020.
Cost of Sales. Cost of sales were $7,187,210 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $8,998,232 for the same period in 2019, representing a decrease of $1,811,022, or 20.1%. The year-over-year reduction was due to decreases in material costs, service and warranty costs, and travel expenses for both new and existing customers. In addition, the decrease in cost was a result of an increase in STEP sales where the cost of equipment is reclassified to property and equipment and amortized over the life of the equipment.
Gross Profit. Gross profit was $11,900,421 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $9,713,691 for the same period in 2019, representing an increase of $2,186,730, or 22.5%. The gross profit margin was 62.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 51.9% for the same period in 2019. The increase in gross profit was primarily due to differences in the quantity and type of simulator systems, type of accessories and variety of services sold, combined with a decrease in cost of sales.
Operating Expenses. Net operating expense was $10,674,109 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $9,451,373 for the same period in 2019, representing an increase of $1,222,736, or 12.9%. During the year ended December 31, 2020, there was a $346,477 allowance for bad debt on accounts and note receivable and a one-time $840,000 impairment loss recorded as general and administrative expense on the Statement of Operations. For the year ended December 31, 2019, there was a $119,750 allowance for bad debt on accounts and note receivable and a $280,000 impairment loss recorded as general and administrative expenses on the Statement of Operations. Additionally, the year-over-year increase in general and administrative was due to an increase in salaries and benefits, research and development, and facility expenses, partially offset by a decrease in tradeshow and travel related costs.
Income from Operations. Income from operations was $1,226,312 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $262,318 for the same period in 2019, representing an increase of $963,994, or 367.4%, resulting from a decrease in cost of sales partially offset by an increase in operating expenses.
Income Tax Expense. Income tax expense (benefit) was ($218,800) for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $446,725 for the same period in 2019, representing a decrease in expense of $665,525, or -148.9%. The decrease resulted from a true-up of our deferred tax asset and temporary timing differences in deferred revenue, reserves, depreciation and amortization, and net operating loss carryforward, offset by an adjustment for taxes prepaid and refunded from prior year tax overpayments.
Other Income (Expense). Other income net of other expense was $13,035 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $109,130 for the same period in 2019, representing a decrease of $96,095, or 88.1%, primarily resulting from a decrease in interest income.
Net Income (Loss). Net income was $1,478,403 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net loss of $75,277 for the same period in 2019, representing an increase of $1,553,680, or 2,063.9%, related to each respective section discussed above.
Adjusted Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization (AEBITDA). Explanation and Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures:
Earnings (loss) before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization and before other non-operating costs and income (“EBITDA”) and adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP measures. Adjusted EBITDA also includes non-cash stock option expense, impairment expense and bad debt expense. Other companies may calculate adjusted EBITDA differently. The Company calculates its adjusted EBITDA to eliminate the impact of certain items it does not consider to be indicative of its performance and its ongoing operations. Adjusted EBITDA is presented herein because management believes the presentation of adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to the Company’s investors regarding the Company’s financial condition and results of operations and because adjusted EBITDA is frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties in the evaluation of companies in the Company’s industry, several of which present EBITDA and a form of adjusted EBITDA when reporting their results. Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of the Company’s results as reported under U.S. GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative for net income, cash flows from operating activities and other income or cash flow statement data prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP or as a measure of profitability or liquidity. A reconciliation of net income to adjusted EBITDA is provided in the following table:
Liquidity and Capital Resources. Liquidity is the ability of an enterprise to generate adequate amounts of cash to meet its needs for cash requirements. The Company had $6,841,985 and $1,415,091 cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company also held certificates of deposits with maturities less than 12 months, which are recorded as short-term investments, totaling $0.00 and $1,915,000 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Working capital was $10,269,397 and $7,173,280 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $2,245,637 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and net cash used in operating activities was $1,914,296 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted primarily from a decrease in accounts receivable, increases in accounts payable and deferred revenue offset by increases in inventory and unbilled revenue, as well as other changes in operating assets and liabilities. Operating activities in 2019 consisted of changes in working capital with significant cash used for increased accounts receivable and unbilled revenue offset by deferred revenue.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $1,852,993 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $1,181,110 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Investing activities in 2020 consisted of redemptions of certificates of deposits, purchase of intangible assets, and reclassification of inventory to property and equipment. Investing activities in 2019 consisted of reclassification of inventory to, and sales of property and equipment, purchase of intangible assets, and purchase and redemption of certificates of deposit.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $1,328,263 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and net cash used in financing activities was $352,104 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Financing activities in 2020 consisted primarily of the proceeds received from the PPP Promissory Note. Financing activities in 2019 consisted of repurchase of stock options, purchase of treasury stock and repayment of the note payable for the machine shop.
Backlog
The Company defines bookings as the total of newly signed contracts and purchase orders received in a defined time period. The Company received bookings totaling $5.5 million for the three months ended December 31, 2020. The Company defines backlog as the accumulation of bookings from signed contracts and purchase orders that are not started, or are uncompleted performance objectives, and cannot be recognized as revenue until delivered in a future quarter. Backlog also includes extended warranty agreements and STEP agreements that are deferred revenue recognized on a straight-line basis over the life of each respective agreement. As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s backlog was $14.6 million.
Management estimates the majority of the new bookings received in the fourth quarter of 2020 will be converted to revenue in 2021. Management’s estimate for the conversion of backlog is based on current contract delivery dates, however, contract terms and install dates are subject to modification and are routinely changed at the request of the customer or due to factors outside the Company’s control.
Cash Requirements
Our management believes that our current capital resources will be adequate to continue operating our company and maintaining our current business strategy for more than 12 months from the filing of this Annual Report. We are, however, open to raising additional funds from the capital markets, at a fair valuation, to purchase a business or assets, expand our production capacity, expand our product and services, to enhance our sales and marketing efforts and effectiveness, and to aggressively take advantage of market opportunities. There can be no assurance, however, that additional financing will be available to us when needed or, if available, that it can be obtained on commercially reasonable terms. If we are not able to obtain the additional financing on a timely basis, if and when it is needed, we will be forced to scale down our plans for expanded marketing and sales efforts.
Critical Accounting Policies
We have identified the following policies below as critical to our business and results of operations. Our reported results are impacted by the application of the following accounting policies, some of which require management to make subjective or complex judgments. These judgments involve making estimates and assumptions about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may significantly impact quarterly or annual results of operations. For all of these policies, management cautions that future events rarely develop exactly as expected, and the best estimates routinely require adjustment. The methods, estimates, interpretations and judgments we use in applying our most critical accounting policies can have a significant impact on the results that we report in our financial statements.
The following discussion provides supplemental information regarding the significant estimates, judgments and assumptions made in implementing the Company’s critical accounting policies.
Basis of Presentation and Use of Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates and judgments. Management bases the estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that it believes are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. For any given individual estimate or assumption we make, it is possible that other people applying reasonable judgment to the same facts and circumstances could develop different estimates. Significant accounting estimates in these financial statements include valuation assumptions for share-based payments, allowance for doubtful accounts and notes receivable, inventory reserves, accrual for warranty reserves, the carrying value of long-lived assets, income tax valuation allowances, the carrying value of cost basis investments, and the allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in our contracts with customers. Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts and Notes Receivable
The Company only ships product when it has reasonable assurance that it will receive payment from the customer. When such assurance is not available, the Company will require payment in advance. For customers other than United States governmental agencies, the Company generally requires advance deposits prior to shipment. The assessment of a customer’s credit-worthiness is reliant on management’s judgment regarding such factors as previous payment history, credit rating, credit references and market reputation. If any sales are made that ultimately become uncollectible, the Company charges the uncollected amount against a reserve for uncollectible accounts. This reserve is established and adjusted from time to time based on management’s assessment of each outstanding receivable and the likelihood of it being collected.
The Company regularly evaluates the financial condition of the borrowers under its notes receivable considering such factors as those discussed above and the known and inherent risks in the notes. The Company establishes a reserve once it has estimated that all or a portion of the notes receivable is uncollectible.
Inventory Valuation
Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value with cost being determined on the average cost method. Work in progress and finished goods inventory includes an allocation for capitalized labor and overhead. Provision is made for obsolete, slow moving or defective items where appropriate. This estimated valuation requires that management make certain judgments about the likelihood that specific inventory items may have minimal or no realizable value in the future. These judgments are based on the current quantity of the item on hand compared to historical sales volumes, potential alternative uses of the products and the age of the inventory item.
Cost Method Investments
The Company holds an investment in TEC. The stock of TEC does not have a readily determinable fair value and is measured at cost minus impairment, if any. Management regularly evaluates the recoverability of its investment in TEC based on TEC’s performance and financial position. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company utilized TEC’s recent offer to sell, and an investor’s bona fide offer to purchase, as an indicator of the fair value of TEC’s common stock. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company evaluated the recoverability and determined to fully impair. There are no other investments as of December 31, 2020.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are carried at cost, net of depreciation. Depreciation commences at the time the assets are placed in service. Depreciation is provided using the straight-line method over the estimated economic lives of the assets or for leasehold improvements, over the shorter of the estimated useful life or the remaining lease term. In determining the depreciation rate, historical disposal experience, holding periods and trends in the market are reviewed.
We periodically perform reviews to determine whether facts and circumstances exist which indicate that the carrying amount of assets may not be recoverable or that the useful life of assets are shorter or longer than originally estimated. We assess the recoverability of our assets by comparing the projected undiscounted net cash flows associated with the related asset or group of assets over their estimated remaining lives against their respective carrying amounts. Impairment, if any, is based on the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of those assets.
Revenue Recognition
We account for revenue recognition in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, which we adopted on January 1, 2018, using the modified retrospective transition method. We evaluated the distinct performance obligations and the pattern of revenue recognition of our contracts upon adoption of the standard. Consequently, after our review of contracts, we concluded that the impact of adopting the standard did not have a significant effect on our balance sheets, statements of operations, changes in stockholders’ equity, or cash flows.
Revenues include sales of products and services and are net of discounts. Product sales consist of simulators, upgrade components, scenarios, scenario software, recoil kits, Threat-Fire® and other accessories. Services include installation, training, limited assurance-type warranties, extended service-type warranty agreements and related support.
We determined our revenue recognition through the identification of the contract with a customer, identification of the performance obligations within the contract, determination of the transaction price, allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations within the contract and recognition of revenue when, or as, the performance obligations have been satisfied.
In reviewing our contracts, the identification of the performance obligations within the contracts, allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations and the point when performance obligations were satisfied required significant judgment. In identifying the performance obligations, the Company considered whether the customer has a reasonable expectation that the Company will provide those goods or services and would view those goods or services as part of the negotiated exchange. The Company believes that, generally, our performance obligations are explicit in the contracts. The Company allocates the transaction price to the performance obligations based on the relative standalone selling price basis. This required consideration and determination of the stand-alone selling price for each distinct good or service using various sources of information. Under ASC 606, the Company recognizes revenue only when it satisfies a performance obligation by transferring the good or service to the customer. To determine when the performance obligation had been transferred to the customer, the Company considered control of the performance obligation transferred once the customer had the right and ability to direct the use of the product or service and the customer obtained substantially all of the remaining benefit from the products and services.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company calculates the cost of awards of equity instruments based on the grant date fair value of the awards using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing valuation model, which incorporates various assumptions including volatility, expected term and risk-free interest rates.
The expected term of the options is the estimated period of time until exercise and was determined using the SEC’s safe harbor rules, using an average of vesting and contractual terms, as we did not have sufficient historical experience of similar awards. Expected stock price volatility is based on historical volatility of the Company’s stock. The risk-free interest rate is based on the implied yield available on United States Treasury zero-coupon issues with an equivalent remaining term. The estimated fair value of stock-based compensation awards and other options is amortized on a straight-line basis over the relevant vesting period. Share-based compensation expense is recognized based on awards ultimately expected to vest. Forfeitures are recorded in subsequent periods when they occur.
Income Taxes
We use significant judgment in determining the provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and any valuation allowance recorded against net deferred tax assets. In preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate income taxes in each of the domestic and foreign jurisdictions in which we operate. This process involves estimating the actual current tax liability together with assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items, such as depreciation and amortization of property and equipment and benefits of net operating loss tax carryforwards. These differences result in deferred tax assets, which include tax loss carryforwards, and liabilities. We then assess the likelihood that deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income, and to the extent that recovery is not likely or there is insufficient operating history, we establish a valuation allowance. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets within the jurisdiction from which they arise, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. In projecting future taxable income, we begin with historical results and incorporate assumptions about the amount of future state, federal, and foreign pretax operating income adjusted for items that do not have tax consequences. The assumptions about future taxable income require significant judgment and are consistent with the plans and estimates we are using to manage the underlying business. To the extent we establish or change a valuation allowance in a period, we include an adjustment within the tax provision of our statements of operations.
Deferred tax assets reflect current statutory income tax rates in effect for the period in which the deferred tax assets are expected to be realized. As changes in tax laws or statutory tax rates are enacted, deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted through the provision of income taxes.
The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations in a multitude of jurisdictions across our global operations. A tax benefit from an uncertain tax position may be recognized when it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination, including resolutions of any related appeals or litigation processes, on the basis of the technical merits. We (1) record unrecognized tax benefits as liabilities in accordance with ASC 740 and (2) adjust these liabilities when our judgment changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available. Because of the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from our current estimate of the unrecognized tax benefit liabilities. These differences will be reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense in the period in which new information is available.
Warranty Reserve
For sales to customers within the U.S. and for all international sales, we typically provide a one-year assurance-type warranty but may provide longer warranty periods if contractually required. We provide a warranty on our simulators that covers the cost of replacement parts and labor on defective products. We estimate, based upon a review of historical warranty claim experience, the costs that may be incurred under our warranty policies and record a liability in the amount of such estimate at the time a product is sold. Factors that affect our warranty liability include the number of units sold, historical and anticipated rates of warranty claims, and cost per claim. At our discretion, based upon the cost to either repair or replace a product, we have occasionally replaced such products covered under warranty with a new or refurbished model. We periodically assess the adequacy of our recorded warranty liability and make adjustments to the accrual as claims data and historical experience warrants.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to our financial statements, included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors. The term “off-balance sheet arrangement” generally means any transaction, agreement or other contractual arrangement to which an entity unconsolidated with us is a party, under which we have any obligation arising under a guarantee contract, derivative instrument or variable interest or a retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to such entity or similar arrangement that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support for such assets.