Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes. The MD&A is intended to assist in understanding our financial condition and results of operations. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated due to various factors discussed under “Risk Factors,” “Forward-Looking Statements,” and elsewhere in this 2020 Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a leading provider of experiential leisure travel and face-to-face events and marketing experiences company with operations in the U.S., Canada, the United Kingdom, continental Europe, the United Arab Emirates, and Iceland. We are committed to providing unforgettable experiences to our clients and guests. We operate through three reportable business segments: GES North America, GES EMEA (collectively, “GES”), and Pursuit.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic is having and will likely continue to have a significant and negative impact on our operations and financial performance, with live events largely shut down and tourism activity significantly disrupted. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we implemented aggressive cost reduction measures to preserve cash, including furloughs, layoffs, mandatory unpaid time off, or salary reductions for all employees, and the reduction of discretionary spending. We also suspended future dividend payments and share repurchases, and we availed ourselves of governmental assistance programs for wages and tax relief. As event activity essentially halted, GES partnered with other members in the event trade business to convert convention centers into temporary hospitals in early April 2020. GES also completed virtual and hybrid events during the second half of 2020. We continue to implement measures to successfully adapt for the long-term impact of COVID-19. In August 2020, we secured additional capital to strengthen our liquidity position by entering into an investment agreement with funds managed by private equity firm Crestview Partners who made an initial investment of $135 million, offset in part by $9.2 million in fees, in newly issued perpetual convertible preferred stock. Refer to Note 15 - Common and Preferred Stock of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2020 Form 10-K) for further information. In August 2020, we also amended our Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “2018 Credit Agreement”) to provide financial flexibility, which, among other things waives our financial covenants until September 30, 2022. Refer to Note 12 - Debt and Finance Lease Obligations of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2020 Form 10-K) for further information.
Due to the deteriorating macroeconomic environment related to the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in disruptions to our operations and the decline in our stock price, we determined interim triggering events occurred in the first and second quarters of 2020, which required us to assess the carrying values of goodwill and intangible assets. Based on this assessment, we recorded non-cash goodwill impairment charges of $185.8 million during 2020, which included a full impairment charge to the remaining GES goodwill balance. Our remaining goodwill balance as of December 31, 2020 of $99.8 million pertains to our Pursuit business. We also recorded a non-cash impairment charge to intangible assets of $15.7 million during 2020 related to our U.S. audio-visual production business. The duration and impact of COVID-19 may result in additional future impairment charges as facts and circumstances evolve. Refer to Note 9 - Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2020 Form 10-K) for further information.
Results of Operations
A discussion related to our results of operations for 2020 compared to 2019 is presented below. A discussion related to our results of operations for 2019 compared to 2018 can be found under Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 26, 2020, and is incorporated herein by reference.
Financial Highlights
(1)
Subsequent to the issuance of the December 31, 2019 consolidated financial statements, we identified prior period errors related to the recognition of revenue of GES’ Corporate Accounts’ third-party services. Revenue from these services should have been recorded on a net basis to reflect only the fees received for arranging these services, whereas previously, we recorded this revenue on a gross basis, thus overstating revenue and cost of services by the same amount. As a result, GES’ 2019 revenue has been corrected to reflect this immaterial gross-to-net adjustment. Refer to Note 1 - Overview and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for additional information.
(2)
Refer to Note 23 - Segment Information of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2020 Form 10-K) for a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measure, segment operating income (loss), to the most directly comparable GAAP measure.
** Change is greater than +/- 100%
•
Total revenue decreased $887.3 million, primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic as GES experienced show postponements and cancellations as exhibition and event activity remained largely dormant. Additionally, Pursuit temporarily closed its properties in mid-March through most of the second quarter of 2020 and was affected by lower visitation due to continued border closures and other travel restrictions.
•
Net loss attributable to Viad was $374.1 million during 2020 as compared to income of $22.0 million during 2019. The 2020 net loss was primarily due to lower revenue, impairment charges of $203.1 million mainly related to goodwill impairment charges, and restructuring charges of $13.4 million primarily related to transformation efforts at GES to significantly reduce costs and create a lower and more flexible cost structure, offset in part by lower performance-based compensation expense as we reduced our estimated performance achievement to zero as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. During 2019, we recorded charges related to our partial withdrawal from the Central States Pension Plan of $15.7 million, a legal settlement charge of $8.5 million, restructuring charges of $8.4 million, and an asset impairment charge of $5.3 million, primarily related to our audio-visual production business in the United Kingdom.
•
Total segment operating loss(1) was $116.2 million during 2020 as compared to income of $90.2 million during 2019. The 2020 losses are primarily due to lower revenue at GES and Pursuit as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, offset in part by the elimination of performance-based incentives.
Foreign Exchange Rate Variances
We conduct our foreign operations primarily in Canada, the United Kingdom, Iceland, the Netherlands, Germany, and to a lesser extent, in certain other countries.
The following table summarizes the foreign exchange rate variance effects (or “FX Impact”) on revenue and segment operating income (loss) from our significant international operations:
Revenue and segment operating income (loss) were primarily impacted by variances of the British pound, the Canadian dollar, the Euro, and the Icelandic krona relative to the U.S. dollar. Future changes in exchange rates may impact overall expected profitability and historical period-to-period comparisons when revenue and segment operating income (loss) are translated into U.S. dollars.
Analysis of Revenue and Operating Results by Reportable Segment
GES
The following table presents a comparison of GES’ reported revenue and segment operating income (loss) to organic revenue(2) and organic segment operating income (loss)(2) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
** Change is greater than +/- 100%
(1)
Subsequent to the issuance of the December 31, 2019 consolidated financial statements, we identified prior period errors related to the recognition of revenue of GES’ Corporate Accounts’ third-party services. Revenue from these services should have been recorded on a net basis to reflect only the fees received for arranging these services, whereas previously, we recorded this revenue on a gross basis, thus overstating revenue and cost of services by the same amount. As a result, GES’ 2019 revenue has been corrected to reflect this immaterial gross-to-net adjustment. Refer to Note 1 - Overview and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.
(2)
Organic revenue and organic segment operating income (loss) are non-GAAP financial measures that adjust for the impacts of exchange rate variances and acquisitions, if any, until such acquisitions are included in the entirety of both comparable periods presented. For more information about organic revenue and organic segment operating income (loss), see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section of this MD&A.
(3)
Refer to Note 23 - Segment Information of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2020 Form 10-K) for a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measure, segment operating income (loss), to the most directly comparable GAAP measure.
GES North America
GES North America revenue decreased $595.2 million or 67.3%, primarily due to show postponements and cancellations due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Revenue earned during 2020 was primarily driven by shows completed during the first quarter of 2020, compensation for work completed on cancelled shows, storage, and the conversion of convention centers into temporary hospitals in early April 2020, as well as virtual and hybrid events completed during the second half of 2020. Organic revenue* decreased $594.8 million or 67.3%.
GES North America segment operating loss was $56.4 million during 2020 as compared to income of $27.7 million during 2019. The 2020 losses are primarily due to the decrease in revenue, offset in part by the elimination of performance-based incentives and by the reduction in operating costs by reducing wages and discretionary costs. Organic segment operating loss* was $56.4 million during 2020 as compared to income of $27.7 million during 2019.
GES EMEA
GES EMEA revenue decreased $163.2 million or 75.3%, primarily due to show postponements and cancellations due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Revenue earned during 2020 was primarily driven by shows completed during the first quarter of 2020, compensation for work completed on cancelled shows, and the conversion of convention centers into temporary hospitals in early April 2020, as well as virtual and hybrid events completed during the second half of 2020. Organic revenue* decreased $162.5 million or 75.0%.
GES EMEA segment operating loss was $17.5 million during 2020 as compared to income of $8.3 million during 2019. The 2020 losses are primarily due to the decrease in revenue, offset in part by the elimination of performance-based incentives and by the reduction in operating costs by reducing wages and discretionary costs. Organic segment operating loss* was $16.9 million during 2020 as compared to income of $8.3 million during 2019.
* Refer to footnote (2) in the above table for more information about the non-GAAP financial measures of organic revenue and organic segment operating income (loss).
Pursuit
The following table presents a comparison of Pursuit’s reported revenue and segment operating income (loss) to organic revenue(3) and organic segment operating income (loss)(3) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
(1)
Revenue by line of business does not agree to Note 2 - Revenue and Related Contract Costs and Contract Liabilities of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2020 Form 10-K) as the amounts in the above table include product revenue from food and beverage and retail operations within each line of business.
(2)
Acquisitions include Mountain Park Lodges (acquired June 2019) and Belton Chalet (acquired May 2019).
(3)
Organic revenue and organic segment operating income (loss) are non-GAAP financial measures that adjust for the impacts of exchange rate variances and acquisitions, if any, until such acquisitions are included in the entirety of both comparable periods presented. For more information about organic revenue and organic segment operating income (loss), see the “Non-GAAP Measures” section of this MD&A.
(4)
Refer to Note 23 - Segment Information of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2020 Form 10-K) for a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measure, segment operating income (loss), to the most directly comparable GAAP measure.
Pursuit revenue decreased $146.0 million or 65.5%, primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic as Pursuit temporarily closed its properties in mid-March through most of the second quarter of 2020. We phased in most of Pursuit’s attractions and lodging operations starting in May 2020 with most open and operational during the third quarter of 2020, although at reduced capacities. The travel and hospitality industry continues to be negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic as travel restrictions and border closures largely remain in place. Organic revenue* decreased $142.9 million or 70.4%.
Pursuit segment operating loss was $42.3 million during 2020 as compared to income of $54.3 million during 2019. The 2020 declines are primarily due to the decrease in revenue, offset in part by the reduction in operating costs through efforts to maximize profitability. Organic segment operating loss* was $43.4 million during 2020 as compared to income of $48.6 million during 2019.
* Refer to footnote (3) in the above table for more information about the non-GAAP financial measures of organic revenue and organic segment operating income (loss).
Performance Measures
We use the following key business metrics to evaluate the performance of Pursuit’s attractions business:
•
Number of visitors. The number of visitors allows us to assess the volume of tickets sold at each attraction during the period.
•
Revenue per attraction visitor. Revenue per attraction visitor is calculated as total attractions revenue divided by the total number of visitors at all Pursuit attractions during the period. Total attractions revenue includes ticket sales and ancillary revenue generated by attractions, such as food and beverage and retail revenue. Total attractions revenue per visitor measures the total spend per visitor that attraction properties are able to capture, which is important to the profitability of the attractions business.
•
Effective ticket price. Effective ticket price is calculated as revenue from the sale of attraction tickets divided by the total number of visitors at all comparable Pursuit attractions during the period.
We use the following key business metrics, common in the hospitality industry, to evaluate Pursuit’s hospitality business:
•
Revenue per Available Room. RevPAR is calculated as total rooms revenue divided by the total number of room nights available for all comparable Pursuit hospitality properties during the period. Total rooms revenue does not include non-rooms revenue, which consists of ancillary revenue generated by hospitality properties, such as food and beverage and retail revenue. RevPAR measures the period-over-period change in rooms revenue per available room for comparable hospitality properties. RevPAR is affected by average daily rate and occupancy, which have different implications on profitability.
•
Average Daily Rate. ADR is calculated as total rooms revenue divided by the total number of room nights sold for all comparable Pursuit hospitality properties during the period. ADR is used to assess the pricing levels that the hospitality properties are able to realize. Increases in ADR lead to increases in rooms revenue with no substantial effect on variable costs, therefore having a greater impact on margins than increases in occupancy.
•
Occupancy. Occupancy is calculated as the total number of room nights sold divided by the total number of room nights available for all comparable Pursuit hospitality properties during the period. Occupancy measures the utilization of the available capacity at the hospitality properties. Increases in occupancy result in increases in rooms revenue and additional variable operating costs (including housekeeping services, utilities, and room amenity costs), as well as increases in ancillary non-rooms revenue (including food and beverage and retail revenue).
The following table provides Pursuit’s same-store key performance indicators. The same-store metrics indicate the performance of all Pursuit’s properties and attractions that we owned and operated at full capacity, considering seasonal closures, for the entirety of both periods presented. For Pursuit properties and attractions located outside of the U.S., comparisons to the prior year are on a constant U.S. dollar basis, using the current year quarterly average exchange rates for previous periods, to eliminate the FX Impact. We believe this same-store constant currency basis provides better comparability between reporting periods.
(1)
Attractions Same-Store Key Performance Indicators exclude FlyOver Iceland (opened August 2019) and Open Top Touring (opened September 2020). Hospitality Same-Store Key Performance Indicators exclude the Glacier Basecamp Lodge (purchased January 2020), West Glacier RV Park & Cabins (opened July 2019), the Mountain Park Lodges (acquired in June 2019), and the Belton Chalet (acquired in May 2019).
(2)
The rooms that were out of service as a result of property closures due to the COVID-19 pandemic were excluded from room nights available when calculating hospitality RevPAR and occupancy.
On July 18, 2020, one of our off-road Ice Explorers was involved in an accident while enroute to the Athabasca Glacier, resulting in three fatalities and multiple other serious injuries. We continue to support the victims and their families, and we are fully cooperating
with the applicable regulatory authorities to investigate this accident. The Columbia Icefield Adventure attraction remained closed through the rest of the season while the investigation was underway.
For the health and well-being of our employees, guests, and community, Pursuit’s year-round attractions and lodging properties were closed temporarily starting in mid-March and remained closed during most of the second quarter of 2020. The majority of Pursuit’s properties were open and operational during the third quarter of 2020, although at reduced capacities. St. Mary Lodge and Glacier Park Lodge remained closed due to a government-imposed closure at the East Glacier entrance at Glacier National Park. We seasonally closed our non-year-round properties during the fourth quarter of 2020. Additionally, temporary government mandated closures occurred at FlyOver Canada and FlyOver Iceland during the fourth quarter of 2020. In order to mitigate the negative financial and operational impacts, we reduced all non-essential capital expenditures during the first and second quarters of 2020 resulting in the delay of the opening of FlyOver Canada Toronto, which is now anticipated to open near the end of 2023. We resumed important growth investments in September of 2020, and now anticipate opening FlyOver Las Vegas in the third quarter of 2021 and the Sky Lagoon in the second quarter of 2021.
Attractions. The decrease in same-store visitors and revenue per attraction was driven by the temporary closure of our attractions and lower visitation due to the continued border closures and travel restrictions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Pursuit’s attractions were open during the third quarter of 2020, although at reduced capacities.
Hospitality. The decrease in RevPAR and ADR was driven by lower demand as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
During 2020 and 2019, Pursuit derived approximately 67% and 66% of its revenue, respectively, and 44% and 88% of its segment operating loss and income, respectively, from its Canadian operations. Accordingly, the strengthening or weakening of the Canadian dollar, relative to other currencies, could affect customer volumes and the results of operations. The 2020 results were negatively impacted by travel restrictions and border closures, which affected long-haul travelers to Canada that is largely dependent on foreign customer visitation.
Other Expenses
** Change is greater than +/- 100%.
Corporate Activities - The decrease in corporate activities expense during 2020 relative to 2019 was primarily due to lower headcount, lower performance-based compensation expense as we reduced our estimated performance achievement to zero as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and higher acquisition transaction-related costs in 2019, offset in part by fees and expenses related to the equity raise and credit facility amendment in 2020.
Interest Expense - The increase in interest expense relative to 2019 was primarily due to higher debt balances during the first half of 2020.
Multi-Employer Pension Plan Withdrawal - During 2019, we finalized the terms of a new collective bargaining agreement with the Teamsters 727 union. The terms included a withdrawal from the underfunded Central States Pension Plan. Accordingly, we recorded a charge of $15.5 million, which represented the estimated present value of future contributions we will be required to make to the plan as a result of this withdrawal from the plan and $0.2 million of other withdrawal costs. Additionally, we recorded $0.5 million in 2020 related to the withdrawal from one of our multi-employer plans.
Restructuring Charges - Restructuring charges during 2020 and 2019 were primarily related to the elimination of certain positions and facility closures at GES, as well as charges related to the closure and liquidation of GES’ United Kingdom-based audio-visual services business during 2020. The 2019 actions arose in connection with our ongoing efforts to simplify and transform GES for greater profitability. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, we accelerated our transformation and streamlining efforts at GES to significantly reduce costs and create a lower and more flexible cost structure focused on servicing our more profitable market segments.
The 2020 charges also included amounts related to the elimination of certain positions at our corporate office in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Legal Settlement - During 2019, we recorded a charge to resolve a legal dispute at GES involving a former industry contractor.
Impairment Charges - During 2020, due to the deteriorating macroeconomic environment related to the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in disruptions to our operations and the decline in our stock price, we recorded non-cash goodwill impairment charges of $185.8 million primarily related to the write-off of GES’ goodwill, a non-cash impairment charge to intangible assets of $15.7 million related to our audio-visual production business in the U.S., and fixed asset impairment charges of $1.6 million. During 2019, we recorded asset impairment charges of $5.3 million related to our audio-visual production business in the United Kingdom.
Income Tax Expense - Our effective income tax rate was negative 3.9% for 2020 as compared to 9.6% for 2019. The negative effective tax rate for 2020 was due to no tax benefits being recorded in our U.S., United Kingdom, and other European jurisdictions as a result of recording a valuation allowance during the second quarter of 2020 against our net deferred tax assets in these jurisdictions due to our belief that it is more likely than not that we will be unable to realize the tax benefits from our current year losses in these jurisdictions. The 9.6% effective rate for 2019 was low primarily due a $4.5 million benefit resulting from the remeasurement of our Alberta deferred tax assets due to a statutory rate reduction.
Loss from Discontinued Operations - Loss from discontinued operations during 2020 was primarily due to settlement and legal expenses related to previously sold operations. Loss from discontinued operations for 2019 was primarily related to legal expenses, offset in part by a favorable legal settlement related to previously sold operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In early March 2020, we began to see event postponements and cancellations at GES, as well as cancelled bookings at Pursuit as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Although we were in compliance with the financial covenants of our 2018 Credit Agreement as of March 31, 2020, we entered into an amendment to our 2018 Credit Agreement in May 2020, which waived our financial covenants for the quarter ending June 30, 2020. As the shut-down of live events and tourism activities escalated, we expected to be unable to meet our financial covenants beginning with the quarter ending September 30, 2020. During the third quarter of 2020, we secured additional capital to strengthen our liquidity position and amended our 2018 Credit Agreement to provide financial covenant relief and financial flexibility as described below.
On August 5, 2020, we entered into an investment agreement with funds managed by private equity firm Crestview Partners (the “Investment Agreement”) who made an initial investment of $135 million, offset in part by $9.2 million in fees, in newly issued perpetual convertible preferred stock that carries a 5.5% cumulative quarterly dividend, which is payable in cash or in-kind at Viad’s option (the “Convertible Preferred Stock”). The Convertible Preferred Stock is convertible into shares of our common stock at a conversion price of $21.25 per share. The Investment Agreement also includes a delayed draw commitment of up to $45 million in additional Convertible Preferred Stock, which we may access during the 12 months following the August 5, 2020 closing date on the same terms and conditions as the initial investment. The proceeds from Crestview’s initial investment were used to repay a portion of our 2018 Credit Facility, will provide additional short-term liquidity, will fund capital expenditures, and will support general corporate purposes. On August 5, 2020, we entered into an amendment to our 2018 Credit Agreement, which, among other things, (i) waives our financial covenants until September 30, 2022 (the “Covenant Waiver Period”) and (ii) requires us to maintain minimum liquidity of $100 million, with liquidity defined as unrestricted cash and available capacity on our 2018 Credit Facility. The interest rate on the borrowings is equal to the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) plus 350 basis points, with a LIBOR floor of one percent during the Covenant Waiver Period. The LIBOR floor continues until the end of the 2018 Credit Agreement. Viad pledged 100% of the capital stock of its wholly-owned domestic subsidiaries and its top-tier foreign subsidiaries (other than Esja Attractions ehf.). Fees related to the amendment were approximately $1.7 million.
Cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash were $42.0 million as of December 31, 2020, as compared to $62.0 million as of December 31, 2019. Our total available liquidity was $258.0 million, including the available capacity on our 2018 Credit Facility of $173.5 million, unrestricted cash of $39.5 million, and an additional $45 million available through the delayed draw commitment from Crestview Partners. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used net cash from operating activities of $80.2 million. We believe that our existing sources of liquidity will be sufficient to fund operations and capital commitments, including approximately $60 million in capital expenditures in select growth investments, for at least the next 12 months.
As of December 31, 2020, we held approximately $36.1 million of our cash and cash equivalents outside of the U.S., consisting of $15.6 million in Canada, $9.8 million in the United Kingdom, $7.2 million in the Netherlands, $1.8 million in Iceland, $1.2 million in the United Arab Emirates, and $0.5 million in other countries.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
The change in net cash (used in) provided by operating activities of $188.4 million was due to net losses at GES and Pursuit due to the COVID-19 pandemic, offset in part by a reduction in the working capital needed to support lower business volumes and active working capital management.
Investing Activities
The decrease in net cash used in investing activities of $158.8 million was primarily due to proceeds from the termination of our life insurance policies, proceeds from dispositions of property and other assets in 2020, including $17.1 million from the sale of the GES warehouse in San Diego, cash paid for acquisitions in 2019, and a decrease in capital expenditures as we reduced all non-essential capital expenditures during most of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Financing Activities
The decrease in net cash provided by financing activities of $7.2 million was primarily due to net debt payments of $49.9 million during 2020 compared to net debt proceeds of $84.8 million during 2019 under the 2018 Credit Facility, offset substantially in part by the proceeds from the issuance of Convertible Series A Preferred Stock.
Debt and Finance Lease Obligations
Refer to Note 12 - Debt and Finance Lease Obligations of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2020 Form 10-K) for further discussion.
Guarantees
Refer to Note 21 - Litigation, Claims, Contingencies, and Other of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2020 Form 10-K) for further discussion.
Share Repurchases
Our Board of Directors previously authorized us to repurchase shares of our common stock from time to time at prevailing market prices. Effective February 7, 2019, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of an additional 500,000 shares. In March 2020, our Board of Directors suspended our share repurchase program for the foreseeable future. Prior to the suspension, we repurchased 53,784 shares on the open market for $2.8 million in 2020. No shares were repurchased on the open market during 2019. As of December 31, 2020, 546,283 shares remained available for repurchase. The Board of Directors’ authorization does not have an expiration date.
Additionally, we repurchased shares related to tax withholding requirements on vested restricted share-based awards.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We are required to make estimates and assumptions that affect our reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. Critical accounting policies are those policies that are most important to the portrayal of our financial position and results of operations, and that require us to make the most difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. We identified and discussed with our audit committee the following critical accounting policies and estimates and the methodology and disclosures related to those estimates:
Revenue recognition - Revenue is measured based on a specified amount of consideration in a contract with a customer, net of commissions paid to customers and amounts collected on behalf of third parties. We recognize revenue when a performance obligation is satisfied by transferring control of a product or service to a customer. Revenue for goods and services provided for which we do not have control of the goods or services before that good or service is transferred to a customer is recorded on a net basis to reflect only the fees received for arranging these services.
GES’ service revenue is primarily derived through its comprehensive range of services to event organizers and corporate brand marketers including Core Services, Audio-visual, and Event Technology. GES’ service revenue is earned over time over the duration of the exhibition, conference or corporate event, which generally lasts one to three days; however, we use the practical expedient of recognizing service revenue at the close of the event when we have the right to invoice, or when a customer cancels a contract. GES’ product revenue is derived from the build of exhibits and environments and graphics. GES’ product revenue is recognized at a point in time upon delivery of the product, or when a customer cancels a contract.
Pursuit’s service revenue is derived through its accommodations, admissions, transportation, and travel planning services. Pursuit’s product revenue is derived through food and beverage and retail sales. Pursuit’s revenue is recognized at the time services are performed or upon delivery of the product. Pursuit’s service revenue is recognized over time as the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits. Pursuit’s product revenue is recognized at a point in time.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets - Goodwill and other intangible assets with indefinite useful lives are not amortized, but instead are tested for impairment at least annually. Intangible assets with finite lives are amortized over their respective estimated useful lives and are reviewed for impairment if an event occurs or circumstances change that would indicate the intangible asset’s carrying value may not be recoverable. Our reporting units are defined, and goodwill is tested, at either an operating segment level or at the component level of an operating segment, depending on various factors including the internal reporting structure of the operating segment, the level of integration among components, the sharing of assets and other resources among components, and the benefits and likely recoverability of goodwill by the component’s operations.
Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level on an annual basis as of October 31, and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more-likely-than-not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value. Due to the deteriorating macroeconomic environment related to the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in disruptions to our operations and the decline in our stock price, we determined interim triggering events occurred in the first and second quarters of 2020, which required us
to assess the carrying values of goodwill and intangible assets. Based on this assessment, we recorded non-cash goodwill impairment charges of $185.8 million during 2020, which included a full impairment charge to the remaining GES goodwill balance. We also recorded a non-cash impairment charge to intangible assets of $15.7 million during 2020 related to our U.S. audio-visual production business.
GES North America’s goodwill was assigned to, and tested at, the operating segment level (GES U.S. and GES Canada (collectively “GES North America”). GES EMEA’s goodwill was assigned to and tested at the operating segment level. Pursuit’s goodwill impairment testing is performed at the reporting unit level (Banff Jasper Collection, the Alaska Collection, the Glacier Park Collection, and FlyOver).
For purposes of goodwill impairment testing, we use a discounted expected future cash flow methodology (income approach) to estimate the fair value of our reporting units. The estimates and assumptions regarding expected future cash flows (the most significant being revenue and EBITDA margins), discount rates, and terminal values require considerable judgment and are based on market conditions, financial forecasts, industry trends, and historical experience.
The most critical assumptions and estimates in determining the estimated fair value of our reporting units relate to the amounts and timing of expected future cash flows for each reporting unit and the reporting unit cost of capital (discount rate) applied to those cash flows. We estimate the assumed reporting unit cost of capital rates (discount rates) using a build-up method based on the perceived risk associated with the cash flows pertaining to the specific reporting unit. In order to assess the reasonableness of our fair value estimates, we perform a reconciliation of the aggregate fair values of our reporting units to our market capitalization.
As noted above, the estimates and assumptions regarding expected future cash flows, discount rates, and terminal values require considerable judgment and are based on market conditions, financial forecasts, industry trends, and historical experience. These estimates have inherent uncertainties, and different assumptions could lead to materially different results. As of December 31, 2020, our aggregate goodwill was $99.8 million. As a result of our most recent impairment analysis performed as of October 31, 2020, the excess of the estimated fair value over the carrying value for our reporting units with reported goodwill (expressed as a percentage of the carrying amounts) under step one of the impairment test for the Banff Jasper Collection and the Alaska Collection was significant, and FlyOver was 6%. Significant reductions in FlyOver and our other reporting unit’s expected future revenue, operating income, or cash flow forecasts and projections, or an increase in a reporting unit’s cost of capital, could trigger additional goodwill impairment testing, which may result in impairment charges.
If an impairment indicator related to intangible assets is identified, or if other circumstances indicate an impairment may exist, we perform an assessment to determine if an impairment loss should be recognized. This assessment includes a recoverability test to identify if the expected future undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying value of the related assets. If the results of the recoverability test indicate that expected future undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying value of the related assets, we perform a measurement of impairment and we recognize any carrying amount in excess of fair value as an impairment. We periodically evaluate the continued recoverability of intangible assets which were previously evaluated due to an impairment indicator to determine if remeasurement is necessary.
Income taxes - We are required to estimate and record provisions for income taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. Accordingly, we must estimate our actual current income tax liability, and assess temporary differences arising from the treatment of items for tax purposes, as compared to the treatment for accounting purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. We use significant judgment in forming conclusions regarding the recoverability of our deferred tax assets and evaluate all available positive and negative evidence to determine if it is more-likely-than-not that the deferred tax assets will be realized. To the extent recovery does not appear likely, a valuation allowance must be recorded. We had gross deferred tax assets of $99.2 million as of December 31, 2020 and $40.5 million as of December 31, 2019. We had a valuation allowance against gross deferred tax assets of $81.8 million as of December 31, 2020 and $4.3 million as of December 31, 2019.
While we believe that the deferred tax assets, net of existing valuation allowances, will be utilized in future periods, there are inherent uncertainties regarding the ultimate realization of these assets. It is possible that the relative weight of positive and negative evidence regarding the realization of deferred tax assets may change, which could result in a material increase or decrease in our valuation allowance. Such a change could result in a material increase or decrease to income tax expense in the period the assessment was made.
We record uncertain tax positions on the basis of a two-step process: first we determine whether it is more-likely-than-not that the tax positions will be sustained on the basis of the technical merits of the position; and, if so, we recognize the largest amount of tax benefit that is more than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement with the related tax authority.
Pension and postretirement benefits - Our pension plans use traditional defined benefit formulas based on years of service and final average compensation. Funding policies provide that payments to defined benefit pension trusts shall be at least equal to the minimum
funding required by applicable regulations. We presently anticipate contributing $0.8 million to our funded pension plans and $0.9 million to our unfunded pension plans in 2021.
We have defined benefit postretirement plans that provide medical and life insurance for certain eligible employees, retirees, and dependents. The related postretirement benefit liabilities are recognized over the employees’ service period. In addition, we retain the obligations for these benefits for retirees of certain sold businesses. While the plans have no funding requirements, we expect to contribute $0.9 million to the plans in 2021.
The discount rates used in determining future pension and postretirement benefit obligations are based on rates determined by actuarial analysis and management review and reflect the estimated rates of return on a high-quality, hypothetical bond portfolio whose cash flows match the timing and amounts of expected benefit payments. Refer to Note 18 - Pension and Postretirement Benefits of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2020 Form 10-K) for further information.
Share-based compensation - We grant share-based compensation awards to our officers, directors, and certain key employees pursuant to the 2017 Viad Corp Omnibus Incentive Plan, which has a 10-year term and provides for the following types of awards: (a) incentive and non-qualified stock options; (b) restricted stock awards and restricted stock units; (c) performance units or performance shares; (d) stock appreciation rights; (e) cash-based awards; and (f) certain other stock-based awards.
Share-based compensation expense recognized in the consolidated financial statements was $2.7 million in 2020, $7.2 million in 2019, and $4.9 million in 2018. There was no income tax benefit related to such cost in 2020 due to the valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets. We recorded total tax benefits related to such costs of $2.2 million in 2019 and $1.2 million in 2018. No share-based compensation costs were capitalized during 2020, 2019, or 2018.
We account for share-based payment awards that will be settled in cash as liability-based awards. We measure share-based compensation expense of liability-based awards at fair value at each reporting date until the date of settlement based on the number of units expected to vest and, where applicable, the level of achievement of predefined performance goals. These awards are remeasured on each reporting date based on our stock price and the Monte Carlo simulation model. A Monte Carlo simulation requires the use of several assumptions, including historical volatility and correlation between our stock price and the price of the common shares of a comparator group, a risk-free rate of return, and an expected term. We account for share-based awards that will be settled in shares of our common stock as equity-based awards. We measure share-based compensation expense of equity-based awards at fair value on the grant date on a straight-line basis over the vesting period. The estimated number of shares to be achieved is updated each reporting period based on the number of units expected to vest and, where applicable, the level of achievement of predefined performance goals, until the date of settlement. The fair value of stock option grants is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes stock option pricing model. The Black-Scholes model requires the use of several assumptions, including expected volatility, a risk-free interest rate, a forfeiture rate, and expected life. We measure share-based compensation for performance-based options on a straight-line basis over the performance period and the underlying shares expected to be settled are adjusted each reporting period based on estimated future achievement of the respective performance metrics. Service-based options are recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period on a graded-vesting schedule. Refer to Note 3 - Share-Based Compensation of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2020 Form 10-K) for further information.
Self-Insurance Liabilities - We are self-insured up to certain limits for workers’ compensation and general liabilities, which includes automobile, product general liability, and client property loss claims. We have also retained and provided for certain workers’ compensation insurance liabilities in conjunction with previously sold businesses. We are also self-insured for certain employee health benefits. Provisions for losses for claims incurred, including actuarially derived estimated claims incurred but not yet reported, are made based on historical experience, claims frequency, and other factors. We have purchased insurance for amounts in excess of the self-insured levels.
Impact of Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 - Overview and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2020 Form 10-K) for further information.
Non-GAAP Measures
In addition to disclosing financial results that are determined in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), we also disclose the following non-GAAP financial measures: Segment operating income (loss), organic revenue, and organic segment operating income (loss) (collectively, the “Non-GAAP Measures”). Our use of Non-GAAP Measures is supplemental to, but not as a substitute for, other measures of financial performance reported in accordance with GAAP. As not all companies use identical calculations, our Non-GAAP Measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. We believe that our use of Non-GAAP Measures provides useful information to investors regarding our results of operations for trending, analyzing, and benchmarking our performance and the value of our business.
•
“Segment operating income (loss)” is net income (loss) attributable to Viad before income (loss) from discontinued operations, corporate activities, interest expense and interest income, income taxes, restructuring charges, impairment charges and recoveries, and the reduction for income attributable to noncontrolling interest. Segment operating income (loss) is used to measure the profit and performance of our operating segments to facilitate period-to-period comparisons. Refer to Note 23 - Segment Information of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements (Part II, Item 8 of this 2020 Form 10-K) for a reconciliation of segment operating income (loss) to income (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes.
•
“Organic revenue” and “organic segment operating income (loss)” are revenue and segment operating income (loss) (as defined above), respectively, without the impact of exchange rate variances and acquisitions, if any, until such acquisitions are included in the entirety of both comparable periods. The impact of exchange rate variances is calculated as the difference between current period activity translated at the current period’s exchange rates and the comparable prior period’s exchange rates. We believe the presentation of “organic” results permits investors to better understand our performance without the effects of exchange rate variances or acquisitions and to facilitate period-to-period comparisons and analysis of our operating performance. Refer to the “Results of Operations” section of this MD&A for reconciliations of organic revenue and organic segment operating income (loss) to the most directly comparable GAAP measures.
We believe non-GAAP Measures are useful operating metrics as they eliminate potential variations arising from taxes, debt service costs, impairment charges and recoveries, and the effects of discontinued operations, resulting in additional measures considered to be indicative of our ongoing operations and segment performance. Although we use Non-GAAP Measures to assess the performance of our business, the use of these measures is limited because these measures do not consider material costs, expenses, and other items necessary to operate our business. These items include debt service costs, expenses related to U.S. federal, state, local and foreign income taxes, impairment charges and recoveries, and the effects of discontinued operations. As the Non-GAAP Measures do not consider these items, net income (loss) attributable to Viad should be considered as an important measure of financial performance because it provides a more complete measure of our performance.