Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Some of the numbers included herein have been rounded for the convenience of presentation. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under Part I. “Item 1A. Risk Factors’’ and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a revenue stage medical technology company focused on the development and commercialization of a highly differentiated technology offering a clinically effective non-surgical, non-invasive, non-pharmaceutical, and low-cost solution for patients with SDB, including mild-to-moderate OSA. We offer novel and proprietary alternatives for treating mild-to-moderate OSA as well as certain craniofacial and anatomical anomalies known to be associated with OSA. We believe our products and technology represent a significant improvement in the treatment of mild-to-moderate OSA versus other treatments such as CPAP.
Our treatment for mild-to-moderate OSA involves specially designed and customized oral appliances and treatment protocols that we call the Vivos System. We believe the Vivos System technology represents the first non-surgical, non-invasive and cost-effective solution that normally does not require lifetime use of intervention for the hundreds of millions of people globally who suffer from mild-to-moderate OSA. We intend to more rapidly expand the use of the Vivos System by actively recruiting dentists and training them about OSA and the use and application of our products and technology to treat mild-to-moderate OSA. Our oral appliances have proven effective (within the scope of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (or FDA) cleared uses as described below) in over 15,000 patients treated worldwide by more than 1,200 trained dentists.
On December 11, 2020, we completed our initial public offering by issuing 4,025,000 shares of common stock, at a public offering price of $6.00 per share, for net proceeds of approximately $21.6 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
Impact of COVID-19
The early 2020 outbreak of COVID-19 and its development into a pandemic in March 2020 has resulted in significant economic disruption globally. Actions taken by various governmental authorities, individuals and companies around the world to prevent the spread of COVID-19 through social distancing have restricted travel, many business operations, public gatherings and the overall level of individual movement and in-person interaction across the globe. This has significantly reduced global economic activity and resulted in a decline in demand across many industries.
Many of our VIPs and potential VIPs closed their offices for periods of time during 2020 as a result of COVID-19, although some remained open to specifically provide patients with our appliances and VIPs were deemed an essential business for health considerations in many jurisdictions. In the face of the pandemic and the potential for revenue reduction, we worked diligently to reduce expenses and maintain revenues during 2020. While revenue growth flattened in March and April 2020, expenses were reduced, and we aggressively expanded our network of healthcare providers familiar with our products by offering online continuing education courses which introduced many in the medical and dental communities to our product line. As a result, we determined no triggering events had occurred indicating no impairment needed as of December 31, 2020. However, even as we take action to face the challenges of the pandemic, since the situation with COVID-19 remains uncertain, we cannot predict with certainty the impact of the pandemic or local outbreaks thereof will have on our near- and longer-term results of operations.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
Revenue increased $1.7 million, or 15%, to $13.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was related to revenue from our VIP program along with the increase in the number of oral appliances sold. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we enrolled 248 VIPs for a total of $7,540,718. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we enrolled 204 VIPs for a total of $6,742,283. Additionally, BIS service revenues increased from $256,415 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $620,094 for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020 we sold 8,135 total oral appliance arches for a total of $4,547,883 and for the year ended December 31, 2019 we sold 4,696 total oral appliance arches for a total of $2,917,095. The increase in appliance revenue is due to both volume and price increases.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Margin
Cost of goods sold decreased $0.1 million, on increased sales of $1.7 million. COVID-19 impacted our sales mix as many dental offices were closed for a good portion of April and May, resulting in having higher margin service revenues represent a larger portion of our overall revenues than our product revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses decreased $0.1 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. As a percentage of revenues, general and administrative expenses decreased to 123% of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 143% of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease as a percent of revenues was achieved as a result of scaling operations as our revenues grew and reducing payroll and travel expenses during the COVID-19 outbreak.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense was flat for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The primary reason for this decrease was the postponement until 2021 of our annual conference for VIPs due to the COVID-19 outbreak combined with the increase in revenues that drives sales and marketing expenses.
Settlement Expense
Settlement expense in 2020 resulted from the settlement of a shareholder demand in the fourth quarter of 2020. We issued 300,000 shares of common stock and 325,000 warrants to purchase common shares as a result of this settlement.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased approximately $33,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to the sale of one of our Vivos Centers in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by approximately $41,000, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 as a result of the convertible notes being exchanged into Series B Preferred Stock throughout 2020.
Interest Income
Interest income increased by approximately $58,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to interest on our note receivable related to the sale of one of our Vivos Centers in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Net Loss
We incurred a net loss of $12.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a net loss of $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $1.3 million additional loss was primarily due to the settlement expense of $3.3 million offset by $1.8 million higher gross margin in 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Revenue
Our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $7,601,016, or 200%, to $11,393,277 from $3,792,261 for the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was related to revenue from our VIP program that began during 2019 along with the increase in the number of oral appliances sold. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we enrolled 204 VIPs for a total of $6,742,283. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we enrolled 67 VIPs for a total of $1,251,679. During the year ended December 31, 2019 we sold 4,696 total oral appliance arches for a total of $2,917,095 and for the year ended December 31, 2018 we sold 2,201 total oral appliance arches for a total of $695,250. The increase in appliance revenue is due to both volume and price increases.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2019 increased $1,654,393, or 153%, to $2,736,034 from $1,081,641 for the year ended December 31, 2018 due to the relative increase in revenue. As a percentage of revenue, cost of sales was 24% for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 29% for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease in cost as percentage of revenue was due to a greater mix of higher margin VIP program revenue during the year ended December 31, 2019 over year ended December 31, 2018.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $6,899,615, or 74%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase relates primarily to payroll and benefits, consultants, travel and other costs associated with the growth of our business.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing increased $1,147,504, or 99%, for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The primary reason for this increase were additional commissions related to the increased service and product revenues, which increased 200%.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense increased $140,555 for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, due almost entirely to the full year’s depreciation on furniture and equipment and leasehold improvements at the Vivos Centers in 2019 versus a partial year in 2018.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased $34,902 for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, primarily as a result of a convertible note offering that commenced in April 2019.
Net Loss
We incurred a net loss of $10,754,319 during the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to $8,439,156 of net loss for the year ended December 31, 2018. A higher gross margin of $5,946,623 was offset by higher sales and marketing expenses and general and administrative expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $18,205,860 compared to cash and cash equivalents of $469,353 at December 31, 2019. In January 2020, we commenced a private placement offering that authorized the issuance of up to $15,000,000 of newly designated Series B Preferred Stock to accredited investors. As of October 1, 2020, we closed our Series B Preferred Stock offering after having received approximately $2,450,000 from the issuance of Series B Preferred Stock and exchanging approximately $2,944,000 in accrued principal and interest from our 2019 convertible notes into Series B Preferred Stock, whereas other 2019 convertible note holders elected to convert their notes into common stock. All Series B Preferred Stock converted into common stock in December 2020 in connection with the initial public offering.
In May 2020, we secured funding of $1,265,067 under the Paycheck Protection Program that was signed into law as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The promissory note contains an interest rate of 1.0% per year. Payments will be deferred for the first six months of the loan, then we must pay principal and interest monthly based on the unforgiven portion of the loan balance plus all accrued interest, beginning seven months from the month the note is dated. We anticipate seeking forgiveness of a significant portion of the loan amount under the provisions of the program as the amount borrowed has been used to pay compensation, rent and utilities. While we believe that our use of the loan proceeds will meet the conditions for forgiveness of the loan, there is a risk that the loan will not be forgiven or that we will take actions that could cause us to be ineligible for forgiveness of the loan, in whole or in part.
On December 11, 2020, we completed our initial public offering by issuing 4,025,000 common shares at a price of $6.00 per share, for net proceeds of approximately $21.6 million, after deducting underwriter discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us. Following our initial public offering, we made payments of $2.0 million to our founder and chief medical officer to redeem a portion of the outstanding Series A Preferred Stock. In early January, we paid an additional $1.5 million to our founder and chief medical officer to redeem all outstanding remaining Series A Preferred Stock.
We believe that our existing cash resources will be sufficient to meet our capital requirements and fund our operations for at least the next 12 months. We may also seek liquidity through additional securities offerings or through borrowings under a new credit facility.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our cash flow for the periods indicated:
Net cash used in operations was $5,680,294 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to net cash used of $5,340,480 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash used from operating activities was primarily driven by the increase in our net loss of $1.2 million.
Net cash used in investing activities consists of capital expenditures for property, plant and equipment and increased by approximately $206,000 from the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2019, $250,000 in proceeds from the sale of a business were included in investing activities.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of the more than $22.3 million in net proceeds from our initial public offering plus $2.5 million in proceeds from the sale of Series B Preferred Stock and $1.3 million in proceeds from the PPP loan offset by $2.2 million in redemptions on the Series A Preferred Stock. For the year ended December 31, 2019, $1.2 million was received from the issuance of common stock and $3.8 million was received from the proceeds of our convertible debt offering that was offset by $0.4 million in redemptions on Series A Preferred Stock.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined by applicable regulations of the SEC, that are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies Involving Management Estimates and Assumptions
Basis of Presentation and Consolidation
Our consolidated financial statements included as part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which include the accounts of our company and our wholly owned subsidiaries (BMS and First Vivos), are prepared in conformity with U.S. GAAP and the rules and regulations of the SEC related to annual and quarterly reports. All significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. Certain information and note disclosures normally included in annual financial statements prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP have been condensed or omitted pursuant to those rules and regulations. The consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2019 included in this report has been derived from our audited consolidated financial statements. The unaudited interim condensed consolidated financial statements have been prepared on the same basis as the annual audited consolidated financial statements and, in the opinion of management, reflect all material adjustments (consisting of normal recurring accruals) necessary for a fair presentation of the unaudited interim condensed consolidated financial statements. The information presented throughout this report, as of and for the periods ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, is unaudited.
Use of Estimates
To prepare financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP, management must make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Concentration of Credit Risk and Significant Customers
Financial instruments, which potentially subject us to concentrations of credit risk, consist primarily of cash and cash equivalents and accounts receivable. We limit our exposure to credit loss by placing our cash with high credit quality financial institutions. Additionally, we have a diverse customer base and no single customer represented greater than ten percent of sales or accounts receivable for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Accounts Receivable, Net
The accounts receivable in the accompanying consolidated financial statements are stated at the amounts management expects to collect. We perform credit evaluations of our customers’ financial condition and may require a prepayment for a portion of the services to be performed. We reduce accounts receivable by estimating an allowance that may become uncollectible in the future. Management determines the estimated allowance for uncollectible amounts based on its judgements in evaluating the aging of the receivables and the financial condition of our clients. Allowance for uncollectible receivables was $507,347 and $180,852 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Intangible Assets, Net
Intangible assets consist of assets acquired from First Vivos and costs paid to third parties for work related to our patents. The identified intangible assets acquired from First Vivos are amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated life of the assets, which approximates 5 years. The costs paid to third parties for our assets are amortized using the straight-line method over the life of the underlying patents, which approximates 15 years commencing at which time the patent has been granted. We determined the fair value of the intangible assets using a discounted cash flow approach.
Goodwill
Goodwill is the excess of acquisition cost of an acquired entity over the fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired. Goodwill is not amortized, but tested for impairment annually or whenever indicators of impairment exist. These indicators may include a significant change in the business climate, legal factors, operating performance indicators, competition, sale or disposition of a significant portion of the business or other factors. We test for impairment annually after the close of the year. There was no impairment of goodwill recognized at December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Long-lived Asset Policy
We review and evaluate the recoverability of long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that an asset’s carrying amount may not be recoverable. Such circumstances could include, but are not limited to (1) a significant decrease in the market value of an asset, (2) a significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which an asset is used, or (3) an adverse action or assessment by a regulator. We measure the carrying amount of the asset against the estimated undiscounted future cash flows associated with it. Should the sum of the expected future net cash flows be less than the carrying value of the asset being evaluated, an impairment loss would be recognized. The impairment loss would be calculated as the amount by which the carrying value of the asset exceeds its fair value. The fair value is measured based on quoted market prices, if available. If quoted market prices are not available, the estimate of fair value is based on various valuation techniques, including the discounted value of estimated future cash flows. The evaluation of asset impairment requires us to make assumptions about future cash flows over the life of the asset being evaluated. These assumptions require significant judgment and actual results may differ from assumed and estimated amounts. Our evaluation of long-lived assets completed for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 resulted in no impairment loss.
Notes Receivable, Net
The notes receivable in the accompanying financial statements are stated at the amount management expects to collect. The current portion is what the Company expects to collect in the next twelve months and the long-term portion consists of the portion the Company expects to collect beyond twelve months. Periodically throughout the year, management evaluates the collectability of the note receivable based on its judgements of the operations and financial strength of underlying practice. The Company reduced notes receivable by estimating a discount based on market rates. The discount on notes receivable was $68,101 and $93,421 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Accretion on the discount and interest on the note is recorded in interest income.
Revenue Recognition
We adopted Accounting Standards Update No. 2014-09 (Topic 606) titled, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” as of January 1, 2019 and relied upon transitional guidance provided for in 606-10- 65-1(f)(3) and do not disclose the transaction price allocated to the remaining performance obligations or an explanation of when we expect to recognize that amount as revenue.
We generate revenue from the sale of products and services. Revenue is recognized when control of the products or services is transferred to our customers in a way that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those products and services.
We determine revenue recognition through the following five-step model, which entails:
1) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract;
2) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations, including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract;
3) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration;
4) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and
5) recognition of revenue when, or as the Company satisfies each performance obligation.
Service revenue
Service revenue is recognized when the underlying training or other services are performed. Unearned revenue reported on the balance sheet as contract liability represents the portion of fees paid by customers for services that have not yet been performed as of the reporting date and are recorded as the service is rendered. We recognize this revenue over the twelve-month life of the contract. Provisions for discounts are provided in the same period that the related revenue from the products and/or services is recorded.
We enter into programs that may provide for multiple element deliverables. Commencing in 2018, we began enrolling medical and dental professionals in a one-year program which includes training in a highly personalized, deep immersion workshop format which provides the dentist access to an onboarding team who is dedicated to creating a successful integrated practice. The key topics covered in training include case selection, clinical diagnosis, appliance design, adjunctive therapies, instructions on ordering our products, guidance on pricing, instruction on insurance reimbursement protocols and interacting with our proprietary software system and the many features on our website. The initial training and educational workshop is typically provided in the first month that a VIP enrolls. Since VIPs are able to begin generating revenue after the first training workshop, we recognize 50% of the service revenue in the second month of enrollment and the remaining 50% pro-rata throughout the following eleven months of the service contract. Ongoing support and additional training are provided throughout the year and include access to our proprietary Airway Intelligence Service (or AIS) which provides VIPs with resources to help simplify the diagnostic and treatment planning process. AIS is provided as part of the price of each appliance and is not a separate revenue stream. Following the year of training and support, a VIP may pay for seminars and training courses that meet the VIP’s needs on a subscription or a course by course basis. In addition to enrollment service revenue, we have more recently launched an additional service on a monthly subscription basis: Billing Intelligence Service (or BIS). Revenue for this service is recognized monthly during the month the service is rendered.
We identify all goods and services that are delivered separately under a sales arrangement and allocates revenue to each deliverable based on relative fair values. Fair values are generally established based on the relevant service period which approximates the prices for relevant training that would be charged if those services were sold separately. In general, revenues are separated between durable medical equipment (product revenue) and education and training services (service revenue). The allocated revenue for each deliverable is then recognized ratably based on relative fair values of the components of the sale. Revenue from training is recognized over the relevant service period (i.e., as we satisfy our performance obligations and creates value for the VIP). We also evaluate the impact of undelivered items on the functionality of delivered items for each sales transaction and, where appropriate, defer revenue on delivered items when that functionality has been affected. Functionality is determined to be met if the delivered products or services represent a separate earnings process.
From time to time we offer various discounts to our customers. These include the following:
1) Discount for cash pay in full
2) Conference or trade show incentives
3) Negotiated concessions on annual enrollment fee
The amount of the discount is determined up front prior to the sale. Accordingly, measurement is determined before the sale occurs and revenue is recognized based on the terms agreed upon between us and the VIP over the performance period. In rare circumstances, a discount has been given after the sale during a conference which is offering a discount to full price. In this situation revenue is measured and the change in transaction price is allocated over the remaining performance obligation.
The amount of consideration can vary by customer due to promotions and discounts authorized to incentivize a sale. Prior to the sale, the customer and us agree upon the amount of consideration that the customer will pay in exchange for the services we provide. The net consideration that the customer has agreed to pay is the expected value that is recognized as revenue over the service period. Any overpayments are refunded during the reporting period so that no refund liability is recognized. At the end of each reporting period, we update the transaction price to represent the circumstances present at the end of the reporting period and any changes in circumstances during the reporting period.
Product revenue
In addition to revenue from services, we also generate revenue from the sale of our patented oral devices and preformed guides, known as appliances or systems to our customer, the VIP. Revenue from the appliance sale is recognized when control of product is transferred to the VIP in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those products. The VIP in turn charges the VIP’s patient and/or patient’s insurance a fee for the appliance and for his or her professional services in measuring, fitting, installing the appliance and educating the patient as to its use. We are contracted with the VIP for the sale of the appliance and are not involved in the sale of the products and services from the VIP to the VIP’s patient.
Our appliances are visually similar to a retainer that is worn after braces are removed. Each appliance is specifically fitted to each patient. We utilize our network of certified VIPs throughout the country to sell the appliances to their customers as well as in two centers that we operate. We utilize third party contract manufacturers or labs to produce each appliance and preformed Guide. The manufacturer designated by us (of which there are several) produces the appliance in strict adherence to our patents, design files, protocols, processes and procedures and under the direction and specific instruction of us. The manufacturer then ships the appliance to the VIP who ordered the appliance from us. All of our contract manufacturers are required to follow our master design files in production of appliances or the lab will be in violation of the FDA’s rules and regulations. We performed an analysis under ASC Topic 606-10-55-36 through 55-40 and concluded it is the principal in the transaction and is reporting revenue gross. We bill the VIP provider the contracted price for the appliance which is recorded as product revenue. Product revenue is recognized once the appliance ships to the VIP provider under our direction.
Beginning in 2018, we operated three centers in Colorado and Utah. Effective October 1, 2019, we sold our center in Utah (see Note 4 to the financial statements included as part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K). Within each center, we utilize a team of medical professionals to measure, order and fit each appliance. Upon scheduling the patient (which is our customer in this case), the center takes a deposit and reviews the patient’s insurance coverage. Revenue is recognized differently for our owned centers than for our VIPs. We recognize revenue in the centers after the appliance is received from the manufacturer and once the appliance is fitted and provided to the patient.
We offer our clinical advisors (who help our VIPs with technical aspects of our products) discounts from our standard VIP pricing. This is done to help encourage our clinical advisors to purchase our products for their own practices. In addition, from time to time, we offer buy one, get one offers and other credits to incentivize our VIPs to embrace our products and increase volume within their practices.
Stock-Based Compensation
Our board of directors (or the compensation committee thereof) grants share-based payments to employees under our equity incentive plans described below. Historically, this is has come in the form of options to purchase shares of our common stock. Since November 2018, all stock options have been granted with an exercise price of $7.50 per share on post-reverse split basis. Exercise price of such stock options has been consistent with the price offered to private investors in the Company’s private placements during this period, which our board of directors or its compensation committee deemed to be the fair value of the underlying common stock.
From an accounting perspective, we account for share-based payments to employees by recognizing compensation expense based upon the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant. Absent a publicly traded market for our stock, we use the price paid for our stock in the most recent sales to third parties as the stock price input into our valuation model as of the date of grant. We determine the estimated grant fair value using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and recognize compensation costs ratably over the requisite service period which approximates the vesting period using the straight-line method. For options issued to consultants, we recognize the estimated fair value of options issued using the Black-Scholes option pricing model at the time the services are rendered.
The Black-Scholes model requires the input of certain subjective assumptions and the application of judgment in determining the fair value of the awards. The most significant assumptions and judgments include the expected volatility, risk-free interest rate, the expected dividend yield, and the expected term of the awards. The Company accounts for forfeitures as they occur.
The assumptions used in our option pricing model represent management’s best estimates. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our equity-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. The key assumptions included in the model are as follows:
● Share Price - We use the price of our stock sold to third parties in our offerings as the most available representation of fair value per share of common stock on date of grant.
● Expected volatility - We determine the expected price volatility based on the historical volatilities of our peer group as we do not have a sufficient trading history for our common stock. Industry peers consist of several public companies in the bio-tech industry similar to us in size, stage of life cycle and financial leverage. We intend to continue to consistently apply this process using the same or similar public companies until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available, or unless circumstances change such that the identified companies are no longer similar to us, in which case, more suitable companies whose share prices are publicly available would be utilized in the calculation.
● Risk-free interest rate - The risk free rate was determined based on yields of U.S. Treasury Bonds of comparable terms. The volatility is based on analyzing the stock price and implied volatility of guideline companies.
● Expected dividend yield - We have not previously issued dividends and do not anticipate paying dividends in the foreseeable future. Therefore, we used a dividend rate of zero based on our expectation of additional dividends.
● Expected term - We estimate the expected term using the simplified method which is the average of the vesting term and the contractual term of the options.
In 2017, our board of directors and shareholders approved the adoption of a stock and option award plan (the “2017 Plan”), under which shares were reserved for future issuance for options, restricted stock awards and other equity awards. The 2017 Plan permits grants of equity awards to employees, directors, consultants and other independent contractors. Our board of directors and shareholders have approved a total reserve of 1,333,333 shares for issuance under the 2017 Plan.
In 2019, our board of directors and shareholders approved the adoption of a stock and option award plan (the “2019 Plan”), under which shares were reserved for future issuance for options, restricted stock awards and other equity awards. The 2019 Plan permits grants of equity awards to employees, directors, consultants and other independent contractors. Our board of directors and shareholders have approved a total reserve of 333,334 shares for issuance under the 2019 Plan. On June 18, 2020, our shareholders approved an amendment and restatement of the 2019 Plan to increase the number shares or our common stock available for issuance thereunder by 833,333 share of common stock such that, after amendment and restatement of the 2019 Plan, and prior to any grants, 1,166,667 shares of common stock were available under the 2019 Plan.
Basic and Diluted Net Loss Per Share
Basic net loss per share is computed using the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period. Diluted net loss per common share is computed using the weighted average number of common shares outstanding and the weighted average dilutive potential common shares outstanding using the treasury stock method. However, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, diluted net loss per share is the same as basic net loss per share as the inclusion of weighted average shares of common stock issuable upon the exercise of outstanding warrants and stock options would be anti-dilutive. The numerator in the basic and diluted net loss per share calculation is the net loss attributable to common stockholders, which is the net loss for the year increased by the current year preferred stock dividends accrued.
The holder of our outstanding Series A Preferred Stock (Dr. G. Dave Singh, our founder and Chief Medical Officer) was entitled to participate in common stock dividends, if and when declared, on a one-to-one per-share basis. Accordingly, in periods in which we have net income, earnings per share will be computed using the two-class method whereby the pro rata dividends distributable to the holder of our Series A Preferred Stock will be deducted from earnings applicable to common stockholders, regardless of whether a dividend is declared for such undistributed earnings. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we incurred a net loss and, accordingly, there were no undistributed earnings to allocate under the two-class method.
The following table summarizes outstanding common stock securities not included in the computation of diluted net loss per common share as their inclusion would be anti-dilutive: