ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto in this Annual Report on Form 10-K as well as the discussion in Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K entitled "Business." This Annual Report provides additional information regarding the Company, our services, industry outlook and forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The forward-looking statements are not historical facts, but rather are based on current expectations, estimates, assumptions and projections about our industry, business and future financial results. Our actual results could differ materially from the results contemplated by these forward-looking statements. See "Forward-Looking Statement Information" for further information regarding forward-looking statements. Amounts presented in and throughout this Item 7 are rounded and, as such, rounding differences could occur in period over period changes and percentages reported.
Forward-Looking Statement Information
This Annual Report on Form 10-K and certain information incorporated herein by reference contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 21E of the Exchange Act, and Section 27A of the Securities Act, and the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and, as such, may involve risks and uncertainties. All statements included or incorporated by reference in this report, other than statements that are purely historical, are forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements generally can be identified by the use of forward-looking terminology such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “intend,” “estimate,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “could,” “potential,” “continue” or similar terminology. These statements are based on the beliefs and assumptions of our management based on information currently available to management. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results contemplated by the forward-looking statements.
The forward-looking statements included or incorporated by reference in this report are subject to additional risks and uncertainties further discussed under Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and are based on information available to us on the filing date of this report. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date
of this report. New risks and uncertainties arise from time to time, and we cannot predict those events or how they may affect us.
We undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law. In addition, forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from the Company’s historical experience and our present expectations or projections. These risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to: the continued impact of COVID-19 on the global economy; our ability to submit proposals for and/or win all potential opportunities in our pipeline; our ability to retain and renew our existing contracts; our ability to compete with other companies in our market; security breaches and other disruptions to our information technology and operation; our mix of cost-plus, cost- reimbursable, and firm-fixed-price contracts; maintaining our reputation and relationship with the U.S. government; protests of new awards; our recent acquisitions of HHB and Zenetex and their integration into our business; economic, political and social conditions in the countries in which we conduct our businesses; changes in U.S. or international government defense budgets; government regulations and compliance therewith, including changes to the DoD procurement process; changes in technology; intellectual property matters; governmental investigations, reviews, audits and cost adjustments; contingencies related to actual or alleged environmental contamination, claims and concerns; delays in completion of the U.S. government's budget; our success in extending, deepening, and enhancing our technical capabilities; our success in expanding our geographic footprint or broadening our customer base; our ability to realize the full amounts reflected in our backlog; impairment of goodwill; misconduct of our employees, subcontractors, agents, prime contractors and business partners; our ability to control costs; our level of indebtedness and terms of our credit agreement; interest rate risk; subcontractor performance; economic and capital markets conditions; our ability to maintain safe work sites and equipment; our ability to retain and recruit qualified personnel and to maintain good relationships with our workforce; our teaming relationships with other contractors; changes in our accounting estimates; the adequacy of our insurance coverage; volatility in our stock price; changes in our tax provisions or exposure to additional income tax liabilities; risks and uncertainties relating to the Spin-off; changes in U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP); and other factors described in Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” and elsewhere in this report and described from time to time in our future reports filed with the SEC.
Overview
Vectrus is a leading provider of global service solutions to the U.S. government worldwide. We operate as one segment and offer facility and base operations, supply chain and logistics services, information technology mission support, and engineering and digital integration services.
Our primary customer is the U.S. Department of Defense, with a high concentration in the U.S. Army. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we had total revenue of $1.4 billion, $1.4 billion and $1.3 billion, respectively, substantially all of which was derived from U.S. government customers. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we generated approximately 69%, 69% and 73%, respectively, of our total revenue from the U.S. Army.
Executive Summary
Our revenue increased by $13.0 million, or 0.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in revenue was attributable mainly to increases from our U.S. programs of $29.2 million (which includes $20.7 million from our 2019 acquisition of Advantor), and our European programs of $17.0 million partially offset by a $33.2 million decrease in our Middle East programs.
Operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $43.5 million, a decrease of $6.2 million or 12.4%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to decreases of $4.6 million from our Middle East programs, $0.8 million from our U.S. programs, and $0.7 million from our European programs.
During the performance of our long-term contracts, we periodically review estimated final contract prices and costs and make revisions as required, which are recorded as changes in revenue and cost of revenue in the periods in which they are determined. Additionally, the fees under certain contracts may be increased or decreased in accordance with cost or performance incentive provisions which measure actual performance against established targets or other criteria. Such incentive fee awards or penalties are included in revenue when there is sufficient information to reasonably assess anticipated contract performance. Amounts representing contract change orders or limitations in funding on contracts are recorded only if it is probable the claim will result in additional contract revenue and the amounts can be reliably estimated. Changes in estimated revenue, cost of revenue and the related effect to operating income are recognized using cumulative adjustments, which recognize in the current period the cumulative effect of the changes on current and prior periods based on a contract's percentage of completion. Cumulative adjustments are driven by changes in contract terms, program performance, customer scope changes and changes to estimates in the reported period. These changes can increase or decrease operating income depending on the dynamics of each contract.
We recorded an income tax expense of $1.7 million and $10.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which represent effective income tax rates of 4.5% and 23.2%, respectively. See Note 13, “Income Taxes,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Further details related to the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, are contained in the Discussion of Financial Results section. Details related to the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 may be found in the Discussion of Financial Results section of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, electronically filed with the SEC on EDGAR on March 3, 2020.
COVID-19 Impact
The global outbreak of COVID-19 was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and a national emergency by the U.S. government in March 2020 and has negatively affected the U.S. and global economy, disrupted global supply chains, resulted in significant travel and transport restrictions, including mandated closures and orders to “shelter-in-place,” and created significant disruption of the financial markets. We have taken measures to protect the health and safety of our employees, to work with our customers to minimize ultimate potential disruptions, and to support our community in addressing the challenges posed by this global pandemic. The extent of the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance, including our ability to execute our programs in the expected timeframe, will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the pandemic and related actions taken by the U.S. government, state and local government officials, and international governments to prevent disease spread, all of which remain uncertain and cannot be predicted.
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, it is estimated that COVID-19 caused a $63.1 million reduction in our revenue and a $0.39 reduction in our diluted earnings per share. This impact was primarily due to certain government actions to restrict access to certain bases by Vectrus personnel and delays in supplier deliveries.
In accordance with the DoD guidance issued in March 2020 designating the Defense Industrial Base as a critical infrastructure workforce, our U.S. facilities have continued to operate in support of essential products and services required to meet our commitments to the U.S. government and the U.S. military; however, facility closures or work slowdowns or supply chain disruptions have affected our financial results and projections. In addition, other countries are responding to the pandemic differently which have affected our international operations and the operations of our suppliers and customers. However, any closures to date have not significantly impacted Vectrus' business.
We continue to work with our customers, employees, suppliers and communities to address the impacts of COVID-19. We continue to assess possible implications to our business, supply chain and customers and to take actions in an effort to mitigate adverse consequences in order to support our customers' mission critical business and national security.
Significant Contracts
The following table reflects contracts that accounted for more than 10% of our total revenue for one or more of the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
Revenue associated with a contract will fluctuate based on increases or decreases in the work being performed on the contract, award fee payments, and other contract modifications within the term of the contract resulting in changes to the total contract value.
U.S. government contracts are multi-year contracts and typically include an initial period of one year or less with annual one-year (or less) option periods for the remaining contract period. The number of option periods vary by contract, and there is no guarantee that an option period will be exercised by the U.S. government. The right to exercise an option period is at the sole discretion of the U.S. government. The U.S. government may also extend the term of a program by issuing extensions or bridge contracts, typically for periods of one year or less.
The K-BOSSS contract currently is exercised through September 28, 2021. K-BOSSS, our largest base operations support services contract, supports geographically-dispersed locations within the State of Kuwait, including several camps and a range training complex. The K-BOSSS contract was re-competed as a task order under the LOGCAP V contract vehicle, which was awarded April 12, 2019. The K-BOSSS contract contributed $475 million and $495 million of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
On December 29, 2020, the US Army announced that Vectrus Systems Corporation (VSC), our wholly-owned subsidiary, was awarded an $882.5 million cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to continue Operations, Maintenance and Defense of Army Communications in Southwest Asia and Central Asia (OMDAC-SWACA). Work will be based in Kuwait with additional locations throughout Southwest Asia. The estimated completion date is December 26, 2025. The OMDAC-SWACA contract contributed $198 million and $216 million of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Backlog
Total backlog includes remaining performance obligations, consisting of both funded backlog (firm orders for which funding is contractually authorized and appropriated by the customer) and unfunded backlog (firm orders for which funding is not currently contractually obligated by the customer and unexercised contract options). Total backlog excludes potential orders under IDIQ contracts and contracts awarded to us that are being protested by competitors with the GAO or in the U.S. Court of Federal Claims. The value of the backlog is based on anticipated revenue levels over the anticipated life of the contract. Actual values may be greater or less than anticipated. Total backlog is converted into revenue as work is performed. The level of order activity related to programs can be affected by the timing of government funding authorizations and their project evaluation cycles. Year-over-year comparisons could, at times, be impacted by these factors, among others.
Our contracts are multi-year contracts and typically include an initial period of one year or less with annual one-year (or less) option periods for the remaining contract period. The number of option periods vary by contract, and there is no guarantee that an option period will be exercised. The right to exercise an option period is at the sole discretion of the U.S. government when we are the prime contractor or of the prime contractor when we are a subcontractor. The U.S. government may also extend the term of a program by issuing extensions of bridge contracts, typically for periods of one year or less.
We expect to recognize a substantial portion of our funded backlog as revenue within the next 12 months. However, the U.S. government or the prime contractor may cancel any contract at any time through a termination for convenience. Most of our contracts have terms that would permit us to recover all or a portion of our incurred costs and fees for work performed in the event of a termination for convenience.
Total backlog increased by $2.3 billion in the year ended December 31, 2020, which includes an increase of $827.4 million from the acquisitions of Zenetex and HHB. As of December 31, 2020, total backlog (funded and unfunded) was $5.1 billion as set forth in the following table:
Funded orders (different from funded backlog) represent orders for which funding was received during the period. We received funded orders of $1.8 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020, which was an increase of $536.0 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Economic Opportunities, Challenges and Risks
The U.S. government’s investment in services and capabilities in response to changing security challenges creates a complex and fluid business environment for Vectrus and other firms in this market segment. The pace and depth of U.S. government acquisition reform and cost savings initiatives, combined with increased industry competitiveness to win long-term positions on key programs, could add pressure to revenue levels and profit margins going forward. However, we expect the U.S. government will continue to place a high priority on national security and will continue to invest in affordable solutions for its facilities, logistics, equipment, operational technology, and communication needs, which aligns with our services and strengths. Further, the DoD budget remains the largest in the world and management believes our addressable portion of the DoD budget offers substantial opportunity for growth.
Over the past several years, U.S. defense spending has been mandated by the Budget Control Act. The Budget Control Act establishes spending caps over a 10-year period through 2021, including a sequester mechanism that would impose additional defense cuts if an annual defense appropriations bill is enacted above the spending cap. The U.S. government's FY begins on October 1 and ends on September 30. On August 2, 2019, the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2019 was enacted, which increased the spending limits for both defense and non-defense discretionary funding for the U.S. government in FY 2020 and 2021 and reduced budget uncertainty associated with the Budget Control Act. The defense spending limits in FY 2020 and FY 2021 were raised by $90 billion and $81 billion, respectively. The total spending limits for national defense (including approved overseas contingency operations spending) for FY 2020 and 2021 are $738 billion and $741 billion, respectively.
On February 10, 2020, the Administration submitted the FY 2021 budget, which provides $741 billion in discretionary funding for national defense and includes $672 billion in base funding and $69 billion in overseas contingency operations funding. The approved funding is in accordance with the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2019. On January 1, 2021, the $741 billion National Defense Authorization Act became law.
Although the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2019 reduces budget uncertainty and the risk of sequestration, there remain risks associated with FY 2021 and future appropriations. If annual appropriations bills are not enacted, the U.S. government
may operate under a CR, restricting new contract or program starts and additional government shutdowns, which might involve all government agencies, including the DoD, could arise. Future CR’s and government shutdowns may lead to delays in procurement of services due to lack of funding, and those delays may adversely affect our revenue, results of operations and cash flow. Finally, there remains uncertainty surrounding future discretionary defense funding levels and priorities of the Administration and Congress, which could adversely impact demand for our services.
We believe spending on operation and maintenance of defense assets, as well as civilian agency infrastructure and equipment, will continue to be a U.S. government priority. Our focus is on sustaining facilities, equipment, and IT networks, while utilizing operational technologies and converged solutions to improve efficiency and the outcomes of our clients' missions. We believe this aligns with our customers' intent to utilize existing equipment and infrastructure rather than executing new purchases. Many of the core functions we perform are mission-essential. The following are examples of a few of these core functions: (i) keeping communications networks operational; (ii) maintaining airfields; and (iii) providing emergency services. While customers may reduce the level of services required from us, we do not currently anticipate the complete elimination of these services.
The information provided above does not represent a complete list of trends and uncertainties that could impact our business in either the near or long-term and should be considered along with the risk factors identified under the caption “Risk Factors” identified in Part 1, Item 1A in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 and the matters identified under the caption “Forward-Looking Statement Information" herein.
DISCUSSION OF FINANCIAL RESULTS
Year ended December 31, 2020, compared to Year ended December 31, 2019
Selected financial highlights are presented in the table below:
Revenue
Our revenue increased by $13.0 million, or 0.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in revenue was attributable mainly to increases from our U.S. programs of $29.2 million (which includes $20.7 million from our 2019 acquisition of Advantor), and our European programs of $17.0 million, partially offset by a decrease from our Middle East programs of $33.2 million.
Cost of Revenue
The increase in cost of revenue of $16.8 million, or 1.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily due to higher revenue as described above and a contract adjustment to one of our European programs.
Selling, General & Administrative (SG&A) Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2020, SG&A expenses of $80.7 million increased by $2.4 million, or 3.0%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was due primarily to increased merger and acquisition costs of $2.2 million, partially offset by decreases to other miscellaneous expenses.
Operating Income
Operating income for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $6.2 million, or 12.4%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily due to decreases of $4.6 million from our Middle East programs, $0.8 million from our U.S. programs, and $0.7 million from our European programs.
Operating income as a percentage of revenue was 3.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 3.6% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Aggregate cumulative adjustments decreased operating income by $3.7 million and increased operating income by $3.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The aggregate cumulative adjustments for the year ended December 31, 2020 relate to lower margins associated with contract staffing and increased other direct costs. The aggregate cumulative adjustments for the year ended December 31, 2019 relate to favorable finalization of contract cost recoveries on contracts closed out with customers and higher margins associated with efficient labor cost management on active contracts.
Interest (Expense) Income, Net
Interest (expense) income, net for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was as follows:
Interest income is directly related to interest earned on our cash. Interest expense is directly related to borrowings under our senior secured credit facilities, the amortization of debt issuance costs, and derivative instruments used to hedge a portion of our exposure to interest rate risk. The decrease in interest expense of $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was due primarily to increased use of our revolving credit facility in 2019 to finance short-term working capital requirements and the acquisition of Advantor.
Income Tax Expense
We recorded income tax expense of $1.7 million and $10.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which represented effective income tax expense rates of 4.5% and 23.2%, for the respective years. The decrease in the effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was due to the release of the uncertain tax position balance of $7.1 million relating to the Foreign Derived Intangible Income (FDII) Deduction for the years 2018 through 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity
Historically, we have generated operating cash flow sufficient to fund our working capital, capital expenditures, and financing requirements. We expect to fund our ongoing working capital, capital expenditure and financing requirements, and pursue additional growth through new business development and potential acquisition opportunities by using cash flows from operations, cash on hand, our credit facilities and access to capital markets. When necessary we will utilize our revolving credit facility to satisfy short-term working capital requirements.
If our cash flows from operations are less than we expect, we may need to access the long-term or short-term capital markets. Although we believe that our current financing arrangements will permit us to finance our operations on acceptable terms and conditions, our access to and the availability of financing on acceptable terms and conditions in the future will be impacted by many factors, including: (i) our credit ratings or absence of a credit rating, (ii) the liquidity of the overall capital markets and (iii) the current state of the economy. We cannot provide assurance that such financing will be available to us on acceptable terms or that such financing will be available at all.
To date, COVID-19 has not had a significant impact on our liquidity, cash flows or capital resources. However, the continued spread of COVID-19 has also led to disruption and volatility in the global capital markets, which, depending on future developments, could impact our capital resources and liquidity in the future.
In addition, on March 27, 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, President Trump signed into law the CARES Act, which provides for the deferral of certain tax payments. The CARES Act also contains numerous other provisions which may benefit Vectrus and we continue to review ongoing government guidance on both the CARES Act and COVID-19 to assess potential impacts on our liquidity and capital resources.
In September 2014, we and our wholly-owned subsidiary, VSC, entered into a credit agreement. The credit agreement was subsequently amended, with the most recent amendment occurring on December 24, 2020 and is collectively referred to
as the Amended Agreement. The Amended Agreement consists of a term loan (Amended Term Loan) and a $270.0 million revolving credit facility (Amended Revolver) as of December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2020, there were $115.0 million of outstanding borrowings under the Amended Revolver that were used for the December 31, 2020 acquisitions of Zenetex and HHB. At December 31, 2020, there were two letters of credit outstanding in the aggregate amount of $2.4 million, which reduced our borrowing availability to $152.6 million under the Amended Revolver. Vectrus had net debt, which is defined as total debt minus cash, of $112.1 million and $35.2 million as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
The Amendment Agreement includes an accordion feature that allows the Company to draw up to an additional $100.0 million subject to the lender's consent on the same terms and conditions as the existing commitments. The Amendment Agreement also permits the Company to borrow up to $75.0 million in unsecured debt as long as the aggregated sum of both the unsecured debt and the accordion does not exceed $100.0 million.
Dividends
We do not currently plan to pay a regular dividend on our common stock. The declaration of any future cash dividends and if declared, the amount of any such dividends, will depend upon our financial condition, earnings, capital requirements, financial covenants and other contractual restrictions and the discretion of our Board of Directors. In deciding whether to pay future dividends on our common stock, our Board of Directors may take into account such matters as general business conditions, industry practice, our financial condition and performance, our future prospects, our cash needs and capital investment plans, income tax consequences, applicable law and such other factors as our Board of Directors may deem relevant.
Sources and Uses of Liquidity
Cash, accounts receivable, unbilled receivables, and accounts payable are the principal components of our working capital and are generally driven by our level of revenue with other short-term fluctuations related to payment practices by our customers and the timing of our billings. Our receivables reflect amounts billed to our customers, as well as the revenue that was recognized in the preceding month, which is normally billed the month following each balance sheet date.
The total amount of our accounts receivable can vary significantly over time and is sensitive to revenue levels and the timing of payments received from our customers. Days sales outstanding (DSO) is a metric used to monitor accounts receivable levels. The Company determines its DSO by calculating the number of days necessary to exhaust its ending accounts receivable balance based on its most recent historical revenue. Our DSO was 66 as of both December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The following table sets forth net cash provided by operating activities, investing and financing activities.
Trends in our operating cash flows tend to follow trends in operating income, excluding non-cash charges. Net cash provided by operating activities increased for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of net income of $37.0 million, non-cash items of $17.9 million, favorable net changes in net working capital of $5.8 million, and favorable net changes in other long-term assets of approximately $3.4 million. Tax deferrals related to the CARES Act contributed $13.2 million to our cash flows from operating activities.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of net income of $33.2 million and non-cash items of $15.2 million offset by increases in net working capital of $20.3 million due to the timing of cash collections and payments, as reflected primarily in accounts receivable and accounts payable and increases in other long-term assets of approximately $0.5 million.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $133.6 million for the acquisition of Zenetex and HHB and $4.4 million of net capital expenditures for the purchase of computer hardware and software, and equipment. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of $45.1 million for the acquisition of Advantor and $10.7 million of net capital expenditures for the purchase of computer hardware and software, intangible assets, and equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of net borrowings from the Amended Revolver of $115.0 million to meet short-term working capital requirements and for the acquisitions of Zenetex and HHB and $0.1 million in cash received from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by repayments of long-term debt of $6.5 million, debt issuance costs of $0.8 million, and payments related to employee withholding taxes on share-based compensation of $2.0 million.
Net cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of repayments of long-term debt of $4.5 million, and payments related to employee withholding taxes on share-based compensation in the amount of $1.1 million, offset by $3.7 million in cash received from the exercise of stock options. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we borrowed and repaid a total of $333.5 million from the Amended Revolver to meet short-term working capital requirements.
Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, we held cash and cash equivalents of $66.9 million, which included $18.8 million held by foreign subsidiaries, and had $152.6 million of available borrowing capacity under the Amended Revolver which expires on November 15, 2022. We believe that our cash at December 31, 2020, as supplemented by cash flows from operations and the Amended Revolver, will be sufficient to fund our anticipated operating costs, capital expenditures and current debt repayment obligations for at least the next 12 months.
We have a shelf registration statement with the SEC that became effective in January 2020 under which we may issue, from time to time, up to $250 million of common stock, preferred stock, depository shares, warrants, rights and debt securities. If necessary, we may seek to obtain additional term loans or issue debt or equity under the registration statement to supplement our working capital and investing requirements or to fund acquisitions. A financing transaction may not be available on terms acceptable to us, or at all, and a financing transaction may be dilutive to our current stockholders.
Contractual Obligations
Our commitments to make future payments under long-term contractual obligations were as follows, as of December 31, 2020:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have obligations relating to operating leases and letters of credit outstanding. Our Amended Revolver permits borrowings up to $270.0 million, of which $25.0 million is available for the issuance of letters of credit. At December 31, 2020, there were two letters of credit outstanding in the aggregate amount of $2.4 million, which reduced our borrowing availability under the Amended Revolver to $152.6 million. The aforementioned arrangements have not had, and management does not believe it is likely that they will in the future, have a material effect on our liquidity, capital resources, operations or financial condition.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES, ESTIMATES AND JUDGMENTS
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. Estimates are revised as additional information becomes available. Management believes that the accounting estimates employed and the resulting balances are reasonable; however, actual results in these areas could differ from management's estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Significant accounting policies used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements are discussed in Note 1, "Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with revenue recognition, goodwill impairment assessments, intangible assets and income taxes have the greatest potential impact on our financial statements because they are inherently uncertain, involve significant judgments, include areas where different estimates reasonably could materially impact the financial statements. These significant critical accounting policies are discussed in this section. Management believes that the accounting estimates employed and the resulting balances are reasonable; however, actual results in these areas could differ from management's estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue Recognition
We adopted Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), on January 1, 2018, using the modified retrospective method. As a defense contractor engaging in long-term contracts, substantially all of our revenue is derived from long-term service contracts. The unit of account for revenue in ASC Topic 606 is a performance obligation. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer. A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. To determine the proper revenue recognition method, consideration is given as to whether a single contract should be accounted for as more than one performance obligation. For most of our contracts, the customer contracts with us to perform an integrated set of tasks and deliverables as a single service solution, whereby each service is not separately identifiable from other promises in the contract and therefore is not distinct. As a result, when this integrated set of tasks exists, the contract is accounted for as one performance obligation. Unexercised contract options and IDIQ contracts are considered to be separate performance obligations when the option or IDIQ task order is exercised or awarded. Our performance obligations are satisfied over time as services are provided throughout the contract term. We recognize revenue over time using the input method (e.g., costs incurred to date relative to total estimated costs at completion) to measure progress. Our over time recognition is reinforced by the fact that our customers simultaneously receive and consume the benefits of our services as they are performed.
Accounting for contracts and programs involves the use of various techniques to estimate total contract revenue and costs. For contracts, we estimate the profit on a contract as the difference between the total estimated revenue and expected costs to complete a contract and recognize that profit over the life of the contract. When the estimates of total costs to be incurred on a contract exceed total estimates of the transaction price, a provision for the entire loss is determined at the contract level and recognized in the period in which the loss was determined.
Contract estimates are based on various assumptions to project the outcome of future events. These assumptions include labor productivity and availability; the complexity of the services being performed; the cost and availability of materials; the performance of subcontractors; and the availability and timing of funding from the customer.
The nature of our contracts gives rise to several types of variable consideration, including award and incentive fees, inspection of supplies and services, undefinitized change orders, and fluctuation in allowable indirect reimbursable costs. We include award or incentive fees in the estimated transaction price when there is certainty and a basis to reasonably estimate the amount of the fee. These estimates are based on historical award experience, anticipated performance and our best judgment at the time. The inspection of supplies and services is a factor because the U.S. government can reduce the transaction price if we do not perform the services in compliance with contract requirements. Variable consideration associated with undefinitized change orders is included to the extent that related estimated costs have been included in the expected costs to complete a contract. The fluctuation of allowable indirect reimbursable costs is a factor because the U.S. government has the right to review our accounting records and retroactively adjust the reimbursable rate. Any prior adjustments are reflected in the U.S. government reserve amounts recorded in our financial statements. We estimate variable consideration at the most likely amount that we expect to be entitled to receive. Refer to Note 16, "Commitments and Contingencies" in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion regarding U.S. government reserve amounts.
As a significant change in one or more of these estimates could affect the profitability of our contracts, we review and update our contract estimates regularly. We recognize adjustments in estimated profit on executed contracts cumulatively. The impact of the adjustments on profit recorded to date is recognized in the period the adjustment is identified. Revenue and profit in future periods of contract performance are recognized using the adjusted estimate. If at any time the estimate of contract profitability indicates an anticipated loss on the contract, we recognize the total loss in the quarter it is identified.
Contracts are often modified to account for changes in contract specifications and requirements. If the modification either creates new enforceable rights and obligations or changes the existing enforceable rights and obligations, the modification will be treated as a separate contract. Our contract modifications, except for those to exercise option years, have historically not been distinct from the existing contract and have been accounted for as if they were part of that existing contract.
The timing of revenue recognition, billings and cash collections results in billed and unbilled accounts receivable (contract assets) and customer advances and deposits (contract liabilities) on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Amounts are billed as work progresses in accordance with agreed-upon contractual terms at periodic intervals (e.g., biweekly or monthly). Generally, billing occurs subsequent to revenue recognition, resulting in contract assets. However, we may receive advances or deposits from our customers, before revenue is recognized, resulting in contract liabilities. These advance billings and payments are not considered significant financing components because they are frequently intended to fund current operating expenses under the contract. These assets and liabilities are reported on the Consolidated Balance Sheets on a contract-by-contract basis at the end of each reporting period.
See Note 1, "Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" and Note 4, “Revenue” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion.
Business Combinations, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
The purchase price of an acquired business is allocated to the tangible assets, financial assets and separately recognized intangible assets acquired less liabilities assumed based upon their respective fair values, with the excess recorded as goodwill. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires significant judgment, which includes, among other factors, analysis of historical performance and estimates of future performance. These factors may cause final amounts to differ materially from original estimates. In some cases, we use discounted cash flow analyses, which are based on our best estimate of future revenue, earnings and cash flows as well as our discount rate adjusted for risk.
Goodwill is not amortized, but instead is tested for impairment annually (or more frequently if impairment indicators arise, such as changes to the reporting unit structure or significant adverse changes in the business climate). We conduct our annual impairment testing as of the beginning of the fourth fiscal quarter. In reviewing goodwill for impairment, we have the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If we elect to perform a qualitative assessment and determine that an impairment is more likely than not, we then perform a quantitative impairment test as described below. Otherwise, no further analysis is required. We also may elect not to perform the qualitative assessment and, instead, proceed directly to the quantitative impairment test.
For the quantitative impairment test we compare the estimated fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying value, including goodwill. If the estimated fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, goodwill of the reporting unit is not impaired. If the carrying value of the reporting unit, including goodwill, exceeds its estimated fair value, a goodwill impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit while taking into consideration the related income tax effect from any tax deductible goodwill.
For 2020 and 2019, we used the qualitative approach to assess goodwill for impairment. No impairment charges related to goodwill were recorded during 2020 and 2019.
We recognize acquired intangible assets apart from goodwill whenever the intangible assets arise from contractual or other legal rights, or whenever they can be separated or divided from the acquired entity and sold, transferred, licensed, rented or exchanged, either individually or in combination with a related contract, asset or liability. Such intangibles are amortized over their estimated useful lives unless the estimated useful life is determined to be indefinite. Amortizable intangible assets are being amortized over useful lives of four to eight years. The straight-line method of amortization is used as it has been determined to approximate the use pattern of the assets.
Income Taxes
We determine the provision or benefit for income taxes using the asset and liability approach. Under this approach, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, applying enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which we expect the differences will reverse. Based on the evaluation of available evidence, we recognize future tax benefits, such as net operating loss carryforwards, to the extent that we believe it is more likely than not we will realize these benefits. We periodically assess the likelihood that we will be able to recover our deferred tax assets and reflect any changes to our estimate of the amount we are more likely than not to realize in the valuation allowance, with a corresponding adjustment to earnings or other comprehensive income (loss), as appropriate.
Our effective tax rate reflects the impact of certain undistributed foreign earnings for which we have not recognized U.S. taxes because we plan to reinvest such earnings indefinitely outside the U.S. We plan foreign earnings remittance amounts based on projected cash flow needs, as well as the working capital and long-term investment requirements of our foreign subsidiaries and our domestic operations. Based on these assumptions, we estimate the amount we will distribute to the U.S. and recognize the U.S. federal taxes due only on these amounts. Material changes in our estimates of cash, working capital and long-term investment requirements in the various jurisdictions in which we do business could impact our actual remittance amounts and, accordingly, our effective tax rate.
The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations in a multitude of jurisdictions across our global operations. We recognize potential liabilities and record tax liabilities for anticipated
tax audit issues in the U.S. and other tax jurisdictions based on our estimate of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes will be due. Furthermore, we recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement.
We adjust our liability for unrecognized tax benefits in light of changing facts and circumstances; however, due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from our current estimate of the tax liabilities. If our estimate of tax liabilities proves to be less than the ultimate assessment, an additional tax expense would result. If a payment of these amounts ultimately proves to be less than the recorded amounts, the reversal of the liabilities would result in tax benefits being recognized in the period when we determine the liabilities are no longer necessary to be provided.
New Accounting Standards Updates
See Part II, Item 8, Note 2, "Recent Accounting Standards Updates" in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding accounting standards updates.