ITEM 7.         MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors. We discuss factors that we believe could cause or contribute to these differences below and elsewhere in this report, including those set forth under Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and under “Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We are a clinical-stage gene therapy company focused on developing life-changing treatments for patients suffering from severe neurological diseases. We focus on neurological diseases where we believe an adeno-associated virus, or AAV, gene therapy approach that either increases or decreases the production of a specific protein can slow or reduce the symptoms experienced by patients, and therefore have a clinically meaningful impact. We have built a gene therapy platform that we believe positions us to be a leading company at the intersection of AAV gene therapy and severe neurological disease. Our gene therapy platform enables us to engineer, optimize, manufacture and deliver our AAV-based gene therapies that have the potential to provide durable efficacy following a single administration.
Additionally, we are working to identify novel AAV capsids, which are the outer viral protein shells that enclose the genetic material of the virus payload. Our team of experts in the fields of AAV gene therapy and neuroscience first identifies and selects severe neurological diseases that are well-suited for treatment using AAV gene therapy. We then engineer and optimize AAV vectors for delivery of the virus payload to the targeted tissue or cells. Our manufacturing process employs an established system that we believe will enable production of high quality AAV vectors at commercial-scale. In addition to our capsid optimization efforts, we leverage novel delivery paradigms, established routes of administration, and advances in dosing techniques to optimize delivery of our AAV gene therapies to target tissues, regions and cell types that are critical to the disease of interest. We believe we can achieve this directly, with targeted infusions to discrete regions of the brain, the spinal cord, or systemically, in conjunction with our novel capsids.
Our business strategy focuses on discovering, developing, manufacturing and commercializing our gene therapy programs. As part of this strategy, we have developed core competencies specific to AAV gene therapy development and manufacturing and are beginning to build our commercial infrastructure. This business strategy also includes business development activities that may include in-licensing activities or partnering certain programs in specific geographies with collaborators, as we have demonstrated through our ongoing collaboration with Neurocrine. Since our inception, our operations have focused on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, establishing our intellectual property portfolio, determining which neurological diseases to pursue, advancing our product candidates including delivery and manufacturing, and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials. We do not have any product candidates approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. We have funded our operations primarily through private placements of redeemable convertible preferred stock, public offerings of our common stock, and our strategic collaborations, including our prior collaboration with Sanofi Genzyme, or the Sanofi Genzyme Collaboration, which commenced in February 2015 and was terminated in June 2019, our prior collaboration with AbbVie focusing on tau-related disease, or the AbbVie Tau Collaboration, which commenced in February 2018 and was terminated in August 2020, our prior collaboration with AbbVie focusing on pathological species of alpha-synuclein, or the AbbVie Alpha-Synuclein Collaboration which commenced in February 2019 and was terminated in August 2020, and our ongoing collaboration with Neurocrine, or the Neurocrine Collaboration, which commenced in March 2019. We refer to our collaboration agreement with Neurocrine as the Neurocrine Collaboration Agreement.
In February 2021, Neurocrine notified us that it had elected to terminate the Neurocrine Collaboration solely with regards to the VY-AADC Program, effective August 2, 2021, or the Neurocrine VY-AADC Program Termination
Effective Date. The Neurocrine Collaboration Agreement remains in full force and effect for each other program thereunder. We intend to support Neurocrine, the clinical trial sponsor and IND holder, on ongoing matters related to the completion of imaging and clinical assessments requested by the DSMB and the provision of other information requested by the FDA for the RESTORE-1 Phase 2 clinical trial. As a result of the termination, subsequent to the Neurocrine VY-AADC Program Termination Effective Date, Neurocrine will no longer reimburse us for research and development activities related to the VY-AADC Program.
We have incurred significant operating losses in every year prior to 2020. We reported a net income of $36.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to revenue recognition in connection with the terminations of our prior collaborations with AbbVie. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $275.9 million. We reported a net loss of $43.6 million and $88.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future. We anticipate that our expenses will increase significantly in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
● continue investing in our gene therapy platform to optimize capsid engineering and payload development, manufacturing, dosing, and delivery techniques;
● work with Neurocrine, the IND holder and RESTORE-1 clinical trial sponsor, to determine the potential path forward for VY-AADC (NBIb-1817) as a treatment for Parkinson’s disease based on, among other things, the additional information being collected by Neurocrine in response to the DSMB;
● initiate additional preclinical studies and clinical trials for, and continue research and development of, our other programs and seek to resolve the clinical hold on VY-HTT01 for the treatment of Huntington’s disease;
● conduct joint research and development under our strategic collaborations for the research, development, and commercialization of certain of our pipeline programs;
● continue our process research and development activities, as well as establish our research-grade and commercial manufacturing capabilities;
● identify additional neurological diseases for treatment with our AAV gene therapies and develop additional programs or product candidates;
● work to identify and optimize novel AAV capsids;
● expand our manufacturing capabilities;
● develop, obtain and maintain regulatory clearances for devices to deliver our AAV gene therapies, and to provide financial and operating support to partners manufacturing and supplying these devices for use in our clinical development program;
● seek marketing and regulatory approvals for our product candidates or devices that arise from our programs that successfully complete clinical development;
● maintain, expand, protect and enforce our intellectual property portfolio;
● identify, acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies;
● develop a sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any product candidates for which we may obtain marketing approval;
● expand our operational, financial and management systems and personnel, including personnel to support our clinical development, manufacturing and commercialization efforts and our operations as a public company;
● increase our product liability and clinical trial insurance coverage as we expand our clinical trials and commercialization efforts; and
● continue to operate as a public company.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate any revenue from product sales for the foreseeable future. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $50.8 million of collaboration revenue from the AbbVie Tau Collaboration, inclusive of the recognition of $46.3 million related to its termination, $63.7 million of collaboration revenue from the AbbVie Alpha-Synuclein Collaboration, inclusive of the recognition of $58.9 million related to its termination, and $56.7 million of collaboration revenue from the Neurocrine Collaboration. For additional information about our revenue recognition policy related to the collaborations, see the section titled “-Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates-Revenue.”
For the foreseeable future, we expect substantially all of our revenue will be generated from our collaboration agreement with Neurocrine and any other strategic collaborations we may enter into in the future. If our development efforts are successful, we may also generate revenue from product sales.
Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our program discovery efforts, and the development of our programs and gene therapy platform, which include:
● employee-related expenses including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation expense;
● costs of funding research performed by third parties that conduct research and development, preclinical activities, manufacturing and production design on our behalf;
● the cost of purchasing lab supplies and non-capital equipment used in designing, developing and manufacturing preclinical study materials;
● consultant fees;
● facility costs including rent, depreciation and maintenance expenses; and
● fees for maintaining licenses under our third-party licensing agreements.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Costs for certain activities, such as manufacturing, preclinical studies, and clinical trials, are generally recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information and data provided to us by our vendors and collaborators.
At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and estimated costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the development of our product candidates. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, material net cash inflows will commence from sales of our product candidates. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing such product candidates, including the uncertainty of:
● successful enrollment in and completion of clinical trials;
● establishing an appropriate safety profile;
● establishing commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers;
● receipt of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
● commercializing the product candidates, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others;
● obtaining and maintaining patent and trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity for our product candidates;
● continued acceptable safety profiles of the products following approval; and
● retention of key research and development personnel.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates would significantly change the costs, timing and viability associated with the development of that product candidate.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. We expect research and development costs to increase for the foreseeable future as our development programs progress and as we seek to move our other product candidates, including VY-HTT01 as a treatment for Huntington’s disease, into clinical trials. We expect that Neurocrine’s partial termination of the Neurocrine Collaboration Agreement will decrease research and development costs related to the VY-AADC Program. However, we continue to evaluate the potential path forward for the VY-AADC Program and, if sponsorship of the RESTORE-1 Phase 2 clinical trial were transferred back to us, we would expect a significant increase in research and development costs above our current forecasts.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance, accounting, business development, legal and human resource functions. Other significant costs include corporate facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, legal fees related to patent and corporate matters and fees for accounting and consulting services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future to support continued research and development activities, including the ongoing research and development activities and initiation of clinical trials for our product candidates. These increases will likely include increased costs related to the hiring of additional personnel and fees to outside consultants. We also anticipate increased expenses associated with being a public company, including costs for audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services, director and officer insurance premiums, business development activities, and investor relations costs.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest and other income (expense) consists primarily of interest income on our marketable debt securities and the gain or loss on the equity securities investment in ClearPoint Neuro, Inc. (formerly known as MRI Interventions, Inc.), or CLPT.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results
may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our judgments and estimates in light of changes in circumstances, facts and experience. The effects of material revisions in estimates, if any, will be reflected in the financial statements prospectively from the date of change in estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies used in the preparation of our financial statements require the most significant judgments and estimates.
Revenue Recognition - ASC 606
In the year ended December 31, 2020, our revenue was generated from the AbbVie Tau Collaboration, the AbbVie Alpha-Synuclein Collaboration, and the Neurocrine Collaboration. We recognize revenue in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Topic 606 Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606. Effective January 1, 2018, we adopted the provisions of ASC 606 using the modified retrospective transition method. Under this method, we recorded the cumulative effect of initially applying the new standard to all contracts as of the date of adoption.
We enter into collaboration agreements which are within the scope of ASC 606, under which we license rights to certain of our product candidates and perform research and development services. The terms of these arrangements typically include payment of one or more of the following: non-refundable, upfront fees; reimbursement of research and development costs; development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments; and royalties on net sales of licensed products.
Under ASC 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized for arrangements determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer.
The promised goods or services in our arrangement typically consist of license rights to our intellectual property or research and development services. We provide options to additional items in the contracts, which are accounted for as separate contracts when the customer elects to exercise such options, unless the option provides a material right to the customer. We evaluate the customer options for material rights, or options to acquire additional goods or services for free or at a discount. If the customer options are determined to represent a material right, the material right is recognized as a separate performance obligation at the outset of the arrangement. Performance obligations are promised goods or services in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and are considered distinct when (i) the customer can benefit from the good or service on its own or together with other readily available resources and (ii) the promised good or service is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract. In assessing whether promised goods or services are distinct, we consider factors such as the stage of development of the underlying intellectual property, the capabilities of the customer to develop the intellectual property on their own or whether the required expertise is readily available and whether the goods or services are integral or dependent to other goods or services in the contract.
We estimate the transaction price based on the amount expected to be received for transferring the promised goods or services in the contract. The consideration may include fixed consideration or variable consideration. At the inception of each arrangement that includes variable consideration, we evaluate the amount of potential payment and the likelihood that the payments will be received. We utilize either the most likely amount method or expected amount method to estimate the amount expected to be received based on which method best predicts the amount expected to be received. The amount of variable consideration which is included in the transaction price may be constrained, and is
included in the transaction price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period.
Our contracts often include development and regulatory milestone payments which are assessed under the most likely amount method and constrained if it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would occur. Milestone payments that are not within our control or the licensee’s control, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. At the end of each reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of such development milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect collaboration revenues in the period of adjustment. To date, we have not recognized any consideration related to the achievement of development, regulatory, or commercial milestone revenue resulting from any of our collaboration arrangements.
For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). To date, we have not recognized any consideration related to sales-based royalty revenue resulting from any of our collaboration arrangements.
We allocate the transaction price based on the estimated stand-alone selling price of each of the performance obligations. We must develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract. We utilize key assumptions to determine the stand-alone selling price for service obligations, which may include other comparable transactions, pricing considered in negotiating the transaction and the estimated costs. Additionally, in determining the standalone selling price for material rights, we utilize comparable transactions, industry standards for product development and clinical trial success probabilities and estimates of option exercise likelihood. Variable consideration is allocated specifically to one or more performance obligations in a contract when the terms of the variable consideration relate to the satisfaction of the performance obligation and the resulting amounts allocated are consistent with the amounts we would expect to receive for the satisfaction of each performance obligation.
The consideration allocated to each performance obligation is recognized as revenue when control is transferred for the related goods or services. For performance obligations which consist of licenses and other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Upfront payments and fees are recorded as contract liabilities within deferred revenue upon receipt or when due until we perform our obligations under these arrangements. Amounts are recorded as accounts receivable when our rights to consideration are unconditional. A significant portion of revenue recognized from the Neurocrine Collaboration is related to performance obligations pursuant to which revenue is recognized using a proportional performance model. Revenue is recognized using input-based measurements, which involves the measurement of progress toward each performance obligation based on the actual costs incurred compared to total projected costs. We estimate the expected remaining costs to complete the research and development services for each performance obligation. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure and related revenue recognition.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on facts and
circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses include the costs incurred for services performed by our vendors in connection with research and development activities for which we have not yet been invoiced.
We record our expenses related to research and development activities on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with vendors that conduct research and development on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the research and development expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid accordingly. Non-refundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities are expensed when the activity has been performed or when the goods have been received rather than when the payment is made.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, together with the changes in those items in dollars:
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue was $171.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and $104.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $66.7 million increase in collaboration revenue in 2020 was primarily a result of the termination of the AbbVie Tau Collaboration and the AbbVie Alpha-Synuclein Collaboration in August 2020. We recognized $50.8 million related to research services from the AbbVie Tau Collaboration in the year ended December 31, 2020. This amount included $4.5 million related to research services provided prior to the termination date and $46.3 million of deferred revenue remaining under the agreement at the termination date as all of our obligations were complete as of September 30, 2020. We also recognized $63.7 million related to research services from the AbbVie Alpha-Synuclein Collaboration in the year ended December 31. 2020. This amount included $4.8 million related to research services provided prior to the termination date and $58.9 million of deferred revenue remaining under the agreement at the termination date as all of our obligations were complete as of September 30, 2020. Additionally, we
recognized $56.7 million of revenue related to the Neurocrine Collaboration for collaboration-related services provided and expenses reimbursed in the year ended December 31, 2020. We expect the termination of the collaboration related to VY-AADC Program will result in a decrease in revenue related to services provided and expenses reimbursed from the Neurocrine Collaboration.
Our collaboration revenues were not materially impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic during the year ended December 31, 2020. In subsequent periods, the COVID-19 pandemic could affect our collaboration revenues and our operations.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense decreased by $10.9 million from $119.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $108.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The decrease in research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to the following:
● a reduction of approximately $19.5 million for external research and development costs primarily related to clinical and manufacturing activities related to the VY-AADC Program, and preclinical and manufacturing activities related to our VY-HTT01 Program for Huntington’s disease;
● offset by an increase of approximately $6.7 million for employee-related and consultant compensation costs as we continue to increase research and development headcount to support our internal efforts on program activities; and
● an increase of approximately $1.9 million for facility and other costs including rent, depreciation, maintenance and other expenses due to the additional space leased at 75 Hayden Avenue;
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve rapidly. Our corporate headquarters is in Massachusetts, a state particularly hard hit by the pandemic. We have and will continue to adhere to applicable guidelines and safety measures including stay-at-home policies and the reporting of only essential personnel for business continuity to ensure the safety of our employees, consultants, contractors, and staff. Certain of our clinical trial sites and collaboration partners have experienced facility closures or been subject to quarantines, travel restrictions and other governmental restrictions and have appropriately diverted attention and resources to respond to the impacts of COVID-19 on their own operations and personnel. Some have even become involved in research and development efforts related to COVID-19.
The current workplace safety measures that we have enacted in response to COVID-19 have required a reduction in on-site activity at our facilities in Massachusetts, including in our laboratories in which preclinical experiments are conducted. As a result, we have had to prioritize our preclinical experiments and terminate or delay some non-critical experiments in order to maintain critical experiments for our preclinical programs.
We will continue to monitor the issues raised by the global spread of COVID-19 and have put in place and will continue to put in place measures as appropriate and necessary for, or that we believe to be in the best interest of, our business, employees, collaborators, stockholders, and the community.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense decreased by $1.3 million from $36.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $35.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in general and administrative expense was primarily attributable to the following:
● a decrease of approximately $1.8 million for legal and intellectual property expenses;
● offset by an increase of approximately $0.5 million for compensation costs associated with the increase in administrative function headcount;
Other Income, Net
Interest and other income of approximately $9.4 million and $8.1 million was recognized in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, primarily driven by $7.7 million and $1.6 million in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to gains on our common stock investment in and warrants to purchase shares of common stock of CLPT, and interest income on marketable securities balances.
Comparison of year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018:
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, together with the changes in those items in dollars:
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue was $104.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, and $7.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The $96.8 million increase in collaboration revenue in 2019 was primarily a result of the termination of the Sanofi Genzyme Collaboration in June 2019, as well as our entries into the Neurocrine Collaboration and AbbVie Alpha-Synuclein Collaboration in the beginning of 2019. As a result of the termination, we paid $10.0 million to Sanofi Genzyme and paid an additional $10.0 million in September 2020 after the filing of an IND application for a product candidate incorporating certain intellectual property rights developed under or substantially related to VY-HTT01 for Huntington’s disease, or a Post-Termination HD Product. We recognized $31.8 million of revenue related to the Sanofi Genzyme Collaboration in 2019. This amount includes $2.9 million related to research services provided prior to the termination date, $0.2 million of in-kind related services, and $48.7 million of deferred revenue remaining under the agreement at the termination date. These amounts were offset by the $10.0 million paid in June 2019 and the $10.0 million paid to Sanofi Genzyme related to the filing of an IND application in September 2020. Additionally, we
recognized $11.3 million, $1.3 million, and $60.0 million of revenue related to the AbbVie Tau Collaboration, AbbVie Alpha-Synuclein Collaboration, and the Neurocrine Collaboration, respectively, for collaboration-related services provided and expenses reimbursed.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense increased by $54.8 million from $64.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $119.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The following table summarizes our research and development expenses, for the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively:
The change in research and development expense was primarily attributable to research and development, and included the following:
● approximately $35.3 million for increased external research and development costs primarily related to clinical and manufacturing activities for the VY-AADC Program, and preclinical and manufacturing activities for the Huntington’s Program.
● approximately $12.1 million for increased research and development employee-related and consultant compensation costs (including an increase of $2.7 million in stock-based compensation) as we continue to increase research and development headcount to support our program pipeline; and
● approximately $7.4 million for increased facility and other costs including rent, depreciation, maintenance and other expenses due to the additional space leased at 64 Sidney Street and 75 Sidney Street;
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense increased by $2.5 million from $33.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $36.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change in general and administrative expense was primarily attributable to the following:
● approximately $6.4 million for increased employee compensation cost due to increases in headcount and stock-based compensation. The increase is offset by the recognition of $5.4 million of stock-based compensation related to the retirement agreement with our former Chief Executive Officer, Dr. Steven Paul for the year ended December 31, 2018;
● approximately $1.1 million for increased legal and intellectual property expenses; and
● approximately $0.4 million for increased facility and other costs including rent, depreciation, maintenance and other expenses.
Other Income, Net
Interest and other income of approximately $8.1 million and $2.6 million was recognized in the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, related to interest income on marketable securities balances, which increased by $235.0 million during 2019 as a result of our AbbVie Alpha-Synuclein and Neurocrine Collaborations, in addition to gains and losses on our common stock investment in and warrants to purchase shares of common stock of CLPT.
Income Tax
There was no income tax payable for the year ended December 31, 2019. We recorded an income tax benefit of $0.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2018 related to our alternative minimum tax, or AMT, liability.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
We have funded our operations primarily through private placements of redeemable convertible preferred stock, public offerings of our common stock, the Sanofi Genzyme Collaboration which commenced in February 2015 and was terminated in June 2019, the AbbVie Tau Collaboration which commenced in February 2018 and was terminated in August 2020, the AbbVie Alpha-Synuclein Collaboration which commenced in February 2019 and was terminated in August 2020, and the Neurocrine Collaboration, which commenced in March 2019.
In February 2021, Neurocrine notified us it had elected to terminate the Neurocrine Collaboration solely with regards to the VY-AADC Program, effective August 2, 2021. The Neurocrine Collaboration Agreement remains in full force and effect for each other program thereunder. We intend to support Neurocrine, the study sponsor and IND holder, on ongoing matters related to the completion of imaging and clinical assessments requested by the DSMB and the provision of other information requested by the FDA for the RESTORE-1 Phase 2 clinical trial. As a result of the termination, subsequent to the Neurocrine VY-AADC Program Termination Effective Date, Neurocrine will no longer reimburse us for research and development activities related to the VY-AADC Program.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents, and marketable debt securities of $174.8 million. Based upon our current operating plans, we expect that our existing cash, cash equivalents, and marketable debt securities as well as amounts expected to be received for reimbursement amounts expected from development costs related to our collaboration and license agreement with Neurocrine will enable us to meet our planned operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into mid-2022.
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $96.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by the one-time recognition of $105.2 million deferred revenue related to the termination of the AbbVie Tau Collaboration and the AbbVie Alpha-Synuclein Collaboration, offset by $36.7 million of net income, and changes in working capital.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $48.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 and was primarily due to an increase in cash received of $157.0 million from the upfront payments related to the AbbVie Alpha-Synuclein Collaboration and the Neurocrine Collaboration, offset by an increase of $57.4 million in operating expenses, net of stock-based compensation and depreciation, as we increased our research and development activities and infrastructure to support our program initiatives.
Net cash used in operating activities was $15.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2018 and was primarily due to an increase in deferred revenue of $69.0 million from the upfront payment related to the AbbVie Tau Collaboration in 2018, offset by a $16.7 million increase in operating expenses, net of stock-based compensation and depreciation, due to increased research and development activities, as well as higher general and administrative expenses. The decrease in cash used in operating activities was also offset by an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets as well as a decrease in accrued expenses.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $113.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to proceeds from maturities of marketable securities of $195.5 million, offset by purchases of marketable securities of $70.4 million and purchases of property and equipment of $12.3 million.
Net cash used in investing activities was $90.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to purchases of marketable securities of $494.2 million and purchases of property and equipment of $5.1 million, offset by proceeds from maturities of marketable securities of $411.3 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $26.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2018. The cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2018 was primarily due to proceeds from maturities of marketable securities of $364.0 million offset by purchase of marketable securities of $333.2 million and purchases of property and equipment of $4.3 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $3.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the proceeds from the exercise of stock options, and purchases by our employees of our common stock under our employee stock purchase plan.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $81.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily related to the issuance of 4,179,728 shares of our common stock to Neurocrine pursuant to a stock purchase agreement in connection with the Neurocrine Collaboration as well as proceeds from exercises of stock options.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $4.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2018 related to proceeds from exercises of stock options, and purchases by our employees of our common stock under our employee stock purchase plan.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue the research and development of, continue or initiate clinical trials of, and seek marketing approval for, our product candidates. In addition, if we obtain marketing approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant expenses related to program sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution to the extent that such sales, marketing and distribution are not the responsibility of potential collaborators. Furthermore, we expect to incur increasing costs associated with operating as a public company, meeting financial controls, satisfying regulatory and quality standards, fulfilling healthcare compliance requirements, and maintaining product, clinical trial and directors’ and officers’ liability insurance coverage. Accordingly, we will need to obtain substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations. If we are unable to raise capital or enter into business development transactions when needed or on acceptable terms, we could be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate our research and development programs or any future commercialization efforts.
Based upon our current operating plan, we expect that our existing cash, cash equivalents, and marketable debt securities as well as amounts expected to be received for reimbursement amounts expected from development costs related to the Neurocrine Collaboration Agreement, will enable us to meet our planned operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into mid-2022. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the scope, progress, results, and costs of product discovery, preclinical studies and clinical trials for our product candidates and any required companion devices;
● the scope, progress, results, costs, prioritization, and number of our research and development programs;
● the progress and status of our strategic collaborations, including any research and development costs for which we are responsible, our collaborators’ willingness and ability to approve desirable budgets for research and development costs for which they are responsible, the potential exercise by our collaboration partners of any options to develop or license certain products and product candidates that they might have, our potential receipt of future milestone payments and royalties from our collaboration partners, and any decisions by our collaborators to exercise their rights to terminate a collaboration in whole or in part;
● the extent to which we are obligated to reimburse, or entitled to reimbursement of, preclinical development and clinical trial costs, or the achievement of milestones or occurrence of other developments that trigger payments, under any other collaboration agreement to which we might become a party;
● the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
● our ability to establish and maintain collaboration, distribution, or other marketing arrangements for our product candidates on favorable terms, if at all;
● the costs and timing of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims;
● the extent to which we acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies, including any intellectual property associated with such candidates or technologies, or acquire or invest in other businesses, such as our investment in CLPT;
● the costs related to evaluating possible alternative devices that may be useful in the delivery of our product candidates, including our potential delivery devices, such as the variable trajectory array guide, or V-TAG®;
● the costs of advancing our manufacturing capabilities and of securing manufacturing arrangements for pre-commercial and commercial production;
● the level of product sales by us or our collaborators from any product candidates for which we obtain marketing approval in the future;
● the costs of operating as a public company, meeting applicable financial, regulatory, and quality control standards, fulfilling healthcare compliance requirements, and maintaining adequate product, clinical trial, and directors’ and officers’ liability insurance coverage; and
● the costs of establishing or contracting for sales, manufacturing, marketing, distribution, and other commercialization capabilities if we obtain regulatory approvals to market our product candidates.
Identifying potential product candidates and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials is a time-consuming, expensive and uncertain process that takes years to complete. We may never generate the necessary data or results required to obtain marketing approval and achieve product sales. In addition, our product candidates, if approved, may not achieve commercial success. Our product revenues, if any, and any commercial milestone payments or royalty payments under our collaboration agreements, will be derived from sales of products that may not be commercially available for many years, if at all. Accordingly, we will need to continue to rely on additional financing and business development transactions to achieve our business objectives. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate product revenues sufficient to achieve consistent profitability, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. We do not have any committed external source of funds other than the amounts we are entitled to receive from Neurocrine for the reimbursement of certain research and development expenses, the achievement of specified regulatory and commercial milestones, and royalty payments related to ongoing programs under the Neurocrine Collaboration. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or equity-linked securities, including convertible debt, our stockholders’ ownership interests will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our existing stockholders’ rights as holders of our common stock. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, obtaining additional capital, acquiring or divesting businesses, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends.
If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Contractual Obligations
We enter into agreements in the normal course of business with clinical research organizations, contract manufacturing organizations, and institutions to license intellectual property. These contracts are cancelable at any time by us, generally upon 30 to 90 days prior written notice.
Our agreements to license intellectual property include potential milestone payments that are dependent upon the development of products using the intellectual property licensed under the agreements and contingent upon the achievement of clinical trial or regulatory approval milestones. We may also be required to pay annual maintenance fees or minimum amounts payable ranging from low-four digits to low five-digits depending upon the terms of the applicable agreement.
We also have non-cancelable operating lease commitments arising from our leases of office and laboratory space at our facilities in Cambridge and Lexington, Massachusetts. We expect lease costs under these commitments to total $7.8 million in 2021 and increase annually; in 2025, we expect total lease costs of approximately $9.6 million.
As described elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K including in “Part I, Item 1 - Business,” we are also currently party to a collaboration agreement with Neurocrine.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have, during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under applicable rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission, or the SEC.
Smaller Reporting Company Status
We previously qualified as a “smaller reporting company,” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, and have been permitted to rely, and have relied, on the reduced disclosure requirements available to smaller reporting companies, including reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation. Our ability to rely on the reduced disclosure requirements available to smaller reporting companies will cease after the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including those portions of our definitive proxy statement relating to our 2021 Annual Meeting of Stockholders incorporated by reference into Part III of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.