ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements, including the notes thereto, appearing elsewhere in this annual report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward looking statements. Our audited financial statements are stated in United States Dollars and are prepared in accordance with the United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in this report discusses the Company’s financial condition and results of operations as of and for 2020 and 2019.
Results of Operations
The Company has incurred losses since inception resulting in an accumulated deficit of $1,715,697 as of December 31, 2020. Our financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern and, accordingly, do not include adjustments relating to the recoverability and realization of assets and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue in operation.
We will require additional capital to meet our short and long term operating requirements. We expect to raise additional capital through, among other things, the sale of equity securities.
Fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year fiscal ended December 31, 2019
Revenues
Revenues for 2020 were $48,262, a decrease of $348,429, or 87.8%, from $396,691 in 2019. The decline in revenues was across all product lines. The decrease in sales for subscriptions and supplements was directly associated to a reduction in advertising spend for the year. The reduced advertising spend also impacted the number of new customers we acquired for the year, this included subscriptions and supplement product lines. COVID-19 has impacted our ability to raise new capital, hence affecting overall revenues and operating costs.
Costs and Expenses
Total costs and operating expenses decreased $274,734, or 39.5%, to $420,550 in 2020 from $695,284 in 2019. The decrease in operating costs and expenses was due to savings initiatives to offset the decline in revenue.
·
Cost of revenue decreased $122,358, or 68.3%, to $56,708 in 2020 compared to $179,066 in 2019, and increased as a percentage of net revenue at 117.5% from 45.1%. Our cost of revenue includes the cost of the supplements we sell as well as shipping and handling costs for shipments to customers, merchant processing fees, call center support, and order processing. The increase in cost of revenues as a percent of revenues is due to the decline in revenue across all product lines.
·
Advertising expenses decreased $237,107 or 99.6%, to $895 in 2020 from $238,002 in 2019, and decreased as a percentage of net revenue to 1.9% from 60.0%. The decrease in advertising expenses as a percentage of our net revenues is the result of our advertising cost per sale decreasing. We monitor our advertising purchases and customer acquisition costs based on various advertising websites, partners and campaigns, and we adjust our campaign costs based on new website subscriptions or sales. The decrease is also due to cost cutting measures.
·
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $84,731, or 30.5%, to $362,947 in 2020 from $278,216 in 2019, and increased as a percentage of net revenue to 752.0% from 70.1%. The increase in SG&A in 2020 as compared to 2019 is principally attributable to increases in consulting and accounting expenses, exchange fees and filing fees offset by decreases in marketing, office expenses and general expenses.
Net Loss
Our net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $379,630 compared to $303,068 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and capital resources
Liquidity is the ability of a company to generate sufficient cash to satisfy its needs for cash. The following table summarizes our total current assets, total current liabilities and working capital deficit at December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019.
The reduction in total current assets between the periods primarily reflects a reduction in cash and the holdback receivables from merchants. The increase in total current liabilities reflects an increase in notes payable, accounts payable, and accrued expenses. We do not have any capital commitments and do not have any external sources of working capital available.
Going concern and management’s liquidity plans
The COVID-19 pandemic has materially and adversely impacted the U.S. economy and financial markets, with legislative and regulatory responses including unprecedented monetary and fiscal policy actions across all sectors, and there is significant uncertainty as to timing of stabilization and recovery. The extent of the COVID-19 impacts will depend on future actions and outcomes, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the scope, severity and duration of the outbreak, the short-term and long-term economic impact of the outbreak (including the effect on advertising activity, consumer discretionary spending and our employees), and the actions taken to mitigate the impact of the virus, and the pace of economic and financial market recovery when the COVID-19 pandemic subsides, among others.
We have experienced recurring operating losses and negative operating cash flows, and have financed our recent working capital requirements primarily through the issuance of notes payable. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we have reported net losses of $379,630 and $303,068, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, our working capital was a deficit of $341,360, our accumulated deficit was $1,715,697, and we had negative cash flows from operations of $112,666. These factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our Financial Statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. The accompanying Financial Statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. There are no assurances we will be successful in our efforts to report profitable operations or to continue as a going concern, in which event investors would lose their entire investment in our company.
Our ability to continue to grow our business is dependent upon our ability to raise additional sufficient capital to fund our operating expenses, including advertising, until such time, if ever, that we are able to report profitable operations, as well as for our short-term and long-term growth plans. We do not generate operating income and we are presently relying on cash we receive from the holdback receivable to pay our operating expenses. Our management estimates that we require approximately $5,500,000 in additional working capital during the next 12 months in order to meet our current business objectives, including the development of new indicators for our Lifestyle Blueprint platform, the addition of print versions of our DWD Protocol, expanding our supplement product line and additional subscription content offerings for our customers. This additional working capital is also necessary to fund increases in our advertising and marketing costs, costs associated with the development of additional infrastructure to support our expected growth, as well as funds to pay our operating expenses and general working capital. We currently do not have any firm commitments to provide any additional capital to us. There are no assurances we will be successful in securing the additional capital necessary to grow our company and pay our operating expenses. Any delay in raising sufficient funds could adversely impact our ability to continue to increase our revenues in future periods. In addition, if we are unable to raise the necessary additional working capital, we may be forced to reduce certain operating expenses in an effort to conserve our working capital which will adversely impact our revenues and results of operations in future periods and there are no assurances we could continue as a going concern.
Summary of cash flows
The increase in cash used in our operating activities in 2020 as compared to 2019 is due to an increase in net loss offset by increases in accounts payable, stock based compensation and capital contribution from the CEO and a decrease in the holdback receivable.
There was no net cash provided by or used in investing activities during 2020 and 2019.
Net cash provided by financing activities during 2020 reflects the loan from Bank of America under the Paycheck Protection Program and proceeds from additional notes payable. Net cash provided by financing activities during 2019 reflects proceeds from notes payable.
Commitments and Contingencies
Information regarding our Commitments and Contingencies is contained in Note 8 to the Financial Statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources and would be considered material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in conformity with U.S. GAAP and are based upon certain critical accounting policies. These policies may require management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that we believe are reasonable based on our historical experience, contract terms, observance of known trends in our Company and the industry as a whole, and information available from other outside sources. Our estimates affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expense during the reporting period. Actual results may differ from those initial estimates. Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 3 of the Financial Statements.
Revenue recognition - Our product revenues are generated through online channels, in which customers provide their credit and/or debit cards for processing payments to purchase our products and services. The credit cards go through various checks and balances to ensure these are valid charges. We use our judgment in various ways including: that the payment is valid if it is approved by the various credible checks in place by the online banking systems, we have engaged with to complete each transaction. In some cases, the banking partners in place will address charges as invalid or fraudulent, due to a lost credit card, or related, and can redress payments issued for up to 12 months or longer. These adjustments are typically done via chargebacks. Every transaction is tracked, but we are unable to ever completely verify a valid transaction. Beyond that, there are also estimated elements of when a consumer “changes their mind” on sale transactions, and leveraging their banking relationships to chargeback the transaction. (Also known as friendly fraud in the space.) In addition to these elements and judgements, there is the case of all of our products having a 60-day money back guarantee. In some cases, customers will take advantage of this system to use our digital services and products for 1-59 days, then decide to request a refund. As these and future events and their effects of these revenue-impacting elements cannot be determined with complete precision, actual results could differ from these estimates and assumptions, and those differences could be material to the Financial Statements.
Holdback Receivables - Since a primary source of our income is generated through online channels, in which a merchant account and merchant bank relationship is developed, we naturally must account for holdback receivables. These merchant banks require “holdbacks,” based on the level of risk associated to a specific business or merchant account. In our case, to ensure we can continue processing credit/debit card sales online, our merchant bank requires they holdback a percentage of that receivable money as a guarantee. The money they hold back is held in their accounts as a ‘reserve.’ They are able to hold a percentage of our monies based on our receivables. We use our judgment in various ways including: we believe the merchant bank will honor their agreement, and release funds based on what is agreed upon in our merchant agreement. We also believe they will continue to operate as expected, and allow us to process sales and transactions accordingly. We also expect our partner merchant bank to be truthful and honorable should we close our accounts and request our monies to be released, in which they are able to hold those funds for upwards of 12 months to cover refunds, chargebacks, and related processing fees. As these and future events and their effects of these holdback receivable elements cannot be determined with complete precision, actual results could differ from these estimates and assumptions, and those differences could be material to the Financial Statements.
Income Taxes - The provision for income taxes includes federal, state, local and foreign taxes. Income taxes are accounted for under the liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the year in which the temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. We evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets and establish a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Stock-Based Compensation - We account for stock based instruments issued to employees and non-employees for services in accordance with Accounting Standard Codification (“ASC”) Topic 718. Stock-based compensation is measured at the grant date based on the estimated fair value of the award and is recognized as an expense over the requisite service period. Accordingly, the Black-Scholes option pricing model is utilized to derive an estimated fair value.
Emerging Growth Company
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the “JOBS Act”, and we are permitted to take advantage of certain exemptions from various public company reporting requirements, including not being required to have our internal controls over financial reporting audited by our independent registered public accounting firm pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, or the “Sarbanes-Oxley Act”, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and any golden parachute payments. We may take advantage of these exemptions until we are no longer an “emerging growth company.” In addition, the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards until such time as those standards apply to private companies.
We have elected to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards under the JOBS Act. This election allows us to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until those standards apply to private companies. As a result of this election, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.
We could remain an emerging growth company for up to five years, or until the earliest of:
·
the last day of the first fiscal year in which our annual gross revenues exceed $1.07 billion;
·
the date that we become a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the “Exchange Act”, which would occur if the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter; or
·
the date we have issued more than $1 billion in non-convertible debt during the preceding three-year period.
At this time, we expect to remain an emerging growth company until possibly as late as 2023. References herein to “emerging growth company” have the meaning associated with that term in the JOBS Act.