Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Verizon Communications Inc. (Verizon or the Company) is a holding company that, acting through its subsidiaries, is one of the world’s leading providers of communications, technology, information and entertainment products and services to consumers, businesses and government entities. With a presence around the world, we offer data, video and voice services and solutions on our networks and platforms that are designed to meet customers’ demand for mobility, reliable network connectivity, security and control.
To compete effectively in today’s dynamic marketplace, we are focused on the capabilities of our high-performing networks to drive growth based on delivering what customers want and need in the new digital world. During 2020, we focused on leveraging our network leadership; retaining and growing our high-quality customer base while balancing profitability; enhancing ecosystems in growth businesses; and driving monetization of our networks, platforms and solutions. We are creating business value by earning customers', employees' and shareholders' trust, limiting our environmental impact and continuing our customer base growth while creating social benefit through our products and services. Our strategy requires significant capital investments primarily to acquire wireless spectrum, put the spectrum into service, provide additional capacity for growth in our networks, invest in the fiber that supports our businesses, evolve and maintain our networks and develop and maintain significant advanced information technology systems and data system capabilities. We believe that steady and consistent investments in our networks and platforms will drive innovative products and services and fuel our growth.
We are consistently deploying new network architecture and technologies to secure our leadership in both fourth-generation (4G) and fifth-generation (5G) wireless networks. We expect that our next-generation multi-use platform, which we call the Intelligent Edge Network, will simplify operations by eliminating legacy network elements, speed the deployment of 5G wireless technology and create new opportunities in the business market in a cost efficient manner. Our network leadership is the hallmark of our brand and the foundation for the connectivity, platforms and solutions upon which we build our competitive advantage.
Highlights of Our 2020 Financial Results
(dollars in millions)
Impacts of the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pandemic
This disclosure discusses the actions Verizon has taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the impacts it has had on our business, as well as related known or expected trends. The disclosure in the remainder of this Management's Discussion & Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is qualified by the disclosure in this section on the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and, to the extent that the disclosure in the remainder of Management's Discussion & Analysis refers to a financial or performance metric that has been affected by a trend or activity, that reference is in addition to any impact discussed in this section on the impacts of the pandemic.
COVID-19 was identified in late 2019 and in 2020 spread throughout the world, including throughout the United States (U.S.). Public and private sector policies and initiatives to reduce the transmission of COVID-19 have varied significantly across the U.S., but at various times during the year ended December 31, 2020 a significant percentage of the U.S. population was subject to meaningful restrictions on activities, which included limitations on the operation of businesses including retail operations, requirements that individuals remain in or close to their homes, school closures, travel restrictions, limitations on large gatherings and other policies to promote or enforce physical distancing.
Similar restrictions have been implemented in many other countries in which we operate. As described below, these restrictions and our responses to them have significantly impacted how our customers use our products and services, how they interact with us, and how our employees work and provide services to our customers. In addition, governments have imposed a wide variety of consumer protection measures that limit how certain businesses, including telecommunications companies, can operate their businesses and interact with their customers. The pandemic and governmental responses to the pandemic have also resulted in a slowdown of global economic activity, which has significantly impacted our customers. As a result, prior trends in our business may not be applicable to our operations during the pendency of the pandemic.
The impact of COVID-19 in the future will depend on the duration and severity of the pandemic and the related public policy actions, additional initiatives we may undertake in response to employee, market or regulatory needs or demands, the length and severity of the global economic slowdown, and whether and how our customers change their behaviors over the longer term.
Operations
In response to the pandemic beginning in the first quarter 2020, we began executing our business continuity plans and evolving our operations to protect the safety of our employees and customers and to continue to provide critical infrastructure and connectivity to our customers as they changed their ways of working and living. Some of the initiatives we took include:
•Moving over 115,000 of our 132,200 employees to remote work arrangements.
•Temporarily closing nearly 70% of our company-owned retail store locations and moving to appointment-only access to our remaining store locations.
•Limiting our customer-focused field operations based on the criticality of the services being provided or repaired.
•Enhancing our safety protocols for employees working outside their homes.
•Providing temporary additional compensation to employees in front line roles that cannot be done from home.
•Adjusting other compensation and benefits programs to address circumstances created by the pandemic.
•Taking the Federal Communication Commission's (FCC's) "Keep Americans Connected" pledge, through which we pledged to waive late fees for, and not terminate service to, any of our consumer or small business customers who informed us that they had been impacted financially by the COVID-19 pandemic through May 13, which we extended to June 30, 2020.
•Providing additional data allocations to permit wireless consumer and small business customers to remain connected during the first several months of the pandemic.
•Temporarily waiving activation and upgrade fees through digital distribution channels.
•Working with business customers to address payment needs during the crisis.
•Maintaining effective governance and internal controls in a remote work environment.
As some of the restrictions on physical movement and limitations on business and other activities described above eased to varying degrees in the second half of 2020, we resumed certain of our operations, with the health and safety of our employees and customers as our utmost priority, and modified some of our temporary policies. These initiatives include:
•Transitioning to facility access at limited capacity where feasible for those with remote work arrangements.
•Optimizing our sales channels to drive more activity through online and telesales to serve customers.
•Reopening temporarily closed company-owned retail store locations and introducing social distancing measures for employee and customer safety, such as touch-less retail, appointment scheduling and curbside pickup options.
•Continuous monitoring of stores, as well as temporary closures and cleaning of stores that have an identified COVID-19 exposure.
•Starting July 1, customers who had notified us that they had been financially impacted by the pandemic and had an unpaid balance were automatically enrolled in our "Stay Connected" repayment program, which allows customers to pay off their service balance over six months and extends any unpaid device payment plan agreements by the number of months unpaid.
•Resuming most customer-focused field operations.
•Discontinuing certain of our temporary compensation and benefits arrangements.
We expect that we will continue to revise our approach to these initiatives as the circumstances surrounding the pandemic evolve in 2021 in order to meet the needs of our employees, customers and the Company and continue to provide our innovative products and services.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Verizon finished the fourth quarter 2020 in a strong financial position. As of December 31, 2020, our balance sheet included:
Cash and cash equivalents $ 22.2 billion
Unsecured debt $ 118.5 billion
As of December 31, 2020, our Cash and cash equivalents balance was $22.2 billion compared to $2.6 billion as of December 31, 2019. We made the decision at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic to maintain a higher cash balance in order to further protect the Company against the economic uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and to opportunistically raise cash to finance future obligations at a time when we believed that market conditions were favorable. During the three months ended December 31, 2020, we redeemed $566 million of unsecured notes maturing in 2021. As of December 31, 2020, we have less than $150 million of unsecured notes maturing in 2021. As of December 31, 2020, we had not drawn down on our $9.5 billion revolving credit facility and the unused borrowing capacity was approximately $9.4 billion. The revolving credit facility does not require us to comply with financial covenants or maintain specified credit ratings, and it permits us to borrow even if our business has incurred a material adverse change. During the three months ended December 31, 2020, we issued $12.0 billion aggregate principal amount of U.S dollar-denominated unsecured notes and £1.2 billion aggregate principal
amount of Pound Sterling-denominated unsecured notes. In addition, we completed exchange offers with respect to 17 series of unsecured notes issued by Verizon, allowing us to exchange the notes accepted in the exchange offers for new unsecured Verizon notes having a later maturity date and, for certain of the accepted series of notes, cash. We also amended our revolving credit facility to extend the maturity date to 2024. We had no outstanding commercial paper as of December 31, 2020.
The COVID-19 pandemic, together with other dynamics in the marketplace, has caused borrowing costs to fluctuate significantly and, in certain cases, restricted the ability of borrowers to access the capital markets and other sources of financing. In order to provide financial flexibility and finance certain investments and projects, we may continue to utilize external financing arrangements that have been or may be affected by these market conditions. However, we believe that our cash on hand, the cash we expect to generate from our operations, and cash from other sources of financing available to us are, and will continue to be, sufficient to meet our ongoing operating, capital expenditure, debt service and investing requirements.
We expect to continue to have sufficient cash to fund our operations, although we could experience significant fluctuations in our cash flows from period to period during the pendency of the pandemic. The net cash generated from our operations provides our primary source of cash flows. While we have historically experienced consistently low levels of payment delinquencies among our consumer and business accounts, beginning late in the first quarter 2020, we started to see increases in delinquencies across our retail customer base and our small and medium business accounts. This change in delinquency rate moderated during the second quarter and improved to levels seen before the COVID-19 pandemic during the third and fourth quarters of 2020. Accordingly, our provision for credit losses increased in the first quarter 2020, but decreased in the second quarter of 2020 and remained flat in the third and fourth quarters of 2020. If these levels of delinquencies begin to grow again, they could have a material adverse impact on our cash flows. We could also experience fluctuations in our cash flows resulting from the ongoing impacts of the pandemic on macroeconomic conditions in the U.S. and our customers working to become current on their bills in the first quarter of 2021 and beyond.
In addition, we issue asset-backed debt secured by our device payment plan agreement receivables and the collections on such receivables. These transactions require us to comply with various tests, including delinquency and loss-related tests, which, if not met, would cause the asset-backed debt to amortize earlier and faster than otherwise expected. The holders of our asset-backed debt do not have any recourse to Verizon with respect to the payment of principal and interest on the debt. However, if an early amortization of our asset-backed debt occurs, including as a result of increased customer delinquencies or losses relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, all collections on the securitized device payment plan agreement receivables would be used to pay principal and interest on the asset-backed debt, and our financing cash flow requirements would increase for the twelve months immediately following an early amortization event.
Impacts on Financial Results
Our revenues and expenses in 2020 were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic as a result of the actions we took to care for our employees and to keep our customers connected and as a result of our customers’ changing activities as well as the restrictions on activities and the global economic slowdown, as described below. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our 2020 results was primarily a result of decreases in wireless service revenue, wireless equipment revenue and advertising and search revenue at Verizon Media Group (Verizon Media), and the operational actions we took, as described above.
Revenues
The year ended December 31, 2020 included lower overage revenues and lower fees from activations and upgrades and fewer fees, as well as lower roaming revenues as our customers significantly reduced travel during the year. As a result of our decision to keep our customers connected during the crisis, we experienced fewer step ups in data plans in the first half of 2020. We saw the rate of step ups increase during the second half of 2020. During the first half of 2020, we also saw a reduction in advertising and search revenue in Verizon Media, as customers scaled back their advertising campaigns. This reduction moderated during the third quarter of 2020 and turned to revenue growth during the fourth quarter of 2020.
We have seen considerably less churn in the consumer wireless base and lower equipment volumes and upgrade rates since the beginning of the pandemic. As a result of changing customer behaviors, we experienced significantly lower equipment revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Expenses
While certain expenses, such as wireless equipment cost, were lower during the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of the revenue impacts discussed above, these decreases were partially offset by an increase in commission expense. The increase in commission expense was a result of an expansion of our compensation programs for both employees and agents early in the pandemic. This COVID-19 relief program did not qualify for deferral treatment as defined by Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2014-09, "Revenue from Contracts with Customers;" however the costs were not materially different on a cash basis.
As a result of waiving late fees and keeping customers connected during the pandemic pursuant to our pledge, and pursuant to various state orders and laws, we saw increases in delinquencies across our retail customer base and certain of our business accounts. This change in the delinquency rate has since moderated, as discussed above; however, if the levels of delinquencies for our consumer and small and medium business customers begin to grow again, additional provisions to our allowance for credit losses may be required, which could be significant. We continue to monitor customer behavior and our expected loss assumptions and estimates.
Other
Equity and debt markets experienced significant volatility during 2020 partially as a result of the pandemic, and federal governmental actions to stimulate the economy have significantly impacted interest rates. These circumstances could affect the funding level of our pension plans and our calculated liabilities under our pension and other postemployment benefit plans. Other impacts from the pandemic on our financial results in the first quarter of 2021 and beyond could result from a further slowdown in the global economy, additional regulatory or legislative initiatives that impact our relationships with our customers, and other initiatives we undertake to respond to the needs of our employees and our customers.
Business Overview
We have two reportable segments that we operate and manage as strategic business units - Verizon Consumer Group (Consumer) and Verizon Business Group (Business).
Revenue by Segment
---
Note: Excludes eliminations.
Verizon Consumer Group
Our Consumer segment provides consumer-focused wireless and wireline communications services and products. Our wireless services are provided across one of the most extensive wireless networks in the U.S. under the Verizon brand and through wholesale and other arrangements. Our wireline services are provided in nine states in the Mid-Atlantic and Northeastern U.S., as well as Washington D.C., over our 100% fiber-optic network through our Verizon Fios product portfolio and over a traditional copper-based network to customers who are not served by Fios. Our Consumer segment's wireless and wireline products and services are available to our retail customers, as well as resellers that purchase wireless network access from us on a wholesale basis.
Customers can obtain our wireless services on a postpaid or prepaid basis. Our postpaid service is generally billed one month in advance for a monthly access charge in return for access to and usage of network services. Our prepaid service is offered only to Consumer customers and enables individuals to obtain wireless services without credit verification by paying for all services in advance. The Consumer segment also offers several categories of wireless equipment to customers, including a variety of smartphones and other handsets, wireless-enabled internet devices, such as tablets and other wireless-enabled connected devices, such as smart watches.
In addition to the wireless services and equipment discussed above, Consumer sells residential fixed connectivity solutions, including internet, video and voice services, and wireless network access to resellers on a wholesale basis. The Consumer segment's operating revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $88.5 billion, a decrease of $2.5 billion, or 2.8%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. See "Segment Results of Operations" for additional information regarding our Consumer segment’s operating performance and selected operating statistics.
Verizon Business Group
Our Business segment provides wireless and wireline communications services and products, including data, video and conferencing services, corporate networking solutions, security and managed network services, local and long distance voice services and network access to deliver various Internet of Things (IoT) services and products, including solutions that support fleet tracking management, compliance management, field service management, asset tracking and other types of mobile resource management. We provide these products and services to businesses, government customers and wireless and wireline carriers across the U.S. and select products and services to customers around the world. The Business segment's operating revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $31.0 billion, a decrease of $481 million, or 1.5%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. See "Segment Results of Operations" for additional information regarding our Business segment’s operating performance and selected operating statistics.
Corporate and Other
Corporate and other includes the results of our media business, Verizon Media, and other businesses, investments in unconsolidated businesses, insurance captives, unallocated corporate expenses, certain pension and other employee benefit related costs and interest and financing expenses. Corporate and other also includes the historical results of divested businesses and other adjustments and gains and losses that are not allocated in assessing segment performance due to their nature. Although such transactions are excluded from the business segment results, they are included in reported consolidated earnings. Gains and losses from transactions that are not individually significant are included in segment results as these items are included in the chief operating decision maker’s assessment of segment performance.
Verizon Media includes diverse media and technology brands that serve both consumers and businesses. Verizon Media provides consumers with owned and operated and third-party search properties as well as mail, news, finance, sports and entertainment offerings, and provides other businesses and partners access to consumers through digital advertising, content delivery and video streaming platforms. Verizon Media's total operating revenues were $7.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was a decrease of 5.6% from the year ended December 31, 2019.
Capital Expenditures and Investments
We continue to invest in our wireless networks, high-speed fiber and other advanced technologies to position ourselves at the center of growth trends for the future. During the year ended December 31, 2020, these investments included $18.2 billion for capital expenditures. See "Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities" and "Operating Environment and Trends" for additional information. We believe that our investments aimed at expanding our portfolio of products and services will provide our customers with an efficient, reliable infrastructure for competing in the information economy.
Global Network and Technology
We are focusing our capital spending on adding capacity and density to our 4G LTE network, while also building our next generation 5G network. We are densifying our network by utilizing small cell technology, in-building solutions and distributed antenna systems. Network densification enables us to add capacity to address increasing mobile video consumption and the growing demand for IoT products and services on our 4G LTE and 5G networks. Over the past several years, we have been leading the development of 5G wireless technology industry standards and the ecosystems for fixed and mobile 5G wireless services. We expect that 5G technology will provide higher throughput and lower latency than the current 4G LTE technology and enable our networks to handle more traffic as the number of internet-connected devices grows. As of December 31, 2020, we have launched our 5G Ultra Wideband Network in 61 U.S. markets. We have commercially launched 5G Home in 12 of those markets. We also launched our 5G Nationwide Network in October 2020, which is available in over 2,700 cities across the U.S. covering approximately 230 million people. 5G Nationwide uses low and mid-band spectrum and dynamic spectrum sharing (DSS) technology, which allows 5G service to run simultaneously with 4G LTE on multiple spectrum bands. With DSS, whenever customers move outside Verizon’s high-band Ultra Wideband coverage area, their 5G-enabled devices will remain on 5G technology using the lower spectrum bands where the 5G Nationwide network is available. This allows us to more fully and effectively utilize our current spectrum resources to serve both 4G and 5G customers.
To compensate for the shrinking market for traditional copper-based products, we continue to build fiber-based networks supporting data, video and advanced business services - areas where demand for reliable high-speed connections is growing. We are evolving the architecture of our networks to a next-generation multi-use platform, providing improved efficiency and virtualization, increased automation and opportunities for edge computing services that will support both our fiber-based and radio access network technologies. We call this the Intelligent Edge Network. We expect that this new architecture will simplify operations by eliminating legacy network elements, speed the deployment of 5G wireless technology and create new opportunities in the business market in a cost efficient manner.
Wireless Spectrum
In September 2020, Cellco Partnership (Cellco), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Verizon, filed an application to participate in FCC Auction 107, which relates to mid-band wireless spectrum known as C-Band. The auction commenced on December 8, 2020. On February 24, 2021, the FCC issued a final notice announcing the conclusion and results of the auction. In its final notice, the FCC announced that Cellco was the winning bidder with respect to approximately $45.5 billion of licenses. Down payments, in the amount of 20% of the cost of the spectrum licenses less the amount of the upfront payment made by bidders in October 2020, with respect to the auction are due on March 10, 2021, and final payments in the amount of 80% of the cost of the spectrum licenses are due on March 24, 2021. In accordance with the rules applicable to the auction, licensees also must pay their allocable shares of an estimated $13.1 billion in associated clearing and incentive costs at the times contemplated by the auction rules.
In this section, we discuss our overall results of operations and highlight special items that are not included in our segment results. Our revenues and expenses in 2020 were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic as a result of the actions we took to care for our employees and keep our customers connected and as a result of our customers’ changing activities, restrictions on activities and the global economic slowdown. See "Overview" for more information. In "Segment Results of Operations," we review the performance of our two reportable segments in more detail. A detailed discussion of 2018 items and year-over-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in the "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Consolidated Revenues
Consolidated revenues decreased during 2020 compared to 2019, due to decreases in our Consumer segment, Business segment and Corporate and other.
Revenues for our segments are discussed separately below under the heading "Segment Results of Operations."
Corporate and other revenues decreased during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a decrease of $417 million in revenues within Verizon Media.
Consolidated Operating Expenses
nm - not meaningful
Operating expenses for our segments are discussed separately below under the heading "Segment Results of Operations."
Cost of Services
Cost of services includes the following costs directly attributable to a service: salaries and wages, benefits, materials and supplies, content costs, contracted services, network access and transport costs, customer provisioning costs, computer systems support, costs to support our outsourcing contracts and technical facilities and traffic acquisition costs. Aggregate customer service costs, which include billing and service provisioning, are allocated between Cost of services and Selling, general and administrative expense.
Cost of services decreased during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to decreases in traffic acquisition costs due to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as decreases in costs related to the device protection offerings to our wireless retail postpaid customers, roaming costs resulting from decreased travel due to the COVID-19 pandemic, regulatory fees and personnel costs. These decreases were partially offset by increases in customer premise equipment, digital content, other direct costs and rent expense as a result of adding capacity to the networks to support demand.
Cost of Wireless Equipment
Cost of wireless equipment decreased during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily as a result of declines in the number of wireless devices sold as a result of an elongation of the handset upgrade cycle as well as lower gross adds and upgrade volumes partially due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The decreases were partially offset by a shift to higher priced devices in the mix of wireless devices sold.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense includes salaries and wages and benefits not directly attributable to a service or product, the provision for credit losses, taxes other than income taxes, advertising and sales commission costs, call center and information technology costs, regulatory fees, professional service fees and rent and utilities for administrative space. Also included is a portion of the aggregate customer care costs as discussed above in "Cost of Services."
Selling, general and administrative expense increased during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a $1.2 billion loss resulting from the Auction 103 spectrum license auction and a net gain from dispositions of assets and businesses during 2019 (see "Special Items"), as well as an increase in sales commission expense. These increases were partially offset by decreases in personnel costs, advertising expenses and the provision for credit losses. The increase in sales commission expense during 2020 compared to 2019 was inclusive of a lower net deferral of
commission costs in the current year compared to the prior year, as well as sales compensation while certain of our stores and agent locations were closed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
Depreciation and amortization expense increased during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to the change in the mix of net depreciable assets.
Media Goodwill Impairment
The goodwill impairment charge recorded in 2019 for Verizon Media was a result of the Company's annual impairment test performed in the fourth quarter (see "Critical Accounting Estimates").
Other Consolidated Results
Other Income (Expense), Net
Additional information relating to Other income (expense), net is as follows:
nm - not meaningful
Other income (expense), net reflects certain items not directly related to our core operations, including interest income, gains and losses from non-operating asset dispositions, debt extinguishment costs, components of net periodic pension and postretirement benefit costs and foreign exchange gains and losses. The change in Other income (expense), net during 2020 compared to 2019, was primarily driven by early debt redemption costs of $129 million recorded during 2020, compared to $3.6 billion recorded during 2019 (see "Special Items"), partially offset by pension and benefit charges of $1.6 billion recorded during 2020, compared to pension and benefit charges of $126 million recorded during 2019 (see "Special Items"). See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on the other components of net periodic benefit (cost) income.
Interest Expense
(1)The average debt outstanding is a financial measure and is calculated by applying a simple average of prior thirteen-month end balances of total short-term and long-term debt, net of discounts, premiums and unamortized debt issuance costs.
(2)The effective interest rate is the rate of actual interest incurred on debt. It is calculated by dividing the total interest costs on debt balances by the average debt outstanding.
(3)We believe that this measure is useful to management, investors and other users of our financial information in evaluating our debt financing cost and trends in our debt leverage management.
Total interest expense decreased during 2020 primarily due to lower interest rates as a result of our refinancing activities.
Provision for Income Taxes
The effective income tax rate is calculated by dividing the provision for income taxes by income before the provision for income taxes. The increase in the effective income tax rate and the provision for income taxes was primarily due to the recognition of a $2.2 billion tax benefit in connection with the disposition of preferred stock representing a minority interest in a foreign affiliate in 2019 that did not reoccur in 2020. See "Cash Flows Provided by Operating Activities" for discussion of the receipt of the cash tax benefit in 2020.
A reconciliation of the statutory federal income tax rate to the effective income tax rate for each period is included in Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements.
Consolidated Net Income, Consolidated EBITDA and Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA
Consolidated earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization expenses (Consolidated EBITDA) and Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA, which are presented below, are non-generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) measures that we believe are useful to management, investors and other users of our financial information in evaluating operating profitability on a more variable cost basis as they exclude the depreciation and amortization expense related primarily to capital expenditures and acquisitions that occurred in prior years, as well as in evaluating operating performance in relation to Verizon’s competitors. Consolidated EBITDA is calculated by adding back interest, taxes, and depreciation and amortization expenses to net income.
Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA is calculated by excluding from Consolidated EBITDA the effect of the following non-operational items: equity in losses of unconsolidated businesses and other income and expense, net, as well as the effect of special items. We believe that this measure is useful to management, investors and other users of our financial information in evaluating the effectiveness of our operations and underlying business trends in a manner that is consistent with management’s evaluation of business performance. We believe that Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA is widely used by investors to compare a company’s operating performance to its competitors by minimizing impacts caused by differences in capital structure, taxes, and depreciation and amortization policies. Further, the exclusion of non-operational items and special items enables comparability to prior period performance and trend analysis. See "Special Items" for additional information.
It is management’s intent to provide non-GAAP financial information to enhance the understanding of Verizon’s GAAP financial information, and it should be considered by the reader in addition to, but not instead of, the financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. Each non-GAAP financial measure is presented along with the corresponding GAAP measure so as not to imply that more emphasis should be placed on the non-GAAP measure. We believe that providing these non-GAAP measures in addition to the GAAP measures allows management, investors and other users of our financial information to more fully and accurately assess both consolidated and segment performance. The non-GAAP financial information presented may be determined or calculated differently by other companies and may not be directly comparable to that of other companies.
(1) Includes Early debt redemption costs, where applicable. See "Special Items" for additional information.
(2) Includes Pension and benefits mark-to-market adjustments and Early debt redemption costs, where applicable. See "Special Items" for additional information
(3) Includes impairment charges, where applicable.
The changes in Consolidated Net Income, Consolidated EBITDA and Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA in the table above during 2020 compared to 2019, were primarily a result of the factors described in connection with operating revenues and operating expenses.
We have three segments that we operate and manage as strategic business units, Consumer, Business and Media, of which Consumer and Business are our reportable segments. We measure and evaluate our segments based on segment operating income. The use of segment operating income is consistent with the chief operating decision maker’s assessment of segment performance.
To aid in the understanding of segment performance as it relates to segment operating income, management uses the following operating statistics to evaluate the overall effectiveness of our segments. We believe these operating statistics are useful to investors and other users of our financial information because they provide additional insight into drivers of our segments’ operating results, key trends and performance relative to our peers. These operating statistics may be determined or calculated differently by other companies and may not be directly comparable to those statistics of other companies.
Wireless retail connections are retail customer device postpaid and prepaid connections as of the end of the period. Retail connections under an account may include those from smartphones and basic phones (collectively, phones), as well as tablets and other internet devices, including wearables and retail IoT devices. Wireless retail connections are calculated by adding total retail postpaid and prepaid new connections in the period to prior period retail connections, and subtracting total retail postpaid and prepaid disconnects in the period.
Wireless retail postpaid connections are retail postpaid customer device connections as of the end of the period. Retail connections under an account may include those from phones, as well as tablets and other internet devices, including wearables and retail IoT devices. Wireless retail postpaid connections are calculated by adding retail postpaid new connections in the period to prior period retail postpaid connections, and subtracting retail postpaid disconnects in the period.
Fios internet connections are the total number of connections to the internet using Fios internet services as of the end of the period. Fios internet connections are calculated by adding Fios internet new connections in the period to prior period Fios internet connections, and subtracting Fios internet disconnects in the period.
Fios video connections are the total number of connections to traditional linear video programming using Fios video services as of the end of the period. Fios video connections are calculated by adding Fios video net additions in the period to prior period Fios video connections. Fios video net additions are calculated by subtracting the Fios video disconnects from the Fios video new connections.
Broadband connections are the total number of connections to the internet using Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) and Fios internet services as of the end of the period. Broadband connections are calculated by adding broadband net additions in the period to prior period broadband connections. Broadband net additions are calculated by subtracting the broadband disconnects from the broadband new connections.
Wireless retail connections, net additions are the total number of additional retail customer device postpaid and prepaid connections, less the number of device disconnects in the period. Wireless retail connections, net additions in each period presented are calculated by subtracting the total retail postpaid and prepaid disconnects, net of certain adjustments, from the total retail postpaid and prepaid new connections in the period.
Wireless retail postpaid connections, net additions are the total number of additional retail customer device postpaid connections, less the number of device disconnects in the period. Wireless retail postpaid connections, net additions in each period presented are calculated by subtracting the retail postpaid disconnects, net of certain adjustments, from the retail postpaid new connections in the period.
Wireless retail postpaid phone connections, net additions are the total number of additional retail customer postpaid phone connections, less the number of phone disconnects in the period. Wireless retail postpaid phone connections, net additions in each period presented are calculated by subtracting the retail postpaid phone disconnects, net of certain adjustments, from the retail postpaid phone new connections in the period.
Fios internet, net additions are the total number of additional Fios internet connections, less the number of disconnects in the period. Fios internet, net additions are calculated by subtracting the Fios internet disconnects from the Fios internet new connections in the period.
Wireless Churn is the rate at which service to retail, retail postpaid, or retail postpaid phone connections is terminated on average in the period. The churn rate in each period presented is calculated by dividing retail disconnections, retail postpaid disconnections, or retail postpaid phone disconnections by the average retail connections, average retail postpaid connections, or average retail postpaid phone connections, respectively, in the period.
Wireless retail postpaid ARPA is the calculated average retail postpaid service revenue per account (ARPA) from retail postpaid accounts in the period. Wireless retail postpaid service revenue does not include recurring device payment plan billings related to the Verizon device payment program, plan billings related to Total Mobile Protection packages or regulatory fees. Wireless retail postpaid ARPA in each period presented is calculated by dividing retail postpaid service revenue by the average retail postpaid accounts in the period.
Wireless retail postpaid accounts are wireless retail customers that are directly served and managed under the Verizon brand and use its services as of the end of the period. Accounts include unlimited plans, shared data plans and corporate accounts, as well as legacy single connection plans and family plans. A single account may include monthly wireless services for a variety of connected devices. Wireless retail postpaid accounts are calculated by adding retail postpaid new accounts to the prior period retail postpaid accounts.
Wireless retail postpaid connections per account is the calculated average number of retail postpaid connections per retail postpaid account as of the end of the period. Wireless retail postpaid connections per account is calculated by dividing the total number of retail postpaid connections by the number of retail postpaid accounts as of the end of the period.
Wireless retail postpaid gross additions are new retail postpaid connections that have activated service on the wireless network in the period. Wireless retail postpaid gross additions are calculated as the total number of new retail postpaid phone, tablet and other device connections in the period.
Segment operating income margin reflects the profitability of the segment as a percentage of revenue. Segment operating income margin is calculated by dividing total segment operating income by total segment operating revenues.
Segment earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (Segment EBITDA), which is presented below, is a non-GAAP measure and does not purport to be an alternative to operating income (loss) as a measure of operating performance. We believe this measure is useful to management, investors and other users of our financial information in evaluating operating profitability on a more variable cost basis as it excludes the depreciation and amortization expenses related primarily to capital expenditures and acquisitions that occurred in prior years, as well as in evaluating operating performance in relation to our competitors. Segment EBITDA is calculated by adding back depreciation and amortization expense to segment operating income (loss). Segment EBITDA margin is calculated by dividing Segment EBITDA by total segment operating revenues. You can find additional information about our segments in Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements.
Verizon Consumer Group
Our Consumer segment provides consumer-focused wireless and wireline communications services and products. Our wireless services are provided across one of the most extensive wireless networks in the U.S. under the Verizon brand and through wholesale and other arrangements. Our wireline services are provided in nine states in the Mid-Atlantic and Northeastern U.S., as well as Washington D.C., over our 100% fiber-optic network through our Verizon Fios product portfolio and over a traditional copper-based network to customers who are not served by Fios.
Our revenues and expenses in 2020 were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic as a result of the actions we took to care for our employees and keep our customers connected and as a result of our customers’ changing activities, restrictions on activities and the global economic slowdown. See "Overview" for more information.
Operating Revenues and Selected Operating Statistics
(1)As of end of period
(2)Includes certain adjustments
nm - not meaningful
Consumer's total operating revenues decreased during 2020 compared to 2019, as a result of decreases in Service and Wireless equipment revenues, partially offset by an increase in Other revenue.
Service Revenue
Service revenue decreased during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to decreases in wireless service and wireline voice and video services.
Wireless service revenue decreased $186 million, or 0.3%, during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to decreases in roaming and TravelPass revenues due to customers' changing activities during the COVID-19 pandemic and waived fees as part of customer assistance initiatives that we undertook during the COVID-19 pandemic. The decrease was further driven by a decrease in data overage revenues resulting from waived charges as part of customer assistance initiatives we undertook to address the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and the shift of customer accounts to unlimited plans. These decreases were partially offset by growth from reseller accounts, increases in access revenues, customers shifting to higher priced plans, and growth in mobile security products included in certain protection packages. The growth from reseller accounts was partially due to customers' changing activities during the COVID-19 pandemic.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, Fios service revenue totaled $10.4 billion and decreased $95 million, or 0.9%, compared to 2019. This decrease was due to decreases in Fios video and voice revenues. The decrease in Fios video revenue reflects a one-time credit provided to customers related to regional sport networks during the COVID-19 pandemic and the ongoing shift from traditional linear video to over-the-top offerings. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in Fios internet connections, reflecting increased demand for higher broadband speeds as consumers work and learn from home during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Wireless Equipment Revenue
Wireless equipment revenue decreased during 2020 compared to 2019, as a result of overall declines in wireless device sales partially due to an elongation of the handset upgrade cycle as well as lower gross adds and upgrade volumes primarily due to the impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic on our customers. These decreases were partially offset by a shift to higher priced units in the mix of wireless devices sold and a decline in promotions.
Other Revenue
Other revenue includes non-service revenues such as regulatory fees, cost recovery surcharges, revenues associated with our device protection offerings, leasing and interest on equipment financed under a device payment plan agreement when sold to the customer by an authorized agent.
Other revenue increased during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to pricing and subscriber increases related to our wireless device protection offerings, as well as cost recovery surcharges. These increases were partially offset by decreases in regulatory fees.
Operating Expenses
Cost of Services
Cost of services decreased during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to decreases in costs related to the device protection offerings to our wireless retail postpaid customers, roaming costs, which were primarily driven by a significant decrease in international travel due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and regulatory fees. These decreases were partially offset by increases in digital content costs, other direct costs and rent expense as a result of adding capacity to the networks to support demand.
Cost of Wireless Equipment
Cost of wireless equipment decreased during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily as a result of declines in the number of wireless devices sold due to an elongation of the handset upgrade cycle as well as lower gross adds and upgrade volumes primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and declines in the number of accessories sold partly due to the COVID-19 pandemic. These decreases were partially offset by a shift to higher priced devices and accessories in the mix of products sold.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense increased during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to increases in sales commission and advertising expenses, partially offset by decreases in the provision for credit losses and personnel costs. The increase in sales commission expense during 2020 compared to 2019 was inclusive of a lower net deferral of commission costs in the current year compared to the prior year, as well as sales compensation while certain of our stores and agent locations were closed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
Depreciation and amortization expense increased during 2020 compared to 2019, driven by the change in the mix of total Verizon depreciable assets and Consumer's usage of those assets.
Segment Operating Income and EBITDA
The changes in the table above during the periods presented were primarily a result of the factors described in connection with operating revenues and operating expenses.
Verizon Business Group
Our Business segment provides wireless and wireline communications services and products, including data, video and conferencing services, corporate networking solutions, security and managed network services, local and long distance voice services and network access to deliver various IoT services and products. We provide these products and services to businesses, government customers and wireless and wireline carriers across the U.S. and select products and services to customers around the world. The Business segment is organized in four customer groups: Small and Medium Business, Global Enterprise, Public Sector and Other, and Wholesale.
Our revenues and expenses in 2020 were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic as a result of the actions we took to care for our employees and keep our customers connected and as a result of our customers’ changing activities, restrictions on activities and the global economic slowdown. See "Overview" for more information.
Operating Revenues and Selected Operating Statistics
(1)Service and other revenues included in our Business segment amounted to approximately $28.1 billion and $27.9 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Wireless equipment revenues included in our Business segment amounted to approximately $2.9 billion and $3.5 billion for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(2)As of end of period
(3)Includes certain adjustments
Business's total operating revenues decreased during 2020 compared to 2019, as a result of decreases in Small and Medium Business, Global Enterprise and Wholesale revenues, partially offset by an increase in Public Sector and Other revenue.
Small and Medium Business
Small and Medium Business offers wireless services and equipment, conferencing services, tailored voice and networking products, Fios services, Internet Protocol (IP) networking, advanced voice solutions and security and managed information technology services to our U.S.-based small and medium businesses that do not meet the requirements to be categorized as Global Enterprise, as described below.
Small and Medium Business revenues decreased during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a decrease in wireless equipment revenue, declines related to the loss of voice and DSL service connections and a decrease in IP networking. Wireless equipment revenue decreased as a result of declines in the number of wireless devices sold primarily due to an elongation of the handset upgrade cycle as well as declines in activation volumes due to decreased demand and store closures resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. The decreases were partially offset by a shift to higher priced units in the mix of wireless devices sold. These revenue decreases were partially offset by an increase in wireless retail postpaid service revenue of 4.4% during 2020 compared to 2019, as a result of increases in the amount of wireless retail postpaid connections, partially offset by lower roaming and usage due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Also contributing to the partial offset was an increase in revenue related to our wireless device protection package as well as an increase in revenue related to Fios services.
Fios revenues totaled $926 million, which represents an increase of 1.2% during 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in Fios revenues during 2020 compared to 2019 reflects the increase in total connections, as well as increased demand for higher broadband speeds as a result of the transition to work and learn from home during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Global Enterprise
Global Enterprise offers services to large businesses, which are identified based on their size and volume of business with Verizon, as well as non-U.S. public sector customers.
Global Enterprise revenues decreased during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to declines in traditional data and voice communication services as a result of competitive price pressures, as well as a decrease in wireless equipment revenue. Wireless equipment revenue decreased as a result of declines in the number of wireless devices sold due to an elongation of the handset upgrade cycle as well as declines in activation volumes partially due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, wireless equipment revenue decreased due to a shift to lower priced units in the mix of wireless devices sold. The decreases in revenue were partially offset by an increase in advanced communication services revenue resulting primarily from the COVID-19 pandemic and the Blue Jeans Network, Inc. (BlueJeans) acquisition, and an increase in customer premise equipment revenues. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information on the BlueJeans acquisition.
Public Sector and Other
Public Sector and Other offers wireless products and services as well as wireline connectivity and managed solutions to U.S. federal, state and local governments and educational institutions. These services include business services and connectivity similar to the products and services offered by Global Enterprise, in each case, with features and pricing designed to address the needs of governments and educational institutions.
Public Sector and Other revenues increased during 2020 compared to 2019, driven by increases in wireless retail postpaid service revenue as a result of an increase in gross additions partially due to federal, state and educational agencies responding to the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, the increases were driven by increases in wireless equipment revenue and advanced communication services revenues. Wireless equipment revenue increased as a result of an increase in the number of wireless devices sold primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by a shift to lower priced units in the mix of wireless devices sold. The increases in revenue were partially offset by decreases in networking revenue and traditional voice communication services.
Wholesale
Wholesale offers wireline communications services including data, voice, local dial tone and broadband services primarily to local, long distance, and wireless carriers that use our facilities to provide services to their customers.
Wholesale revenues decreased during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to declines in core data resulting from the effect of technology substitution and continuing contraction of market rates due to competition, partially offset by an increase in traditional voice communication services due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating Expenses
Cost of Services
Cost of services were unchanged during 2020 compared to 2019, which was due to an increase in customer premise equipment and other direct costs, which was fully offset by lower roaming costs primarily driven by a significant decrease in international travel due to the COVID-19 pandemic and decreases in costs related to the device protection offerings to our wireless retail postpaid customers and personnel costs.
Cost of Wireless Equipment
Cost of wireless equipment decreased during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to lower overall postpaid sales and a shift to lower priced units in the mix of wireless devices sold, partially offset by an increase in the net number of wireless devices sold to support distance learning programs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense increased during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily driven by increases in personnel costs and sales commission expense. The increase in sales commission expense during 2020 compared to 2019 inclusive of a lower net deferral of commission costs in the current year compared to the prior year, as well as sales compensation while certain of our stores and agent locations were closed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. These increases were partially offset by a one-time international tax benefit.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased during 2020 compared to 2019, driven by the change in the mix of total Verizon depreciable assets and the Business segment's usage of those assets.
Segment Operating Income and EBITDA
The changes in the table above during the periods presented were primarily a result of the factors described in connection with operating revenues and operating expenses.
Special items included in Income Before Provision For Income Taxes were as follows:
The Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA non-GAAP measure presented in the Consolidated Net Income, Consolidated EBITDA and Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA discussion (see "Consolidated Results of Operations") excludes all of the amounts included above, as described below.
The income and expenses related to special items included in our consolidated results of operations were as follows:
Severance, Pension and Benefits Charges
During 2020, in accordance with our accounting policy to recognize actuarial gains and losses in the period in which they occur, we recorded net pre-tax pension and benefits charges of $1.6 billion in our pension and postretirement benefit plans. The charges were recorded in Other income (expense), net in our consolidated statement of income and were primarily driven by a decrease in our discount rate assumption used to determine the current year liabilities of our pension plans and postretirement benefit plans from a weighted-average of 3.3% at December
31, 2019 to a weighted-average of 2.6% at December 31, 2020 ($3.2 billion), partially offset by the difference between our estimated return on assets and our actual return on assets ($1.6 billion). During 2020, we also recorded net pre-tax severance charges of $221 million related to a voluntary offer under our existing separation plans in Selling, general and administrative expense in our consolidated statements of income.
During 2019, in accordance with our accounting policy to recognize actuarial gains and losses in the period in which they occur, we recorded net pre-tax pension and benefits charges of $126 million in our pension and postretirement benefit plans. The charges were recorded in Other income (expense), net in our consolidated statements of income and were primarily driven by a decrease in our discount rate assumption used to determine the current year liabilities of our pension plans and postretirement benefit plans from a weighted-average of 4.4% at December 31, 2018 to a weighted-average of 3.3% at December 31, 2019 ($4.3 billion), partially offset by the difference between our estimated return on assets and our actual return on assets ($2.3 billion) and other assumption adjustments of $1.9 billion, of which $1.6 billion related to healthcare claims experience. During 2019, we also recorded net pre-tax severance charges of $204 million in Selling, general and administrative expense in our consolidated statements of income.
Due to the presentation of the other components of net periodic benefit cost, we recognize a portion of the pension and benefits charges in Other income (expense), net in our consolidated statements of income.
See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information related to severance, pension and benefits charges.
Loss on Spectrum License Auction
During 2020, we recorded a pre-tax net loss of $1.2 billion as a result of the conclusion of the FCC incentive auction, Auction 103, for spectrum licenses in the upper 37 Gigahertz (GHz), 39 GHz and 47 GHz bands. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Impairment Charges
The impairment charges consist of write-downs of goodwill and other investments or assets. The goodwill impairment charge of $186 million recorded during 2019 for Verizon Media was a result of the Company's annual impairment test performed in the fourth quarter (see "Critical Accounting Estimates"). In addition, we recorded an impairment charge of $50 million in Equity in losses of unconsolidated businesses related to a media joint venture investment during 2019.
Early Debt Redemption Costs
During 2020 and 2019, we recorded early debt redemption costs of $102 million and $3.6 billion, respectively.
See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information related to our early debt redemptions.
Net (Gain) Loss from Dispositions of Assets and Businesses
During 2020, we recorded a pre-tax net loss of $119 million, primarily in connection with the sale of our Huffington Post business. During 2019, we recorded pre-tax net gains from dispositions of assets and businesses of $261 million in connection with the sale of various real estate properties and businesses.
See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information related to dispositions of assets and businesses.
The telecommunications industry is highly competitive. We expect competition to remain intense as traditional and non-traditional participants seek increased market share. Our high-quality customer base and networks differentiate us from our competitors and give us the ability to plan and manage through changing economic and competitive conditions. We remain focused on executing on the fundamentals of the business: maintaining a high-quality customer base, delivering strong financial and operating results and strengthening our balance sheet. We will continue to invest for growth, which we believe is the key to creating value for our shareholders. We continue to lead in 4G LTE performance while building momentum for our 5G network. Our strategy lays the foundation for the future through investments in our Intelligent Edge Network that enable efficiencies throughout our core infrastructure and deliver flexibility to meet customer requirements.
The U.S. wireless market has achieved a high penetration of smartphones, which reduces the opportunity for new phone connection growth for the industry. We expect future revenue growth in the industry to be driven by expanding existing customer relationships, increasing the number of ways customers can connect with wireless networks and services and increasing the penetration of other connected devices including wearables, tablets and IoT devices. We expect 5G technology will provide a significant opportunity for growth in the industry in 2021 and beyond. With respect to our wireless connectivity products and services, we compete against other national wireless service providers, including AT&T Inc. and T-Mobile USA, Inc., as well as various regional wireless service providers. We also compete for retail activations with resellers that buy bulk wholesale service from wireless service providers, including Verizon, and resell it to their customers. Resellers include cable companies and others. We face competition from other communications and technology companies seeking to increase their brand recognition and capture customer revenue with respect to the provision of wireless products and services, in addition to non-traditional offerings in mobile data. For example, Microsoft Corporation, Alphabet Inc., Apple Inc. and others are offering alternative
means for making wireless voice calls that, in certain cases, can be used in lieu of the wireless provider’s voice service, as well as alternative means of accessing video content.
With respect to wireless services and equipment, pricing plays an important role in the wireless competitive landscape. We compete in this area by offering our customers services and devices that we believe they will regard as the best available value for the price. As the demand for wireless services continues to grow, wireless service providers are offering a range of service plans at competitive prices. These service offerings will vary from time to time based on customer needs, technology changes and market conditions and may be provided as standard plans or as part of limited time promotional offers.
We expect future service revenue growth opportunities to arise from increased access revenue as customers shift to higher access plans, driven in part by attractive bundled content with premium brands, as well as from increased connections per account. Future service revenue growth opportunities will be dependent on expanding the penetration of our services, increasing the number of ways that our customers can connect with our networks and services and the development of new ecosystems. We and other wireless service providers, as well as equipment manufacturers, offer device payment options, which provide customers with the ability to pay for their device over a period of time, and some providers offer device leasing arrangements.
Current and potential competitors in the wireline service market include cable companies, wireless service providers, domestic and foreign telecommunications providers, satellite television companies, internet service providers, over-the-top providers and other companies that offer network services and managed enterprise solutions.
In addition, companies with a global presence are increasingly competing with us in our wireline services. A relatively small number of telecommunications and integrated service providers with global operations serve customers in the global enterprise market and, to a lesser extent, the global wholesale market. We compete with these providers for large contracts to provide integrated solutions to global enterprises and government customers. Many of these companies have strong market presence, brand recognition and existing customer relationships, all of which contribute to intensifying competition that may affect our future revenue growth.
Despite this challenging environment, we expect that we will be able to grow key aspects of our wireline services. We continue to provide network reliability and offer products, which include fiber-optic internet access, several video services, and voice services. Further, we will continue to offer our business and government customers more robust IP products and services, and advance our IoT strategies by leveraging business models that monetize usage on our networks at the connectivity, platform and solution layers.
The online advertising market continues to evolve as online users are migrating from traditional desktop to mobile and multiple-device usage. Also, there is a continued shift towards programmatic advertising which presents opportunities to connect online advertisers with the appropriate online users in a rapid environment. Our media business competes with other online search engines, advertising platforms, digital video services and social networks. We are experiencing pressure from search and desktop usage and believe the pressure in these sectors will continue. We are implementing initiatives to realize synergies across all of our media assets and build services around our core content pillars to diversify revenue and return to growth.
We will also continue to focus on cost efficiencies to ensure we have the maximum flexibility to adjust to changes in the competitive and economic environments and maximize returns to shareholders.
2021 Connection Trends
In our Consumer segment, we expect to continue to attract new customers and maintain high-quality retail postpaid customers, capitalizing on demand for data services and providing our customers new ways of using wireless services in their daily lives. We expect that future connection growth will be driven by smartphones, tablets and other connected devices such as wearables. We believe the combination of our wireless network performance and Mix & Match unlimited plans provides a superior customer experience, supporting increased penetration of data services and the continued attraction and retention of higher valued retail postpaid connections. We expect to manage churn by providing a consistent, reliable experience on our wireless service and focusing on improving the customer experience through simplified pricing and continued focus in our distribution channels. We expect to continue to grow our Fios internet connections as we seek to increase our penetration rates within our Fios service areas, further supported by the demand for higher speed internet connections. In Fios video, the business continues to face ongoing pressure as observed throughout the linear television market. We expect to manage market pressure by offering customers a choice of video service, including options such as Mix & Match on Fios and other offerings. We have experienced continuing access line and DSL losses as customers have disconnected both primary and secondary lines and switched to alternative technologies such as wireless, Voice over Internet Protocol, and cable for voice and data services.
In our Business segment, we offer wireless products and services to business and government customers across the U.S. We continue to grow our retail connections while operating in a competitive environment. We expect to maintain connection growth in part by adding capacity and density to our 4G LTE network, in addition to leading the build-out of our 5G network. We expect this connection growth, combined with our industry-leading network assets, will provide additional opportunities to sell solutions, such as those around security, advanced communications and professional services. We expect to expand our existing services offered to business customers through our Intelligent Edge Network, our multi-use platform.
2021 Operating Revenue Trends
In our Consumer segment, we expect to see an acceleration of service revenue growth in 2021 as customers shift to higher access plans with additional services and increase the number of devices they connect with our networks and services. We expect Fios revenue to benefit in 2021 as growth in our broadband customer base offsets the impact of the shift from the triple-play bundle to standalone service.
In our Business segment, we expect wireless revenue to expand, driven by an increase in the number of connections. We expect that our Fios products, through increased penetration, will also contribute to revenue growth. Legacy traditional wireline services will continue to face secular pressures. In addition, certain products and services provided by our Public Sector and Global Enterprise groups experienced elevated demand during 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Demand for those products and services may return to more historical levels in 2021.
Our media business, Verizon Media, is primarily made up of digital advertising products. We expect Verizon Media revenue to grow in 2021 as the strong advertising trends from 2020 are expected to continue, with the exception of political advertising spend. We will continue the implementation of initiatives to realize synergies across all of our media assets and build services around our core content pillars. We expect positive growth in mobile services and products.
2021 Operating Expense and Cash Flow from Operations Trends
We expect our consolidated operating income margin and adjusted consolidated EBITDA margin to remain strong as we continue to undertake initiatives to reduce our overall cost structure by improving productivity and gaining efficiencies in our operations throughout the business in 2021 and beyond. Business Excellence initiatives include the adoption of the zero-based budgeting methodology, driving capital efficiencies from the architecture of the networks, evolving our Information Technology strategy and the continuing benefit from the Voluntary Separation Program. We believe our additional investments in our Business segment in both product simplification and continued focus on process improvements and new work tools will drive cost savings and create incremental growth opportunities in areas such as 5G and One Fiber. The goal of the Business Excellence initiative is to take $10 billion of cumulative cash outflows out of the business over four years, beginning in 2018. As part of this initiative, we are focusing on both operating expenses and capital expenditures. Our Business Excellence initiatives produced cumulative cash savings of $9.5 billion through the end of 2020 from a mix of capital and operational expenditure activities. The program remains on track to achieve our goal in 2021. We will continue to explore opportunities for additional savings beyond the program.
We create value for our shareholders by investing the cash flows generated by our business in opportunities and transactions that support continued profitable growth, thereby increasing customer satisfaction and usage of our products and services. In addition, we have used our cash flows to maintain and grow our dividend payout to shareholders. Verizon’s Board of Directors increased the Company’s quarterly dividend by 2.0% during 2020, making this the fourteenth consecutive year in which we have raised our dividend.
Our goal is to use our cash to create long-term value for our shareholders. We will continue to look for investment opportunities that will help us to grow the business, strengthen our balance sheet, acquire spectrum licenses (see "Cash Flows from Investing Activities"), pay dividends to our shareholders and, when appropriate, buy back shares of our outstanding common stock (see "Cash Flows from Financing Activities").
Capital Expenditures
Our 2021 capital program includes capital to fund advanced networks and services, including expanding our core networks, adding capacity and density to our 4G LTE network in order to stay ahead of our customers’ increasing data demands and deploying our 5G network, transforming our structure to deploy the Intelligent Edge Network while reducing the cost to deliver services to our customers, and pursuing other opportunities to drive operating efficiencies. We expect that the new network architecture will simplify operations by eliminating legacy network elements, improve our 4G LTE coverage, speed the deployment of 5G technology, and create new enterprise opportunities in the business market. The level and the timing of the Company’s capital expenditures within these broad categories can vary significantly as a result of a variety of factors outside of our control, such as material weather events, equipment availability from vendors and permits from local governments. We believe that we have significant discretion over the amount and timing of our capital expenditures on a Company-wide basis as we are not subject to any agreement that would require significant capital expenditures on a designated schedule or upon the occurrence of designated events.
We use the net cash generated from our operations to fund expansion and modernization of our networks, service and repay external financing, pay dividends, invest in new businesses and spectrum and, when appropriate, buy back shares of our outstanding common stock. Our sources of funds, primarily from operations and, to the extent necessary, from external financing arrangements, are sufficient to meet
ongoing operating and investing requirements. We made the decision at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic to maintain a higher cash balance in order to further protect the Company against the economic uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and to opportunistically raise cash to finance future obligations at a time when we believed that market conditions were favorable. We expect that our capital spending requirements will continue to be financed primarily through internally generated funds. Debt or equity financing may be needed to fund additional investments or development activities, including, for example, to complete our acquisition of TracFone Wireless, Inc. (Tracfone) or to acquire additional wireless spectrum, or to maintain an appropriate capital structure to ensure our financial flexibility. Our cash and cash equivalents are held both domestically and internationally, and are invested to maintain principal and provide liquidity. See "Market Risk" for additional information regarding our foreign currency risk management strategies.
Our available external financing arrangements include an active commercial paper program, credit available under credit facilities and other bank lines of credit, vendor financing arrangements, issuances of registered debt or equity securities, U.S. retail medium-term notes and other capital market securities that are privately-placed or offered overseas. In addition, we monetize our device payment plan agreement receivables through asset-backed debt transactions.
Cash Flows Provided By Operating Activities
Our primary source of funds continues to be cash generated from operations. Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $6.0 billion during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to improvements in working capital, which includes the receipt of the $2.2 billion cash tax benefit related to preferred shares in a foreign affiliate sold during the fourth quarter 2019 and lower wireless volumes, as well as the receipt of $764 million relating to the settlement of interest rate swaps during 2020. In addition, an employee benefits contribution as well as severance payments as a result of the Voluntary Separation Program in 2019 did not repeat in 2020. These comparative increases were partially offset by lower earnings in 2020. We made a $300 million discretionary employee benefits contribution during the first quarter 2019 to our defined benefit pension plan. As a result of the 2019 discretionary pension contribution and higher actual asset returns than expected returns in both 2019 and 2020, we expect that there will be no required pension funding through 2030, subject to changes in market conditions. The 2019 contribution also improved the funded status of our qualified pension plan.
Cash Flows Used In Investing Activities
Capital Expenditures
Capital expenditures continue to relate primarily to the use of capital resources to increase the operating efficiency and productivity of our networks, maintain our existing infrastructure, facilitate the introduction of new products and services and enhance responsiveness to competitive challenges.
Capital expenditures, including capitalized software, were $18.2 billion and $17.9 billion for 2020 and 2019, respectively. Capital expenditures increased approximately $253 million, or 1.4%, during 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to increased focus on 5G technology deployment.
Acquisitions of Wireless Licenses
During 2020 and 2019, we invested $2.1 billion and $898 million, respectively, in acquisitions of wireless licenses.
In March 2020, the FCC completed an incentive auction, Auction 103, for spectrum licenses. Through December 31, 2020, we paid approximately $1.6 billion, including $101 million paid in December 2019.
In 2019, the FCC completed two millimeter wave spectrum license auctions, Auction 101 and Auction 102. We paid approximately $521 million for spectrum licenses in connection with these auctions.
During 2020 and 2019, we entered into and completed various other wireless license acquisitions for cash consideration of $360 million and an insignificant amount, respectively.
Acquisitions of Businesses, Net of Cash Acquired
During 2020 and 2019, we invested $520 million and an insignificant amount, respectively, in acquisitions of businesses, net of cash acquired.
In April 2020, we entered into a definitive purchase agreement to acquire BlueJeans, an enterprise-grade video conferencing and event platform, whose services are sold to Business customers globally. The transaction closed in May 2020. The aggregate cash consideration paid by Verizon at the closing of the transaction was approximately $397 million, net of cash acquired.
During 2020, we completed various other acquisitions for approximately $127 million in cash consideration.
See "Acquisitions and Divestitures" for information on our acquisitions.
Other, Net
In September 2020, the FCC completed Auction 105 for Priority Access Licenses. Through December 31, 2020, we paid a cash deposit of approximately $1.9 billion for the licenses. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
During 2019, we received gross proceeds of approximately $1.0 billion for a sale-leaseback transaction for buildings and real estate. See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Cash Flows Provided by (Used In) Financing Activities
We seek to maintain a mix of fixed and variable rate debt to lower borrowing costs within reasonable risk parameters and to protect against earnings and cash flow volatility resulting from changes in market conditions. During 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $1.3 billion. During 2019, net cash used in financing activities was $18.2 billion.
During 2020, our net cash provided by financing activities of $1.3 billion was primarily driven by $31.5 billion provided by proceeds from long-term borrowings, which included $5.6 billion of proceeds from our asset-backed debt transactions. These cash flows provided by financing activities were partially offset by $17.2 billion used for repayments, redemptions and repurchases of long-term borrowings and finance lease obligations, which included $7.4 billion used for prepayments and repayments of asset-backed long-term borrowings, $10.2 billion used for dividend payments and $2.7 billion used for other financing activities.
Proceeds from and Repayments, Redemptions, and Repurchases of Long-Term Borrowings
At December 31, 2020, our total debt increased to $129.1 billion as compared to $111.5 billion at December 31, 2019. Our effective interest rate was 4.1% and 4.8% during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The substantial majority of our total debt portfolio consists of fixed rate indebtedness, therefore, changes in interest rates do not have a material effect on our interest payments. See also "Market Risk" and Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
At December 31, 2020, approximately $29.0 billion, or 22.5%, of the aggregate principal amount of our total debt portfolio consisted of foreign denominated debt, primarily Euro and British Pound Sterling. We have entered into cross currency swaps on substantially all of our foreign denominated debt in order to fix our future interest and principal payments in U.S. dollars and mitigate the impact of foreign currency transaction gains or losses. See "Market Risk" for additional information.
Verizon may continue to acquire debt securities issued by Verizon and its affiliates in the future through open market purchases, redemptions, privately negotiated transactions, tender offers, exchange offers, or otherwise, upon such terms and at such prices as Verizon may from time to time determine, for cash or other consideration.
Other, Net
Other, net financing activities during 2020 includes $827 million in payments related to vendor financing arrangements and $748 million in cash paid on debt exchanges. See Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Dividends
The Verizon Board of Directors assesses the level of our dividend payments on a periodic basis taking into account such factors as long-term growth opportunities, internal cash requirements and the expectations of our shareholders. During the third quarter of 2020, the Board increased our quarterly dividend payment by 2.0% to $0.6275 from $0.6150 per share from the previous quarter. This is the fourteenth consecutive year that Verizon’s Board of Directors has approved a quarterly dividend increase.
As in prior periods, dividend payments were a significant use of capital resources. During 2020, we paid $10.2 billion in dividends.
During 2019, our net cash used in financing activities of $18.2 billion was primarily driven by:
•$23.9 billion used for repayments, redemptions and repurchases of long-term borrowings and finance lease obligations, which included $6.3 billion used for prepayments and repayments of asset-backed long-term borrowings;
•$10.0 billion used for dividend payments; and
•$1.8 billion used for net debt related costs.
These uses of cash were partially offset by proceeds from long-term borrowings of $18.7 billion, which included $8.6 billion of proceeds from our asset-backed debt transactions.
Proceeds from and Repayments, Redemptions, and Repurchases of Long-Term Borrowings
At December 31, 2019, our total debt was $111.5 billion, and during the year ended December 31, 2019, our effective interest rate was 4.8%. The substantial majority of our total debt portfolio consisted of fixed rate indebtedness, therefore, changes in interest rates did not have a material effect on our interest payments. See "Market Risk" and Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
At December 31, 2019, approximately $23.5 billion, or 21.1%, of the aggregate principal amount of our total debt portfolio consisted of foreign denominated debt, primarily Euro and British Pound Sterling. We have entered into cross currency swaps on substantially all of our foreign denominated debt in order to fix our future interest and principal payments in U.S. dollars and mitigate the impact of foreign currency transaction gains or losses. See "Market Risk" for additional information.
Other, Net
Other, net financing activities during 2019, included early debt redemption costs. See "Special Items" for additional information, as well as cash paid on debt exchanges and derivative-related transactions. See Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Dividends
During the third quarter of 2019, the Board increased our quarterly dividend payment by 2.1% to $0.6150 per share.
As in prior periods, dividend payments were a significant use of capital resources. During 2019, we paid $10.0 billion in dividends.
Asset-Backed Debt
As of December 31, 2020, the carrying value of our asset-backed debt was $10.6 billion. Our asset-backed debt includes Asset-Backed Notes (ABS Notes) issued to third-party investors (Investors) and loans (ABS Financing Facilities) received from banks and their conduit facilities (collectively, the Banks). Our consolidated asset-backed debt bankruptcy remote legal entities (each, an ABS Entity or collectively, the ABS Entities) issue the debt or are otherwise party to the transaction documentation in connection with our asset-backed debt transactions. Under the terms of our asset-backed debt, Cellco and certain other affiliates of Verizon (collectively, the Originators) transfer device payment plan agreement receivables to one of the ABS Entities, which in turn transfers such receivables to another ABS Entity that issues the debt. Verizon entities retain the equity interests in the ABS Entities, which represent the rights to all funds not needed to make required payments on the asset-backed debt and other related payments and expenses.
Our asset-backed debt is secured by the transferred device payment plan agreement receivables and future collections on such receivables. The device payment plan agreement receivables transferred to the ABS Entities and related assets, consisting primarily of restricted cash, will only be available for payment of asset-backed debt and expenses related thereto, payments to the Originators in respect of additional transfers of device payment plan agreement receivables, and other obligations arising from our asset-backed debt transactions, and will not be available to pay other obligations or claims of Verizon’s creditors until the associated asset-backed debt and other obligations are satisfied. The Investors or Banks, as applicable, which hold our asset-backed debt have legal recourse to the assets securing the debt, but do not have any recourse to Verizon with respect to the payment of principal and interest on the debt. Under a parent support agreement, Verizon has agreed to guarantee certain of the payment obligations of Cellco and the Originators to the ABS Entities.
Cash collections on the device payment plan agreement receivables collateralizing our asset-backed debt securities are required at certain specified times to be placed into segregated accounts. Deposits to the segregated accounts are considered restricted cash and are included in Prepaid expenses and other, and Other assets in our consolidated balance sheets.
Proceeds from our asset-backed debt transactions are reflected in Cash flows from financing activities in our consolidated statements of cash flows. The asset-backed debt issued and the assets securing this debt are included in our consolidated balance sheets.
See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
In May 2020, we amended and restated our outstanding ABS financing facility originally entered into in 2016, and previously amended and restated in 2019, with a number of financial institutions (ABS Financing Facility). One loan agreement is outstanding in connection with the ABS Financing Facility, and such loan agreement was amended and restated in May 2020. Under the loan agreement, we have the right to prepay all or a portion of the advances at any time without penalty, but in certain cases, with breakage costs. During 2020, we borrowed $1.3 billion and prepaid $4.0 billion under the loan agreement.
Long-Term Credit Facilities
N/A - not applicable
(1) The revolving credit facility does not require us to comply with financial covenants or maintain specified credit ratings, and it permits us to borrow even if our business has incurred a material adverse change. The revolving credit facility provides for the issuance of letters of credit.
(2) During 2020 and 2019, we drew down $1.0 billion and $1.5 billion from these facilities, respectively. These credit facilities are used to finance equipment-related purchases. Borrowings under certain of these facilities amortize semi-annually in equal installments up to the applicable maturity dates. Maturities reflect maturity dates of principal amounts outstanding. Any amounts borrowed under these facilities and subsequently repaid cannot be reborrowed.
2021 Credit Agreement
Delayed Draw Term Loan Credit Agreement
On February 24, 2021 (the Effective Date), Verizon entered into a $25.0 billion Delayed Draw Term Loan Credit Agreement (the Credit Agreement) with two financial institutions, which includes initial commitments of $12.5 billion from each of these parties. The Credit Agreement provides Verizon with the ability to borrow up to $25.0 billion for general corporate purposes, including any potential acquisition of spectrum. The loans under the Credit Agreement are available during the period (the Availability Period) beginning on the Effective Date and ending on the earlier of (i) May 28, 2021, and (ii) the receipt by the two financial institutions of written notice by Verizon of its election to terminate commitments pursuant to the Credit Agreement. The availability of the loans under the Credit Agreement, which have not yet been funded, is subject to the satisfaction (or waiver) of the conditions that certain representations of Verizon are accurate in all material respects and the absence of certain event of default. The loans under the Credit Agreement are to be made in a single borrowing on the funding date and will mature and be payable in full on the date that is 364 days after the funding date unless extended pursuant to the terms of the Credit Agreement. The two financial institutions may syndicate their commitments under the Credit Agreement, subject to the terms of the Credit Agreement.
Interest Rate and Fees
The loans under the Credit Agreement will bear interest at a rate equal to, at the option of Verizon, (i) the base rate (defined as the greater of the rate last quoted by the Wall Street Journal as the "prime rate", the federal funds rate plus 0.500%, and the one-month London Inter-Bank Offered Rate (LIBOR) plus 1.000%, subject to a floor of 1.000%) or (ii) LIBOR, in each case plus a margin to be determined by reference to Verizon’s credit ratings and ranging from 0.000% to 0.125% in the case of base rate loans and 0.625% to 1.125% in the case of LIBOR loans. Additional margin of 0.125% is added to the loan on December 31, 2021.
Verizon will pay a commitment fee on the daily actual unused commitment of each lender starting on the date that is 60 days after the Effective Date through the last day of the Availability Period. This fee accrues at a rate determined by reference to Verizon’s credit ratings and ranges from 0.070% to 0.125% per annum.
Prepayments
The Credit Agreement requires Verizon to reduce unused commitments and prepay the loans with 100% of the net cash proceeds received from issuances or sales of equity and incurrences of borrowed money indebtedness, subject to certain exceptions.
Covenants and Events of Default
The Credit Agreement contains certain negative covenants, including a negative pledge covenant, a merger or similar transaction covenant and an accounting changes covenant, and affirmative covenants and events of default that are customary for companies maintaining an investment grade credit rating. An event of default may result in the inability to borrow in certain circumstances or the acceleration of any outstanding loan under the Credit Agreement, as applicable.
Common Stock
Common stock has been used from time to time to satisfy some of the funding requirements of employee and shareholder plans. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we issued 2.3 million and 3.8 million common shares from Treasury stock, respectively, which had an insignificant aggregate value.
In February 2020, the Verizon Board of Directors authorized a share buyback program to repurchase up to 100 million shares of Verizon's common stock. The program will terminate when the aggregate number of shares purchased reaches 100 million, or a new share repurchase plan superseding the current plan is authorized, whichever is sooner. The program permits Verizon to repurchase shares over time, with the amount and timing of repurchases depending on market conditions and corporate needs. There were no repurchases of common stock during 2020 and 2019 under our current or previously authorized share buyback program.
Credit Ratings
Verizon’s credit ratings did not change in 2020 or 2019.
Securities ratings assigned by rating organizations are expressions of opinion and are not recommendations to buy, sell or hold securities. A securities rating is subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization. Each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating.
Covenants
Our credit agreements contain covenants that are typical for large, investment grade companies. These covenants include requirements to pay interest and principal in a timely fashion, pay taxes, maintain insurance with responsible and reputable insurance companies, preserve our corporate existence, keep appropriate books and records of financial transactions, maintain our properties, provide financial and other reports to our lenders, limit pledging and disposition of assets and mergers and consolidations, and other similar covenants.
We and our consolidated subsidiaries are in compliance with all of our restrictive covenants in our debt agreements.
Change In Cash, Cash Equivalents and Restricted Cash
Our Cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020 totaled $22.2 billion, a $19.6 billion increase compared to December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of the factors discussed above.
Restricted cash at December 31, 2020 totaled $1.3 billion, relatively flat compared to restricted cash at December 31, 2019, primarily related to cash collections on the device payment plan agreement receivables that are required at certain specified times to be placed into segregated accounts.
Free Cash Flow
Free cash flow is a non-GAAP financial measure that reflects an additional way of viewing our liquidity that, we believe, when viewed with our GAAP results, provides management, investors and other users of our financial information with a more complete understanding of factors and trends affecting our cash flows. Free cash flow is calculated by subtracting capital expenditures (including capitalized software) from net cash provided by operating activities. We believe it is a more conservative measure of cash flow since purchases of fixed assets are necessary for ongoing operations. Free cash flow has limitations due to the fact that it does not represent the residual cash flow available for discretionary expenditures. For example, free cash flow does not incorporate payments made on finance lease obligations or cash payments for business acquisitions or wireless licenses. Therefore, we believe it is important to view free cash flow as a complement to our entire consolidated statements of cash flows.
The following table reconciles net cash provided by operating activities to free cash flow:
The increase in free cash flow during 2020 is a reflection of the increase in operating cash flows, partially offset by the increase in capital expenditures discussed above.
Employee Benefit Plans Funded Status and Contributions
Employer Contributions
We operate numerous qualified and nonqualified pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans. These plans primarily relate to our domestic business units. We made no discretionary contribution to our qualified pension plan in 2020. In 2019, we made contributions of $300 million to our qualified pension plans. During 2020 and 2019 we made contributions of $57 million and $71 million to our nonqualified pension plans, respectively.
The Company’s overall investment strategy is to achieve a mix of assets that allows us to meet projected benefit payments while taking into consideration risk and return. In an effort to reduce the risk of our portfolio strategy and better align assets with liabilities, we have adopted a liability driven pension strategy that seeks to better match the interest rate sensitivity of the liability hedging assets with the interest rate sensitivity of the liability. We expect that the strategy will reduce the likelihood that assets will decline at a time when liabilities increase (referred to as liability hedging), with the goal to reduce the risk of underfunding to the plan and its participants and beneficiaries; however, we also expect the strategy to result in lower asset returns. Nonqualified pension contributions are estimated to be approximately $70 million in 2021.
Contributions to our other postretirement benefit plans generally relate to payments for benefits on an as-incurred basis since these other postretirement benefit plans do not have funding requirements similar to the pension plans. We contributed $709 million and $449 million to our other postretirement benefit plans in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Contributions to our other postretirement benefit plans are estimated to be approximately $800 million in 2021.
Leasing Arrangements
See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of leasing arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
The following table provides a summary of our contractual obligations and commercial commitments at December 31, 2020. Additional detail about these items is included in the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
(1)Items included in long-term debt with variable coupon rates exclude unamortized debt issuance costs, and are described in Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements.
(2)See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
(3)Items included in purchase obligations are primarily commitments to purchase content and network services, equipment, software and marketing services, which will be used or sold in the ordinary course of business. These amounts do not represent our entire anticipated purchases in the future, but represent only those items that are the subject of contractual obligations. We also purchase products and services as needed with no firm commitment. For this reason, the amounts presented in this table alone do not provide a reliable indicator of our expected future cash outflows or changes in our expected cash position. See Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
(4)Other long-term liabilities represent estimated postretirement benefit and qualified pension plan contributions. Estimated qualified pension plan contributions include expected minimum funding contributions, which commence after 2030 based on the plan's current funded status. Estimated postretirement benefit payments include expected future postretirement benefit payments. These estimated amounts: (1) are subject to change based on changes to assumptions and future plan performance, which could impact the timing or amounts of these payments; and (2) exclude expectations beyond 5 years due to uncertainty of the timing and amounts. See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
(5)Represents future minimum payments under the sublease arrangement for our tower transaction. See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
We are not able to make a reasonable estimate of when the unrecognized tax benefits balance of $2.9 billion and related interest and penalties will be settled with the respective taxing authorities until issues or examinations are further developed. See Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Guarantees
We guarantee the debentures of our operating telephone company subsidiaries as well as the debt obligations of GTE LLC, as successor in interest to GTE Corporation, that were issued and outstanding prior to July 1, 2003. See Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
In connection with the execution of agreements for the sale of businesses and investments, Verizon ordinarily provides representations and warranties to the purchasers pertaining to a variety of nonfinancial matters, such as ownership of the securities being sold, as well as financial losses. See Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
As of December 31, 2020, letters of credit totaling approximately $677 million, which were executed in the normal course of business and support several financing arrangements and payment obligations to third parties, were outstanding. See Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Other Future Obligations
During 2020, Verizon entered into 12 renewable energy purchase agreements (REPAs) with third parties, in addition to one signed in 2019. See Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information. Under our REPA arrangements, we plan to purchase up to an aggregate of nearly 1.7 gigawatts of capacity across multiple states, including Illinois, Indiana, Maryland, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Texas and West Virginia.
Critical Accounting Estimates
A summary of the critical accounting estimates used in preparing our financial statements is as follows:
Wireless Licenses and Goodwill
Wireless licenses and Goodwill are a significant component of our consolidated assets. Both our wireless licenses and goodwill are treated as indefinite-lived intangible assets and, therefore are not amortized, but rather are tested for impairment annually in the fourth fiscal quarter, unless there are events requiring an earlier assessment or changes in circumstances during an interim period providing impairment indicators are present. We believe our estimates and assumptions are reasonable and represent appropriate marketplace considerations as of the valuation date. Although we use consistent methodologies in developing the assumptions and estimates underlying the fair value calculations used in our impairment tests, these estimates and assumptions are uncertain by nature, may change over time and can vary from actual results. It is possible that in the future there may be changes in our estimates and assumptions, including the timing and amount of future cash flows, margins, growth rates, market participant assumptions, comparable benchmark companies and related multiples and discount rates, which could result in different fair value estimates. Significant and adverse changes to any one or more of the above-noted estimates and assumptions could result in a goodwill impairment for one or more of our reporting units.
Wireless Licenses
The carrying value of our wireless licenses was approximately $96.1 billion as of December 31, 2020. We aggregate our wireless licenses into one single unit of accounting, as we utilize our wireless licenses on an integrated basis as part of our nationwide wireless network. Our wireless licenses provide us with the exclusive right to utilize certain radio frequency spectrum to provide wireless communication services. There are currently no legal, regulatory, contractual, competitive, economic or other factors that limit the useful life of our wireless licenses.
In the first quarter of 2020, we reclassified substantially all of our 39 GHz wireless licenses, including capitalized interest, with a carrying value of $2.8 billion to assets held for sale in connection with the FCC's incentive auction, Auction 103. As a result, these wireless licenses were adjusted down to their fair value of $1.6 billion resulting in a pre-tax loss of $1.2 billion ($914 million after-tax).
During the fourth quarter of 2020 and 2019, we performed a qualitative impairment assessment as our annual impairment test to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of our wireless licenses was less than the carrying amount. As part of our assessment we considered several qualitative factors including the business enterprise value of our combined wireless business, macroeconomic conditions (including changes in interest rates and discount rates), industry and market considerations (including industry revenue and EBITDA margin results, projections and recent merger and acquisition activity), the recent and projected financial performance of our combined wireless business as a whole, as well as other factors. Our annual impairment tests in 2020 and 2019 indicated that it is more likely than not that the fair value of our wireless licenses remained above their carrying value and, therefore, did not result in an impairment.
Goodwill
To determine if goodwill is potentially impaired, we have the option to perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If we elect not to conduct the qualitative assessment or if indications of a potential impairment exist, the determination of whether an impairment has occurred requires the determination of the fair value of each the reporting unit being assessed.
Under the qualitative assessment, we consider several qualitative factors, including the business enterprise value of the reporting unit from the last quantitative test and the excess of fair value over carrying value from this test, macroeconomic conditions (including changes in interest rates and discount rates), industry and market considerations (including industry revenue and EBITDA margin results, projections and recent merger and acquisition activity), the recent and projected financial performance of the reporting unit, as well as other factors.
Under our quantitative assessment, the fair value of the reporting unit is calculated using a market approach and a discounted cash flow method, as a form of the income approach. The market approach includes the use of comparative multiples to corroborate discounted cash flow results. The discounted cash flow method is based on the present value of two components-projected cash flows and a terminal value. The terminal value represents the expected normalized future cash flows of the reporting unit beyond the cash flows from the discrete projection period. The fair value of the reporting unit is calculated based on the sum of the present value of the cash flows from the discrete period and the present value of the terminal value. The discount rate represented our estimate of the weighted-average cost of capital (WACC), or expected return, that a marketplace participant would have required as of the valuation date. The application of our goodwill impairment test required key assumptions underlying our valuation model. The discounted cash flow analysis factored in assumptions on discount rates and terminal growth rates to reflect risk profiles of key strategic revenue and cost initiatives, as well as revenue and EBITDA growth relative to history and market trends and expectations. The market multiples approach incorporated significant judgment involved in the selection comparable public company multiples and benchmarks. The selection of companies was influenced by differences in growth and profitability, and volatility in market prices of peer companies. These valuation inputs are inherently uncertain, and an adverse change in one or a combination of these inputs could trigger a goodwill impairment loss in the future.
A projected sustained decline in a reporting unit's revenues and earnings could have a significant negative impact on its fair value and may result in impairment charges. Such a decline could be driven by, among other things: (1) further anticipated decreases in service pricing, sales volumes and long-term growth rate as a result of competitive pressures or other factors; or (2) the inability to achieve or delays in achieving
the goals in strategic initiatives. Also, adverse changes to macroeconomic factors, such as increases to long-term interest rates, would also negatively impact the fair value of the reporting unit.
At December 31, 2020, the balance of our goodwill was approximately $24.8 billion, of which $17.2 billion was in our Consumer reporting unit and $7.5 billion was in our Business reporting unit. We performed qualitative impairment assessments for our Consumer and Business reporting units during the fourth quarter of 2020. Our qualitative assessments indicated that it was more likely than not that the fair values for our Consumer and Business reporting units exceeded their respective carrying values and, therefore, did not result in an impairment.
In November 2018, we announced a strategic reorganization of our business, which resulted in changes to our segments and reporting units effective April 1, 2019. As a result, we performed impairment assessments of the reporting units impacted by the strategic reorganization, specifically our historical Wireless, historical Wireline and historical Connect reporting units on March 31, 2019, immediately before our strategic reorganization became effective. Our impairment assessments indicated that the fair value for each of our historical Wireless, historical Wireline and historical Connect reporting units exceeded their respective carrying values, and therefore did not result in a goodwill impairment. We then performed quantitative assessments of our Consumer and Business reporting units on April 1, 2019, immediately following our strategic reorganization. Our impairment assessments indicated that the fair value for each of our Consumer and Business reporting units exceeded their respective carrying values and therefore, did not result in a goodwill impairment. Our Media reporting unit was not impacted by the strategic reorganization and there was no indicator of impairment as of the reorganization date.
We performed qualitative impairment assessments for our Consumer and Business reporting units during the fourth quarter of 2019. Our qualitative assessments indicated that it was more likely than not that the fair values of our Consumer and Business reporting units exceeded their respective carrying values and, therefore, did not result in an impairment.
We performed a quantitative impairment assessment for our Media reporting unit in 2019. In connection with Verizon’s annual budget process during the fourth quarter of 2019, the leadership at both Verizon Media and Verizon completed a comprehensive five-year strategic planning review of Verizon Media's business prospects resulting in unfavorable adjustments to Verizon Media's financial projections. These revised projections were used as a key input into Verizon Media's annual goodwill impairment test performed in the fourth quarter of 2019.
During the fourth quarter of 2019, consistent with our accounting policy, we applied a combination of a market approach and a discounted cash flow method reflecting current assumptions and inputs, including our revised projections, discount rate and expected growth rates, which resulted in the determination that the fair value of the Media reporting unit was less than its carrying amount. As a result, we recorded a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of approximately $186 million ($176 million after-tax) in the fourth quarter of 2019 in our consolidated statement of income. The goodwill balance of the Media reporting unit had been fully written off as a result of the impairment charge.
At December 31, 2019, the balance of our goodwill was approximately $24.4 billion, of which $17.1 billion was in our Consumer reporting unit and $7.3 billion was in our Business reporting unit.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
We maintain benefit plans for most of our employees, including, for certain employees, pension and other postretirement benefit plans. At December 31, 2020, in the aggregate, pension plan benefit obligations exceeded the fair value of pension plan assets, which will result in future pension plan expense. Other postretirement benefit plans have larger benefit obligations than plan assets, resulting in expense. Significant benefit plan assumptions, including the discount rate used, the long-term rate of return on plan assets, the determination of the substantive plan and health care trend rates are periodically updated and impact the amount of benefit plan income, expense, assets and obligations. Changes to one or more of these assumptions could significantly impact our accounting for pension and other postretirement benefits. A sensitivity analysis of the impact of changes in these assumptions on the benefit obligations and expense (income) recorded, as well as on the funded status due to an increase or a decrease in the actual versus expected return on plan assets as of December 31, 2020 and for the year then ended pertaining to Verizon’s pension and postretirement benefit plans, is provided in the table below.
* In determining its pension and other postretirement obligation, the Company used a weighted-average discount rate of 2.6%. The rate was selected to approximate the composite interest rates available on a selection of high-quality bonds available in the market at December 31, 2020. The bonds selected had maturities that coincided with the time periods during which benefit payments are expected to occur, were non-callable and available in sufficient quantities to ensure marketability (at least $300 million par outstanding).
The annual measurement date for both our pension and other postretirement benefits is December 31. We use the full yield curve approach to estimate the interest cost component of net periodic benefit cost for pension and other postretirement benefits. The full yield curve approach
refines our estimate of interest cost by applying the individual spot rates from a yield curve composed of the rates of return on several hundred high-quality fixed income corporate bonds available at the measurement date. These individual spot rates align with the timing of each future cash outflow for benefit payments and therefore provide a more precise estimate of interest cost.
Income Taxes
Our current and deferred income taxes and associated valuation allowances are impacted by events and transactions arising in the normal course of business as well as in connection with the adoption of new accounting standards, changes in tax laws and rates, acquisitions and dispositions of businesses and non-recurring items. As a global commercial enterprise, our income tax rate and the classification of income taxes can be affected by many factors, including estimates of the timing and realization of deferred income tax assets and the timing and amount of income tax payments. We account for tax benefits taken or expected to be taken in our tax returns in accordance with the accounting standard relating to the uncertainty in income taxes, which requires the use of a two-step approach for recognizing and measuring tax benefits taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We review and adjust our liability for unrecognized tax benefits based on our best judgment given the facts, circumstances and information available at each reporting date. To the extent that the final outcome of these tax positions is different than the amounts recorded, such differences may impact income tax expense and actual tax payments. We recognize any interest and penalties accrued related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense. Actual tax payments may materially differ from estimated liabilities as a result of changes in tax laws as well as unanticipated transactions impacting related income tax balances. See Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Our Property, plant and equipment balance represents a significant component of our consolidated assets. We record Property, plant and equipment at cost. We depreciate Property, plant and equipment on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the assets. We expect that a one year increase in estimated useful lives of our Property, plant and equipment would result in a decrease to our 2020 depreciation expense of $2.7 billion and that a one year decrease would result in an increase of approximately $4.5 billion in our 2020 depreciation expense.
Accounts Receivable
Prior to January 1, 2020, accounts receivable were recorded at cost less an allowance for doubtful accounts. The gross amount of accounts receivable and corresponding allowance for doubtful accounts were presented separately in the consolidated balance sheets. We maintained allowances for uncollectible accounts receivable, including our direct-channel device payment plan agreement receivables, for estimated losses resulting from the failure or inability of our customers to make required payments. Indirect-channel device payment receivables are considered financial instruments and were initially recorded at fair value net of imputed interest, and credit losses were recorded as incurred. However, receivable balances were assessed quarterly for impairment and an allowance was recorded if the receivable was considered impaired. Subsequent to January 1, 2020, accounts receivable are recorded at amortized cost less an allowance for credit losses that are not expected to be recovered. The gross amount of accounts receivable and corresponding allowance for credit losses are presented separately in the consolidated balance sheets. We maintain allowances for credit losses resulting from the expected failure or inability of our customers to make required payments. We recognize the allowance for credit losses at inception and reassess quarterly based on management’s expectation of the asset’s collectability. The allowance is based on multiple factors including historical experience with bad debts, the credit quality of the customer base, the aging of such receivables and current macroeconomic conditions, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as management’s expectations of conditions in the future, if applicable. Our allowance for credit losses is based on management’s assessment of the collectability of assets pooled together with similar risk characteristics.
We record an allowance to reduce the receivables to the amount that is expected to be collectible. For device payment plan agreement receivables, we record bad debt expense based on a default and loss calculation using our proprietary loss model. The expected loss rate is determined based on customer credit scores and other qualitative factors as noted above. The loss rate is assigned individually on a customer by customer basis and the custom credit scores are then aggregated by vintage and used in our proprietary loss model to calculate the weighted-average loss rate used for determining the allowance balance.
We monitor the collectability of our wireless service receivables as one overall pool. Wireline service receivables are disaggregated and pooled by the following customer groups: consumer, small and medium business, global enterprise, public sector and wholesale. For wireless service receivables and wireline consumer and small and medium business receivables, the allowance is calculated based on a 12 month rolling average write-off balance multiplied by the average life-cycle of an account from billing to write-off. The risk of loss is assessed over the contractual life of the receivables and we adjust the historical loss amounts for current and future conditions based on management’s qualitative considerations. For global enterprise, public sector and wholesale wireline receivables, the allowance for credit losses is based on historical write-off experience and individual customer credit risk, if applicable. We consider multiple factors in determining the allowance as discussed above.
If there is a deterioration of our customers’ financial condition or if future actual default rates on receivables in general differ from those currently anticipated, we may have to adjust our allowance for credit losses, which would affect earnings in the period the adjustments are made.
Blue Jeans Network, Inc.
In April 2020, we entered into a definitive purchase agreement to acquire BlueJeans, an enterprise-grade video conferencing and event platform, whose services are sold to Business customers globally. The transaction closed in May 2020. The aggregate cash consideration paid by Verizon at the closing of the transaction was approximately $397 million, net of cash acquired. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
TracFone Wireless, Inc.
In September 2020, we entered into a purchase agreement (Tracfone Purchase Agreement) with América Móvil to acquire Tracfone, a provider of prepaid and value mobile services in the U.S. Under the terms of the Tracfone Purchase Agreement, we will acquire all of the stock of Tracfone for approximately $3.1 billion in cash and $3.1 billion in Verizon common stock, subject to customary adjustments, at closing. The number of shares issued will be based on an average trading price determined as of the closing date and is subject to a minimum number of shares issuable of 47,124,445 and a maximum number of shares issuable of 57,596,544. The Tracfone Purchase Agreement also includes up to an additional $650 million in future cash consideration related to the achievement of certain performance measures and other commercial arrangements. The transaction is subject to regulatory approvals and closing conditions and is expected to close in the second half of 2021.
Bluegrass Cellular
In October 2020, we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire certain assets of Bluegrass Cellular, a rural wireless operator serving central Kentucky. Bluegrass Cellular provides wireless service to 210,000 customers in 34 counties in rural service areas 3, 4, and 5 in Central Kentucky. The transaction is subject to regulatory approvals and closing conditions and is expected to close in the first quarter of 2021.
Spectrum License Transactions
From time to time, we enter into agreements to buy, sell or exchange spectrum licenses. We believe these spectrum license transactions have allowed us to continue to enhance the reliability of our wireless network while also resulting in a more efficient use of spectrum. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our spectrum license transactions.
Other
From time to time, we enter into strategic agreements to acquire various other businesses and investments. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
In November 2020, Verizon entered into an agreement to sell our Huffington Post business. In connection with this transaction, we recorded a pre-tax loss of $126 million in Selling, general and administrative expense in our consolidated statement of income for the year ended December 31, 2020. The transaction closed in February 2021.