ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion addresses information pertaining to the financial condition and results of operations of Westamerica Bancorporation and subsidiaries (the “Company”) that may not be otherwise apparent from a review of the consolidated financial statements and related footnotes. It should be read in conjunction with those statements and notes found on pages 50 through 92, as well as with the other information presented throughout this Report.
Critical Accounting Policies
The Company’s consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America and follow general practices within the banking industry. Application of these principles requires the Company to make certain estimates, assumptions, and judgments that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. These estimates, assumptions, and judgments are based on information available as of the date of the financial statements; accordingly, as this information changes, the financial statements could reflect different estimates, assumptions, and judgments. Certain accounting policies inherently have a greater reliance on the use of estimates, assumptions and judgments and as such have a greater possibility of producing results that could be materially different than originally reported. Estimates, assumptions and judgments are necessary when assets and liabilities are required to be recorded at fair value, when a decline in the value of an asset not carried on the financial statements at fair value warrants an impairment writedown or valuation reserve to be established, or when an asset or liability needs to be recorded contingent upon a future event. Carrying assets and liabilities at fair value inherently results in more financial statement volatility. The fair values and the information used to record valuation adjustments for certain assets and liabilities are based either on quoted market prices or are provided by other third-party sources, when available.
The most significant accounting policies followed by the Company are presented in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements. These policies, along with the disclosures presented in the other financial statement notes and in this discussion, provide information on how significant assets and liabilities are valued in the financial statements and how those values are determined. Based on the valuation techniques used and the sensitivity of financial statement amounts to the methods, assumptions, and estimates underlying those amounts, Management has identified the allowance for credit losses accounting to be the accounting area requiring the most subjective or complex judgments, and as such could be most subject to revision as new information becomes available. A discussion of the factors affecting accounting for the allowance for credit losses and purchased loans is included in the “Loan Portfolio Credit Risk” discussion below.
Financial Overview
Westamerica Bancorporation and subsidiaries’ (collectively, the “Company”) reported net income of $80.4 million or $2.98 diluted earnings per common share in 2020. The COVID-19 coronavirus pandemic began in the United States and California in the first quarter 2020 and continued to cause escalating infections in the United States through the fourth quarter 2020. In response to the pandemic, the Company’s primary and wholly-owned subsidiary bank, Westamerica Bank (the “Bank”), funded $249 million Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loans for the Bank’s customers during the second quarter 2020. PPP loans meaningfully increased interest-earning assets and related interest and fee income. The Bank continues to work with loan customers requesting deferral of loan payments due to economic weakness caused by the pandemic. At December 31, 2020, consumer loans granted loan deferrals totaled $2.5 million, commercial real estate loans with deferred payments totaled $7.8 million, primarily for hospitality and retail properties, and commercial loans with deferred payments totaled $33 thousand. The results for 2020 included a provision for credit losses of $4.3 million, which reduced EPS $0.11, representing Management’s estimate of additional reserves needed over the remaining life of its loans due to increased credit-risk from deteriorating economic conditions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Results for 2020 include a $3.5 million gain on sales of a closed branch building which increased EPS $0.13. These results compare to net income of $80.4 million or $2.98 diluted earnings per common share for 2019. Results for 2019 include a tax-exempt life insurance gain of $433 thousand and $553 thousand in loss contingencies. The loss contingencies include a $301 thousand increase in estimated customer refunds of revenue recognized prior to 2018 and a $252 thousand settlement to dismiss a lawsuit. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company paid $4,410 thousand of obligations accrued in prior years to customers eligible for refunds. The remaining obligations at December 31, 2020 was $1,433 thousand, included in other liabilities. The tax-exempt life insurance gain and loss contingencies did not have a significant impact on the EPS for 2019.
Regions and states of the United States of America, including California implemented varying degrees of “stay at home” directives in an effort to prevent the spread of the virus in the first quarter of 2020. These directives have significantly reduced economic activity in the United States and the State of California. In the second and third quarters 2020 the “stay at home” directives were gradually lifted in varying stages in counties of the State of California. Counties with high infection rates delayed reopening and restrictions on certain economic activity remained. When infections increased in the fourth quarter restrictions were re-imposed to some degree. California-based claims for unemployment rose and remained elevated during 2020. The California “stay at home” directive excludes essential businesses including banks. The Bank remains open and fully operational.
In response to the pandemic, the Federal Reserve has engaged significant levels of monetary policy to provide liquidity and credit facilities to the financial markets. On March 15, 2020, the Federal Open Market Committee (“FOMC”) reduced the target range for the federal funds rate to 0 to 0.25 percent; relatedly, the FOMC reduced the interest rate paid on deposit balances to 0.10 percent effective March 16, 2020. The Bank maintains deposit balances at the Federal Reserve Bank; the amount that earns interest is identified in the Company’s financial statements as “interest-bearing cash”.
The extent of the spread of the coronavirus and its ultimate containment are uncertain at this time. The effectiveness of the Federal Reserve Bank’s monetary policies and the federal government’s fiscal policies in stimulating the United States economy is uncertain at this time. Management expects the Company’s net interest margin and non-interest income to decline and credit-related losses to increase for an uncertain period given the decline in economic activity occurring due to the coronavirus. The amount of impact on the Company’s financial results is uncertain. Please refer to Part II, Item 1A “Risk factors” in this report on Form 10-K.
The Company presents its net interest margin and net interest income on a fully taxable equivalent (“FTE”) basis using the current statutory federal tax rate. Management believes the FTE basis is valuable to the reader because the Company’s loan and investment securities portfolios contain a relatively large portion of municipal loans and securities that are federally tax exempt. The Company’s tax exempt loans and securities composition may not be similar to that of other banks, therefore in order to reflect the impact of the federally tax exempt loans and securities on the net interest margin and net interest income for comparability with other banks, the Company presents its net interest margin and net interest income on an FTE basis.
The Company’s significant accounting policies (see Note 1 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the Consolidated Financial Statements below) are fundamental to understanding the Company’s results of operations and financial condition. The Company adopted the following new accounting guidance:
FASB ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, was issued on June 16, 2016. The ASU significantly changed estimates for credit losses related to financial assets measured at amortized cost and certain other contracts. For estimating credit losses, the FASB replaced the incurred loss model with the current expected credit loss (CECL) model, which accelerated recognition of credit losses. Additionally, credit losses relating to debt securities available-for-sale are recorded through an allowance for credit losses under the new standard. The Company is also required to provide additional disclosures related to the financial assets within the scope of the new standard.
The Company adopted the ASU provisions on January 1, 2020. Management evaluated available data, defined portfolio segments of loans with similar attributes, and selected loss estimate models for each identified loan portfolio segment. Management measured historical loss rates for each portfolio segment. Management also segmented debt securities held to maturity, selected methods to estimate losses for each segment, and measured a loss estimate. Agency mortgage-backed securities were assigned no credit loss allowance due to the perceived backing of government sponsored entities. Municipal securities were evaluated for risk of default based on credit rating and remaining term to maturity using Moody’s risk of default factors; Moody’s loss upon default factors were applied to the assumed defaulted principal amounts to estimate the amount for credit loss allowance. The adjustment to the allowance for credit losses was recorded through an offsetting after-tax adjustment to shareholders’ equity. The implementing entry increased allowance for credit losses on loans by $2,017 thousand, reduced allowance for unfunded credit commitments by $2,107 thousand and increased retained earnings by $52 thousand.
FASB ASU 2018-13, Fair Value Measurements (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework - Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement, was issued August 2018. The ASU is part of the disclosure framework project, where the primary focus is to improve the effectiveness of disclosures in the financial statements. The ASU removes, modifies and adds disclosure requirements related to Fair Value Measurements.
The provisions of the ASU were effective January 1, 2020 with the option to early adopt any removed or modified disclosures upon issuance of the ASU. The Company early adopted the provisions to remove and/or modify relevant disclosures in the “Fair Value Measurements” note to the unaudited consolidated financial statements. The requirement to include additional disclosures was adopted by the Company January 1, 2020. The additional disclosures did not affect the financial results upon adoption.
Net Income
Following is a summary of the components of net income for the periods indicated:
Net income remained at the same level in 2020 and 2019. Net interest and loan fee (FTE) income increased $6.3 million due to higher average balances of investments and average balances of $151 million of PPP loans, partially offset by lower yield on interest-bearing earning assets and lower average balances of other loans.
Results for 2020 include a provision of credit losses of $4.3 million, representing Management estimate of additional reserves needed over the remaining life of its loans due to credit-risk from economic weakness caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Noninterest income decreased $1.8 million compared with 2019 due to lower income from activity based fees due to reduced economic activity related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, the results for 2019 included a life insurance gain of $433 thousand. The decrease in noninterest income from 2019 to 2020 was partially offset by $3.5 million in gains on sales of a closed branch building in 2020. In 2020 noninterest expense decreased $420 thousand compared with lower salaries, occupancy and equipment expenses, and lower amortization of intangible assets, and because the results for 2019 included $553 thousand of loss contingency. The decrease was partially offset by higher FDIC assessments (included in “other noninterest expense”) in 2020 because FDIC assessments in 2019 were reduced by application of the Bank’s FDIC assessment credit described in Part 1, Item 1, “Premiums for Deposit Insurance”. The effective tax rates (FTE) was 27.2% for 2020 compared with 26.8% for 2019.
Comparing 2019 with 2018, net income increased $8.8 million. Net interest and loan fee (FTE) income increased $6.0 million due to a higher net yield on earning assets and higher average balances of investments, partially offset by lower average balances of interest-bearing cash and loans. The provision for loan losses remained zero, reflecting Management's evaluation of losses inherent in the loan portfolio. In 2019, noninterest income decreased $741 thousand compared with 2018 due to lower income from service charges on deposit accounts, other service charges and debit card fees, offset in part by an increase in merchant processing services and securities gains in 2019. In 2019 noninterest expense decreased $7.9 million compared with 2018 primarily due to decreases in loss contingencies, salaries and related benefits, FDIC insurance assessments, and intangible amortization. The effective tax rates (FTE) was 26.8% for 2019 compared with 26.0% for 2018.
[The remainder of this page intentionally left blank]
Net Interest and Loan Fee Income (FTE)
The Company's primary source of revenue is net interest income, or the difference between interest income earned on loans and investment securities and interest expense paid on interest-bearing deposits and other borrowings.
Components of Net Interest and Loan Fee Income (FTE)
Net interest and loan fee income (FTE) increased $6.3 million in 2020 compared with 2019 due to higher average balances of investments (up $445 million) and average balances of $151 million of PPP loans, partially offset by lower yield on interest-bearing earning assets (down 0.20%) and lower average balances of other loans (down $74 million).
Comparing 2019 with 2018, net interest and loan fee income (FTE) increased $6.0 million due to a higher net yield on earning assets (up 0.12%) and higher average balances of investments (up $127 million), partially offset by lower average balances of interest-bearing cash (down $101 million) and loans (down $47 million).
The net interest margin (FTE) was 2.91% in 2020, 3.11% in 2019 and 2.98% in 2018. The yield on earning assets (FTE) was 2.94% in 2020, 3.14% in 2019 and 3.02% in 2018. Market interest rates declined in 2020 compared with 2019. Additionally, investments, which generally carry lower yield than loans, made up a higher percentage of total earning assets in 2020 than in prior periods. (72.0% in 2020 compared with 71.4% in 2019 and 68.6% in 2018).
The Company’s funding costs were 0.03% in 2020 and 2019 compared with 0.04% in 2018. Average balances of time deposits in 2020 declined $18 million from 2019. Average balances of lower-cost checking and savings deposits grew 11% from 2019 to 2020. Average balances of checking and saving deposits accounted for 96.9% of average total deposits in 2020 compared with 96.2% in 2019 and 95.6% in 2018.
Net Interest Margin (FTE)
The following summarizes the components of the Company's net interest margin (FTE) for the periods indicated.
[The remainder of this page intentionally left blank]
Summary of Average Balances, Yields/Rates and Interest Differential
The following tables present information regarding the consolidated average assets, liabilities and shareholders’ equity, the amounts of interest income earned from average interest earning assets and the resulting yields, and the amounts of interest expense incurred on average interest-bearing liabilities and the resulting rates. Average loan balances include nonperforming loans. Interest income includes reversal of previously accrued interest on loans placed on non-accrual status during the period and proceeds from loans on nonaccrual status only to the extent cash payments have been received and applied as interest income and accretion of purchased loan discounts. Yields on tax-exempt securities and loans have been adjusted upward to reflect the effect of income exempt from federal income taxation at the federal statutory tax rate of 21 percent.
Distribution of Assets, Liabilities & Shareholders’ Equity and Yields, Rates & Interest Margin
(1)
Amounts calculated on an FTE basis using the current statutory federal tax rate.
(2)
Net interest spread represents the average yield earned on interest-earning assets less the average rate incurred on interest-bearing liabilities.
(3)
Net interest margin is computed by calculating the difference between interest income and expense, divided by the average balance of interest-earning assets. The net interest margin is greater than the net interest spread due to the benefit of noninterest-bearing demand deposits.
Distribution of Assets, Liabilities & Shareholders’ Equity and Yields, Rates & Interest Margin
(1)
Amounts calculated on a fully taxable equivalent basis using the current statutory federal tax rate.
(2)
Net interest spread represents the average yield earned on interest-earning assets less the average rate incurred on interest-bearing liabilities.
(3)
Net interest margin is computed by calculating the difference between interest income and expense, divided by the average balance of interest-earning assets. The net interest margin is greater than the net interest spread due to the benefit of noninterest-bearing demand deposits.
[The remainder of this page intentionally left blank]
Distribution of Assets, Liabilities & Shareholders’ Equity and Yields, Rates & Interest Margin
(1)
Amounts calculated on a fully taxable equivalent basis using the current statutory federal tax rate.
(2)
Net interest spread represents the average yield earned on interest-earning assets less the average rate incurred on interest-bearing liabilities.
(3)
Net interest margin is computed by calculating the difference between interest income and expense, divided by the average balance of interest-earning assets. The net interest margin is greater than the net interest spread due to the benefit of noninterest-bearing demand deposits.
[The remainder of this page intentionally left blank]
Summary of Changes in Interest Income and Expense due to Changes in Average Asset & Liability Balances and Yields Earned & Rates Paid
The following tables set forth a summary of the changes in interest income and interest expense due to changes in average assets and liability balances (volume) and changes in average interest yields/rates for the periods indicated. Changes not solely attributable to volume or yields/rates have been allocated in proportion to the respective volume and yield/rate components.
Summary of Changes in Interest Income and Expense
(1) Amounts calculated on an FTE basis using the current statutory federal tax rate.
[The remainder of this page intentionally left blank]
Summary of Changes in Interest Income and Expense
(1) Amounts calculated on a fully taxable equivalent basis using the current statutory federal tax rate.
Provision for Credit Losses
The Company manages credit costs by consistently enforcing conservative underwriting and administration procedures and aggressively pursuing collection efforts with debtors experiencing financial difficulties. The provision for credit losses reflects Management's assessment of credit risk in the loan portfolio and debt securities held to maturity during each of the periods presented.
The Company’s provided a provision of credit losses of $4.3 million recorded in 2020. The provision represents Management’s estimate of additional reserves needed over the remaining life of its loans due to credit-risk from weakened economic conditions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company provided no provision for loan losses in 2019 and 2018. Classified loans declined $3.8 million in 2019. Nonaccrual loans were $4 million at December 31, 2019 compared with $5 million at December 31, 2018. These factors were reflected in Management’s evaluation of credit quality, the level of the provision for loan losses in 2019, and the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2019. For further information regarding credit risk, net credit losses and the allowance for credit losses, see the “Loan Portfolio Credit Risk” and “Allowance for Credit Losses” sections of this Report.
[The remainder of this page intentionally left blank]
Noninterest Income
Components of Noninterest Income
In 2020, noninterest income decreased $1.8 million compared with 2019 due to lower income from activity based fees due to reduced economic activity related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, the results for 2019 included a life insurance gain of $433 thousand. The decrease was partially offset by $3.5 million in gains on sale of a closed branch building in 2020.
In 2019, noninterest income decreased $741 thousand compared with 2018. Income from service charges on deposit accounts decreased due to lower overdraft fees in 2019. Other service charges decreased due to lower income from internet banking. Debit card fees and financial services commissions decreased in 2019. Merchant processing services increased due to successful sales efforts and higher transaction volumes and partially offset the decrease in noninterest income in 2019 compared with 2018.
Noninterest Expense
Components of Noninterest Expense
In 2020, noninterest expense decreased $420 thousand compared with 2019 due to lower salaries, occupancy and equipment expenses, and lower amortization of intangible assets, and because the results for 2019 included $553 thousand of loss contingency. The decrease was partially offset by higher FDIC assessments (included in “other noninterest expense”) in 2020 because FDIC assessments in 2019 were reduced by application of the Bank’s FDIC assessment credit described in Part 1, Item 1, “Premiums for Deposit Insurance”.
In 2019, noninterest expense decreased $7.9 million compared with 2018 primarily due to decreases in loss contingencies, salaries and related benefits, FDIC insurance assessments, and intangible amortization. The 2019 loss contingencies include a $301 thousand increase in estimated customer refunds of revenue recognized prior to 2018 and a $252 thousand settlement to dismiss a lawsuit. Although loss contingencies represent estimated liabilities, which are subject to revision, the Company does not anticipate additional losses for either of these matters. Salaries and related benefits decreased $1.9 million primarily due to employee attrition and lower incentives and employee benefit costs. Amortization of intangibles decreased $1.4 million as assets are amortized on a declining balance method. FDIC insurance assessments (included in “other noninterest expense”) decreased primarily due to application of the Bank’s assessment credit described in Part 1, Item 1, “Premiums for Deposit Insurance”.
Provision for Income Tax
The Company’s income tax provision (FTE) was $30.0 million in 2020 compared with $29.4 million in 2019 and $25.1 million in 2018. The effective tax rates (FTE) were 27.2% in 2020 compared with 26.8% in 2019 and 26.0% in 2018.
The higher effective tax rate (FTE) in 2020 compared with 2019 and 2018 is due to lower levels of tax-exempt interest income and stock compensation tax deductions in 2020. The tax provisions (FTE) for 2020, 2019 and 2018 include tax benefits of $87 thousand, $435 thousand and $737 thousand, respectively, for tax deductions from the exercise of employee stock options which exceed related compensation expenses recognized in the financial statements. In 2019, the Company decreased unrecognized tax benefits by $909 thousand related to settlements with taxing authorities. The settlements incorporated amended tax returns for which the Company had recognized a deferred tax asset in the amount of $1,003 thousand.
Investment Securities Portfolio
The Company maintains an investment securities portfolio consisting of securities issued by U.S. Government sponsored entities, agency and non-agency mortgage backed securities, state and political subdivisions, corporations, collateralized loan obligations, commercial paper and other securities.
Management managed the investment securities portfolio in response to changes in deposit and loan volumes. The carrying value of the Company’s investment securities portfolio was $4.6 billion at December 31, 2020 and $3.8 billion at December 31, 2019. The following table indicates the carrying values of investment securities in the Company’s portfolio by type as of the indicated dates. The Company adopted ASU 2016-13 effective January 1, 2020. Debt securities held to maturity of $515,598 thousand at December 31, 2020, is amortized cost before related reserve for expected credit losses of $9 thousand.
Management continually evaluates the Company’s investment securities portfolio in response to established asset/liability management objectives, changing market conditions that could affect profitability, liquidity, and the level of interest rate risk to which the Company is exposed. These evaluations may cause Management to change the level of funds the Company deploys into investment securities and change the composition of the Company’s investment securities portfolio.
At December 31, 2020, substantially all of the Company’s investment securities continue to be investment grade rated by one or more major rating agencies. In addition to monitoring credit rating agency evaluations, Management performs its own evaluations regarding the credit worthiness of the issuer or the securitized assets underlying asset-backed securities. The Company’s procedures for evaluating investments in securities are in accordance with guidance issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Investing in Securities without Reliance on Nationally Recognized Statistical Rating Agencies” (SR 12-15) and other regulatory guidance. There have been no significant differences in the Company’s internal analyses compared with the ratings assigned by the third party credit rating agencies.
The Company had no marketable equity securities at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. All of the marketable equity securities were sold with no gains or losses from the sale during the third quarter 2019. The market value of the marketable equity securities was $1,747 thousand at December 31, 2018. The Company recognized gross unrealized holding gains of $50 thousand in earnings in 2019.
The following table shows the fair value carrying amount of the Company’s equity securities and debt securities available for sale as of the dates indicated:
[The remainder of this page intentionally left blank]
The following table sets forth the relative maturities and contractual yields of the Company’s debt securities available for sale (stated at fair value) at December 31, 2020. Yields on state and political subdivision securities have been calculated on a fully taxable equivalent basis using the current federal statutory rate. Mortgage-backed securities are shown separately because they are typically paid in monthly installments over a number of years.
Debt Securities Available for Sale Maturity Distribution
The following table shows the amortized cost carrying amount and fair value of the Company’s debt securities held to maturity as of the dates indicated:
The following table sets forth the relative maturities and contractual yields of the Company’s debt securities held to maturity at December 31, 2020. Yields on state and political subdivision securities have been calculated on a fully taxable equivalent basis using the current federal statutory rate. Mortgage-backed securities are shown separately because they are typically paid in monthly installments over a number of years.
Debt Securities Held to Maturity Maturity Distribution
The following table summarizes total corporate securities by credit rating:
The Company’s $14.96 million corporate bond rated BB- at December 31, 2020 and $14.53 million corporate bond rated BB at December 31, 2019, represents a bond of one pharmaceutical company which develops, manufactures and markets generic and branded human pharmaceuticals, as well as active pharmaceutical ingredients, to customers worldwide. The bond matures in July 2021.
The following table summarizes total corporate securities by the industry sector in which the issuing companies operate:
[The remainder of this page intentionally left blank]
The following table summarizes total consumer, cyclical by sub-sector:
The Company’s $21.1 million in corporate bonds to issuers operating in the consumer cyclical - restaurant subsector represent bonds of one company which retails, roasts and provides its own brand of specialty coffee and other complementary products through retail locations worldwide and sells coffee through several distribution channels. The bonds mature in 2023. At December 31, 2020, the bonds were rated BBB and priced with an unrealized gain of $1.1 million.
The $103.0 million (fair value) in corporate bonds in the energy sector are issued by 4 issuers at December 31, 2020. The $188.8 million (fair value) in corporate bonds in the industrial sector are issued by 10 issuers at December 31, 2020.
The Company’s $1.2 billion (fair value) in collateralized loan obligations at December 31, 2020, include investments in 141 issues that are within the senior tranches of their respective fund securitization structures. All of the Company’s collateralized loan obligation investments are rated AAA or AA at December 31, 2020.
[The remainder of this page intentionally left blank]
The following tables summarize the total general obligation and revenue bonds issued by states and political subdivisions held in the Company’s investment securities portfolios as of the dates indicated, identifying the state in which the issuing government municipality or agency operates.
At December 31, 2020, the Company’s investment securities portfolios included securities issued by 317 state and local government municipalities and agencies located within 40 states. The largest exposure to any one municipality or agency was $8.2 million (fair value) represented by six general obligation bonds.
[The remainder of this page intentionally left blank]
At December 31, 2019, the Company’s investment securities portfolios included securities issued by 451 state and local government municipalities and agencies located within 42 states. The largest exposure to any one municipality or agency was $9.0 million (fair value) represented by one general obligation bond.
At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, the revenue bonds in the Company’s investment securities portfolios were issued by state and local government municipalities and agencies to fund public services such as water utility, sewer utility, recreational and school facilities, and general public and economic improvements. The revenue bonds were payable from 19 revenue sources at December 31, 2020 and 20 revenue sources at December 31, 2019. The revenue sources that represent 5% or more individually of the total revenue bonds are summarized in the following tables.
[The remainder of this page intentionally left blank]
See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information related to the investment securities.
Loan Portfolio
The Company originates loans with the intent to hold such assets until principal is repaid. Management follows written loan underwriting policies and procedures which are approved by the Bank’s Board of Directors. Loans are underwritten following approved underwriting standards and lending authorities within a formalized organizational structure. The Board of Directors also approves independent real estate appraisers to be used in obtaining estimated values for real property serving as loan collateral. Prevailing economic trends and conditions are also taken into consideration in loan underwriting practices.
All loan applications must be for clearly defined legitimate purposes with a determinable primary source of repayment, and as appropriate, secondary sources of repayment. All loans are supported by appropriate documentation such as current financial statements, tax returns, credit reports, collateral information, guarantor asset verification, title reports, appraisals, and other relevant documentation.
The Bank processed customer PPP loan applications as established by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). The United States Small Business Administration guarantees PPP loans; given this guarantee, the PPP loans are not considered to have default risk. The Company funded $249 million PPP loans in the second quarter 2020. PPP loans, net of deferred fees and costs, were $187 million at December 31, 2020.
Commercial loans represent term loans used to acquire durable business assets or revolving lines of credit used to finance working capital. Underwriting practices evaluate each borrower’s cash flow as the principal source of loan repayment. Commercial loans are generally secured by the borrower’s business assets as a secondary source of repayment. Commercial loans are evaluated for credit-worthiness based on prior loan performance and borrower financial information including cash flow, borrower net worth and aggregate debt. PPP loans are included in commercial loans.
Commercial real estate loans represent term loans used to acquire or refinance real estate to be operated by the borrower in a commercial capacity. Underwriting practices evaluate each borrower’s global cash flow as the principal source of loan repayment, independent appraisal of value of the property, and other relevant factors. Commercial real estate loans are generally secured by a first lien on the property as a secondary source of repayment.
Real estate construction loans represent the financing of real estate development. Loan principal disbursements are controlled through the use of project budgets, and disbursements are approved based on construction progress, which is validated by project site inspections. A first lien on the real estate serves as collateral to secure the loan.
Residential real estate loans generally represent first lien mortgages used by the borrower to purchase or refinance a principal residence. For interest-rate risk purposes, the Company offers only fully-amortizing, adjustable-rate mortgages. In underwriting first lien mortgages, the Company evaluates each borrower’s ability to repay the loan, an independent appraisal of the value of the property, and other relevant factors. The Company does not offer riskier mortgage products, such as non-amortizing “interest-only” mortgages and “negative amortization” mortgages.
For loans secured by real estate, the Bank requires title insurance to insure the status of its lien and each borrower is obligated to insure the real estate collateral, naming the Company as loss payee, in an amount sufficient to repay the principal amount outstanding in the event of a property casualty loss.
Consumer installment and other loans are predominantly comprised of indirect automobile loans with underwriting based on credit history and scores, personal income, debt service capacity, and collateral values.
Excluding PPP, loan volumes have declined due to payoffs and problem loan workout activities, particularly with purchased loans, and reduced volumes of loan originations. The Company did not take an aggressive posture relative to loan portfolio growth during the post-recession period of historically low interest rates. Management increased investment securities as loan volumes declined.
The following table shows the composition of the loan portfolio of the Company by type of loan and type of borrower, on the dates indicated:
Loan Portfolio
The following table shows the maturity distribution and interest rate sensitivity of commercial, commercial real estate, and construction loans at December 31, 2020. Balances exclude residential real estate loans and consumer installment and other loans totaling $297.0 million. These types of loans are typically paid in monthly installments over a number of years.
Loan Maturity Distribution
Commitments and Letters of Credit
The Company issues formal commitments on lines of credit to well-established and financially responsible commercial enterprises. Such commitments can be either secured or unsecured and are typically in the form of revolving lines of credit for seasonal working capital needs. Occasionally, such commitments are in the form of letters of credit to facilitate the customers’ particular business transactions. Commitment fees are generally charged for commitments and letters of credit. Commitments on lines of credit and letters of credit typically mature within one year. For further information, see the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
Loan Portfolio Credit Risk
The Company extends loans to commercial and consumer customers which expose the Company to the risk borrowers will default, causing loan losses. The Company’s lending activities are exposed to various qualitative risks. All loan segments are exposed to risks inherent in the economy and market conditions. Significant risk characteristics related to the commercial loan segment include the borrowers’ business performance and financial condition, and the value of collateral for secured loans. Significant risk characteristics related to the commercial real estate segment include the borrowers’ business performance and the value of properties collateralizing the loans. Significant risk characteristics related to the construction loan segment include the borrowers’ performance in successfully developing the real estate into the intended purpose and the value of the property collateralizing the loans. Significant risk characteristics related to the residential real estate segment include the borrowers’ financial wherewithal to service the mortgages and the value of the property collateralizing the loans. Significant risk characteristics related to the consumer loan segment include the financial condition of the borrowers and the value of collateral securing the loans.
The Bank processed customer PPP loan applications as established by the CARES Act. The United States Small Business Administration guarantees PPP loans; given this guarantee, the PPP loans are not considered to have default risk. The Company funded $249 million PPP loans in the second quarter 2020. PPP loans, net of deferred fees and costs, were $187 million at December 31, 2020.
On April 7, 2020, the U.S. banking agencies issued an Interagency Statement on Loan Modifications and Reporting for Financial Institutions Working with Customers Affected by the Coronavirus (Revised). The statement describes accounting for COVID-19-related loan modifications, including clarifying the interaction between current accounting rules and the temporary relief provided by the CARES Act. The Bank has been actively working with consumer and commercial borrowers requesting deferral of loan payments, granting deferrals of principal and interest payments for 90 days. At December 31, 2020, consumer loans granted loan deferrals totaled $2.5 million, commercial real estate loans with deferred payments totaled $7.8 million, primarily for hospitality and retail properties, and five commercial loans with deferred payments totaled $33 thousand.
The preparation of the financial statements requires Management to estimate the amount of expected losses in the loan portfolio and establish an allowance for credit losses. The allowance for credit losses is maintained by assessing or reversing a provision for credit losses through the Company’s earnings. In estimating credit losses, Management must exercise judgment in evaluating information deemed relevant, such as financial information regarding individual borrowers, overall loan loss experience, the amount of past due, nonperforming and classified loans, recommendations of regulatory authorities, prevailing economic conditions and other information. The amount of ultimate losses on the loan portfolio can vary from the estimated amounts. Management follows a systematic methodology to estimate loss potential in an effort to reduce the differences between estimated and actual losses.
The Company closely monitors the markets in which it conducts its lending operations and follows a strategy to control exposure to loans with high credit risk. The Bank’s organization structure separates the functions of business development and loan underwriting; Management believes this segregation of duties avoids inherent conflicts of combining business development and loan approval functions. In measuring and managing credit risk, the Company adheres to the following practices.
●
The Bank maintains a Loan Review Department which reports directly to the audit committee of the Board of Directors. The Loan Review Department performs independent evaluations of loans to challenge the credit risk grades assigned by Management using grading standards employed by bank regulatory agencies. Those loans judged to carry higher risk attributes are referred to as “classified loans.” Classified loans receive elevated Management attention to maximize collection.
●
The Bank maintains two loan administration offices whose sole responsibility is to manage and collect classified loans.
Classified loans with higher levels of credit risk are further designated as “nonaccrual loans.” Management places classified loans on nonaccrual status when full collection of contractual interest and principal payments is in doubt. Uncollected interest previously accrued on loans placed on nonaccrual status is reversed as a charge against interest income. The Company does not accrue interest income on loans following placement on nonaccrual status. Interest payments received on nonaccrual loans are applied to reduce the carrying amount of the loan unless the carrying amount is well secured by loan collateral. “Nonperforming assets” include nonaccrual loans, loans 90 or more days past due and still accruing, and repossessed loan collateral (commonly referred to as “Other Real Estate Owned”).
[The remainder of this page intentionally left blank]
Nonperforming Assets
At December 31, 2020, one loan secured by commercial real estate with a balance of $3.4 million was on nonaccrual status. The remaining seven nonaccrual loans held at December 31, 2020 had an average carrying value of $130 thousand.
Management believes the overall credit quality of the loan portfolio is reasonably stable; however, classified and nonperforming assets could fluctuate from period to period. The performance of any individual loan can be affected by external factors such as the interest rate environment, economic conditions, pandemics, and collateral values or factors particular to the borrower. No assurance can be given that additional increases in nonaccrual and delinquent loans will not occur in the future.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Effective January 1, 2020, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses: Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“CECL”). The following table summarizes allowance for credit losses at the dates indicated:
Allowance for Credit Losses on Debt Securities Held to Maturity
Management segmented debt securities held to maturity, selected methods to estimate losses for each segment, and measured a loss estimate. Agency mortgage-backed securities were assigned no credit loss allowance due to the perceived backing of government sponsored entities. Municipal securities were evaluated for risk of default based on credit rating and remaining term to maturity using Moody’s risk of default factors; Moody’s loss upon default factors were applied to the assumed defaulted principal amounts to estimate the amount for credit loss allowance. The adoption of the ASU resulted in establishment of allowance for credit losses related to debt securities held to maturity of $16 thousand. It was reduced to $9 thousand at December 31, 2020 to reflect the expected credit losses on debt securities held to maturity.
Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans
The Company’s allowance for credit losses on loans represents Management’s estimate of forecasted credit losses in the loan portfolio based on the current expected credit loss (CECL) model. In evaluating credit risk for loans, Management measures loss potential of the carrying value of loans. As described above, payments received on nonaccrual loans may be applied against the principal balance of the loans until such time as full collection of the remaining recorded balance is expected.
The following table summarizes the allowance for credit losses, chargeoffs and recoveries for the periods indicated:
The Company's allowance for credit losses on loans is maintained at a level considered adequate to provide for expected losses based on historical loss rates adjusted for current and expected conditions over a forecast period. These include conditions unique to individual borrowers, as well as overall loan loss experience, the amount of past due, nonperforming and classified loans, recommendations of regulatory authorities, prevailing and forecasted economic conditions, or credit protection agreements and other factors. Loans that share common risk characteristics are segregated into pools based on common characteristics, which is primarily determined by loan, borrower, or collateral type. Historical loss rates are determined for each pool. Loans that do not share risk characteristics with other loans in the pools are evaluated individually. See Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
The following table presents the allocation of the allowance for credit losses as of December 31 for the years indicated:
[The remainder of this page intentionally left blank]
Management considers the $23.9 million allowance for credit losses on loans to be adequate as a reserve against current expected credit losses in the loan portfolio as of December 31, 2020.
See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information related to the loan portfolio, loan portfolio credit risk, and allowance for credit losses.
Asset/Liability and Market Risk Management
Asset/liability management involves the evaluation, monitoring and management of interest rate risk, market risk, liquidity and funding. The fundamental objective of the Company's management of assets and liabilities is to maximize its economic value while maintaining adequate liquidity and a conservative level of interest rate risk.
Interest Rate Risk
Interest rate risk is a significant market risk affecting the Company. Many factors affect the Company’s exposure to interest rates, such as general economic and financial conditions, customer preferences, historical pricing relationships, and re-pricing characteristics of financial instruments. Financial instruments may mature or re-price at different times. Financial instruments may re-price at the same time but by different amounts. Short-term and long-term market interest rates may change by different amounts. The timing and amount of cash flows of various financial instruments may change as interest rates change. In addition, the changing levels of interest rates may have an impact on loan demand and demand for various deposit products.
The Company’s earnings are affected not only by general economic conditions, but also by the monetary and fiscal policies of the United States government and its agencies, particularly the FOMC. The monetary policies of the FOMC can influence the overall growth of loans, investment securities, and deposits and the level of interest rates earned on loans and investment securities and paid for deposits and other borrowings. The nature and impact of future changes in monetary policies are generally not predictable.
Management attempts to manage interest rate risk while enhancing the net interest margin and net interest income. At times, depending on expected increases or decreases in market interest rates, the relationship between long and short-term interest rates, market conditions and competitive factors, Management may adjust the Company's interest rate risk position. The Company's results of operations and net portfolio values remain subject to changes in interest rates and to fluctuations in the difference between long and short-term interest rates.
Management monitors the Company’s interest rate risk using a purchased simulation model, which is periodically validated using supervisory guidance issued by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, SR 11-7 “Guidance on Model Risk Management.” Management measures its exposure to interest rate risk using both a static and dynamic composition of financial instruments. Within the static composition simulation, cash flows are assumed redeployed into like financial instruments at prevailing rates and yields, except cash flows from PPP loans are reinvested into interest-bearing cash. Within the dynamic composition simulation, Management makes assumptions regarding the expected change in the volume of financial instruments given the assumed change in market interest rates. Both simulations are used to measure expected changes in net interest income assuming various levels of change in market interest rates.
The Company’s asset and liability position was slightly “asset sensitive” at December 31, 2020, depending on the interest rate assumptions applied to each simulation model. An “asset sensitive” position results in a slightly larger change in interest income than in interest expense resulting from application of assumed interest rate changes.
At December 31, 2020, Management’s most recent measurements of estimated changes in net interest income were:
Static Simulation (balance sheet composition unchanged):
Assumed Immediate Parallel Shift in Interest Rates
+1.00%
First Year Change in Net Interest Income
+12.96%
Dynamic Simulation (balance sheet composition changes):
Assumed Change in Interest Rates Over 1 Year
+1.00%
First Year Change in Net Interest Income
+6.90%
Simulation estimates depend on, and will change with, the size and mix of the actual and projected composition of financial instruments at the time of each simulation.
The Company does not currently engage in trading activities or use derivative instruments to manage interest rate risk, even though such activities may be permitted with the approval of the Company's Board of Directors.
Market Risk - Equity Markets
Equity price risk can affect the Company. Preferred or common stock holdings, as permitted by banking regulations, can fluctuate in value. Changes in value of preferred or common stock holdings are recognized in the Company's income statement.
Fluctuations in the Company's common stock price can impact the Company's financial results in several ways. First, the Company has at times repurchased and retired its common stock; the market price paid to retire the Company's common stock affects the level of the Company's shareholders' equity, cash flows and shares outstanding. Second, the Company's common stock price impacts the number of dilutive equivalent shares used to compute diluted earnings per share. Third, fluctuations in the Company's common stock price can motivate holders of options to purchase Company common stock through the exercise of such options thereby increasing the number of shares outstanding and potentially adding volatility to the book tax provision. Finally, the amount of compensation expense and tax deductions associated with share based compensation fluctuates with changes in and the volatility of the Company's common stock price.
Market Risk - Other
Market values of loan collateral can directly impact the level of loan chargeoffs and the provision for credit losses. The financial condition and liquidity of debtors issuing bonds and debtors whose mortgages or other obligations are securitized can directly impact the credit quality of the Company’s investment securities portfolio requiring the Company to establish or increase reserves for credit losses. Other types of market risk, such as foreign currency exchange risk, are not significant in the normal course of the Company's business activities.
Liquidity and Funding
The objective of liquidity management is to manage cash flow and liquidity reserves so that they are adequate to fund the Company's operations and meet obligations and other commitments on a timely basis and at a reasonable cost. The Company achieves this objective through the selection of asset and liability maturity mixes that it believes best meet its needs. The Company's liquidity position is enhanced by its ability to raise additional funds as needed by selling debt securities available-for-sale or borrowing in the wholesale markets.
In recent years, the Company's deposit base has provided the majority of the Company's funding requirements. This relatively stable and low-cost source of funds, along with shareholders' equity, provided 97% of funding for average total assets in the year ended December 31, 2020 and 98% in the year ended December 31, 2019. The stability of the Company’s funding from customer deposits is in part reliant on the confidence clients have in the Company. The Company places a very high priority in maintaining this confidence through conservative credit and capital management practices and by maintaining an appropriate level of liquidity.
Liquidity is further provided by assets such as balances held at the Federal Reserve Bank, investment securities, and amortizing loans. The Company's investment securities portfolio provides a substantial secondary source of liquidity. The Company held $4.6 billion in total investment securities at December 31, 2020. Under certain deposit, borrowing and other arrangements, the Company must hold and pledge investment securities as collateral. At December 31, 2020, such collateral requirements totaled approximately $889 million.
The Bank funded $249 million in PPP loans by crediting loan proceeds to the borrower’s deposit accounts. PPP loans, net of deferred fees and costs, were $187 million at December 31, 2020. The Federal Reserve Bank established the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (“PPPLF”) to provide funding for eligible firms extending PPP loans. Under the PPPLF, the Bank must pledge PPP loans as collateral for PPPLF borrowings. Principal reductions on the pledged PPP loans must immediately result in principal reduction of the PPPLF borrowing.
Liquidity risk can result from the mismatching of asset and liability cash flows, or from disruptions in the financial markets. The Company performs liquidity stress tests on a periodic basis to evaluate the sustainability of its liquidity. Under the stress testing, the Company assumes outflows of funds increase beyond expected levels. Measurement of such heightened outflows considers the composition of the Company’s deposit base, including any concentration of deposits, non-deposit funding such as short-term borrowings, and unfunded lending commitments. The Company evaluates its stock of highly liquid assets to meet the assumed higher levels of outflows. Highly liquid assets include cash and amounts due from other banks from daily transaction settlements, reduced by branch cash needs and Federal Reserve Bank reserve requirements, and investment securities based on regulatory risk-weighting guidelines. Based on the results of the most recent liquidity stress test, Management is satisfied with the liquidity condition of the Bank and the Company. However, no assurance can be given the Bank or Company will not experience a period of reduced liquidity.
Management continually monitors the Company’s cash levels. Loan demand from credit worthy borrowers will be dictated by economic and competitive conditions. The Company aggressively solicits non-interest bearing demand deposits and money market checking deposits, which are the least sensitive to changes in interest rates. The growth of these deposit balances is subject to heightened competition, the success of the Company's sales efforts, delivery of superior customer service, new regulations and market conditions. The Company does not aggressively solicit higher-costing time deposits. Changes in interest rates, most notably rising interest rates, could impact deposit volumes. Depending on economic conditions, interest rate levels, liquidity management and a variety of other conditions, deposit growth may be used to fund loans or purchase investment securities. However, due to possible volatility in economic conditions, competition and political uncertainty, loan demand and levels of customer deposits are not certain. Shareholder dividends are expected to continue subject to the Board's discretion and continuing evaluation of capital levels, earnings, asset quality and other factors.
Westamerica Bancorporation ("Parent Company") is a separate entity apart from the Bank and must provide for its own liquidity. In addition to its operating expenses, the Parent Company is responsible for the payment of dividends declared for its shareholders, and interest and principal on any outstanding debt. The Parent Company currently has no debt. Substantially all of the Parent Company's revenues are obtained from subsidiary dividends and service fees.
The Bank’s dividends paid to the Parent Company, proceeds from the exercise of stock options, and Parent Company cash balances provided adequate cash for the Parent Company to pay shareholder dividends of $44 million each in the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 and retire common stock in the amount of $16 million and $488 thousand, respectively. Payment of dividends to the Parent Company by the Bank is limited under California and Federal laws. The Company believes these regulatory dividend restrictions will not have an impact on the Parent Company's ability to meet its ongoing cash obligations.
Capital Resources
The Company has historically generated high levels of earnings, which provide a means of accumulating capital. The Company's net income as a percentage of average shareholders' equity (“return on equity” or “ROE”) has been 11.3% in the year ended December 31, 2020 and 11.9% in the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company also raises capital as employees exercise stock options. Capital raised through the exercise of stock options was $2.8 million in year ended December 31, 2020 and $14 million in the year ended December 31, 2019.
The Company paid common dividends totaling $44 million each in the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, which represent dividends per common share of $1.64 and $1.63, respectively. The Company's earnings have historically exceeded dividends paid to shareholders. The amount of earnings in excess of dividends provides the Company resources to finance growth and maintain appropriate levels of shareholders' equity. In the absence of profitable growth opportunities, the Company has at times repurchased and retired its common stock as another means to return earnings to shareholders. The Company repurchased and retired 319 thousand shares valued at $16 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 and 8 thousand shares valued at $488 thousand in the year ended December 31, 2019.
The Company's primary capital resource is shareholders' equity, which was $845 million at December 31, 2020 compared with $731 million at December 31, 2019. The Company's ratio of equity to total assets was 12.5% at December 31, 2020 and 13.0% at December 31, 2019.
The Company performs capital stress tests on a periodic basis to evaluate the sustainability of its capital. Under the stress testing, the Company assumes various scenarios such as deteriorating economic and operating conditions, unanticipated asset devaluations, and significant operational lapses. The Company measures the impact of these scenarios on its earnings and capital. Based on the results of the most recent stress tests, Management is satisfied with the capital condition of the Bank and the Company. However, no assurance can be given the Bank or Company will not experience a period of reduced earnings or a reduction in capital from unanticipated events and circumstances.
Capital to Risk-Adjusted Assets
The capital ratios for the Company and the Bank under current regulatory capital standards are presented in the tables below, on the dates indicated. For Common Equity Tier I Capital, Tier 1 Capital and Total Capital, the minimum percentage required for regulatory capital adequacy purposes include a 2.5% “capital conservation buffer.”
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued an update to the accounting standards for credit losses known as the "Current Expected Credit Losses" (CECL) methodology, which replaced the existing incurred loss methodology for certain financial assets. The Company adopted the CECL methodology effective January 1, 2020, which involved an implementing accounting entry to retained earnings on a net-of-tax basis. The adoption of the CECL methodology did not have a material adverse day-one impact to capital ratios and the Company did not adopt the phase in regulatory capital relief. See Note 1 to consolidated financial statements, “Recently Adopted Accounting Standards” for more information on the CECL methodology.
PPP loans are zero percent risk weighted for regulatory capital purposes; average PPP loans of $228 million did not affect regulatory capital ratios. The Leverage ratio would have been approximately 0.3% higher for both the Company and the Bank without PPP loans. To the extent funding of PPP loans is through excess cash balances or PPPLF borrowings, the Leverage ratio is unaffected. However, PPP loans funded by increased non-PPPLF borrowings reduces the leverage ratio.
The Company and the Bank routinely project capital levels by analyzing forecasted earnings, credit quality, shareholder dividends, asset volumes, share repurchase activity, stock option exercise proceeds, and other factors. Based on current capital projections, the Company and the Bank expect to maintain regulatory capital levels in excess of the minimum required to be considered well-capitalized under the prompt corrective action framework while continuing to pay quarterly dividends to shareholders. No assurance can be given that changes in capital management plans will not occur.
Deposit Categories
The Company primarily attracts deposits from local businesses and professionals, as well as through retail savings and checking accounts, and, to a more limited extent, certificates of deposit.
The following table summarizes the Company’s average daily amount of deposits and the rates paid for the periods indicated:
Deposit Distribution and Average Rates Paid
(1) The rates for total deposits reflect the value of noninterest-bearing deposits.
The Company’s strategy includes building the value of its deposit base by building balances of lower-costing deposits and avoiding reliance on higher-costing time deposits. Average balances of higher costing time deposits declined 24% to $164 million from 2018 to 2020. The Company’s average balances of checking and savings accounts represented 97% of average balances of total deposits in 2020 compared with 96% in 2019 and 2018.
Total time deposits were $156 million and $169 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The following table sets forth, by time remaining to maturity, the Company’s total domestic time deposits. The Company has no foreign time deposits.
Time Deposits Maturity Distribution
The following sets forth, by time remaining to maturity, the Company’s domestic time deposits in amounts of $100 thousand or more:
Time Deposits $100,000 or more Maturity Distribution
Short-term Borrowings
The following table sets forth the short-term borrowings of the Company:
Short-Term Borrowings Distribution
Further detail of federal funds purchased and other borrowed funds is as follows:
Financial Ratios
The following table shows key financial ratios for the periods indicated:
[The remainder of this page intentionally left blank]