ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is a supplement to and should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and related notes. This section provides additional information regarding our businesses, current developments, results of operations, cash flows, financial condition, contractual commitments and critical accounting policies.
A discussion of our results of operations and liquidity for fiscal 2019 compared to fiscal 2018 can be found under Item 7 in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed on February 27, 2020, which is available free of charge on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and our Investor Relations website at ir.corporate.discovery.com.
BUSINESS OVERVIEW
We are a global media company that provides content across multiple distribution platforms, including linear platforms such as pay-TV, FTA and broadcast television, our authenticated GO applications, digital distribution arrangements, content licensing arrangements and DTC subscription products. For a discussion of our global portfolio of networks and joint ventures see our business overview set forth in Item 1, “Business” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our content spans genres including survival, natural history, exploration, sports, general entertainment, home, food, travel, heroes, adventure, crime and investigation, health and kids. We have an extensive library of content and own most rights to our content and footage, which enables us to leverage our library to quickly launch brands and services into new markets and on new platforms. Our content can be re-edited and updated in a cost-effective manner to provide topical versions of subject matter that can be utilized around the world on a variety of platforms.
We aim to invest in high-quality content for our networks and brands with the objective of building viewership, optimizing distribution revenue, capturing advertising revenue, and creating or repositioning branded channels and business to sustain long-term growth and occupy a desired content niche with strong consumer appeal. Our strategy is to maximize the distribution, ratings and profit potential of each of our branded networks. In addition to growing distribution and advertising revenues for our branded networks, we have extended content distribution across new platforms, including brand-aligned websites, online streaming, mobile devices, VOD, and broadband channels, which provide promotional platforms for our television content and serve as additional outlets for advertising and distribution revenue. Audience ratings are a key driver in generating advertising revenue and creating demand on the part of cable television operators, DTH satellite operators, telecommunication service providers, and other content distributors who deliver our content to their customers.
Although we utilize certain brands and content globally, we classify our operations in two reportable segments: U.S. Networks, consisting principally of domestic television networks and digital content services, and International Networks, consisting primarily of international television networks and digital content services. Our segment presentation aligns with our management structure and the financial information management uses to make decisions about operating matters, such as the allocation of resources and business performance assessments. For further discussion of financial information for our segments and the geographical areas in which we do business, our content development activities, and revenues see our business overview set forth in Item 1, “Business” and Note 23 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Impact of COVID-19
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak to be a global pandemic. COVID-19 continues to spread throughout the world, and the duration and severity of its effects and associated economic disruption remain uncertain. Restrictions on social and commercial activity in an effort to contain the virus have had, and are expected to continue to have, a significant adverse impact upon many sectors of the U.S. and global economy, including the media industry. We continue to closely monitor the impact of COVID-19 on all aspects of our business and geographies, including the impact on our customers, employees, suppliers, vendors, distribution and advertising partners, production facilities, and various other third parties.
Beginning in the second quarter of 2020, demand for our advertising products and services decreased due to economic disruptions from limitations on social and commercial activity. These economic disruptions and the resulting effect on the Company slightly eased during the second half of 2020, but the pandemic continued to impact demand through the end of 2020 and this decreased demand is expected to continue into 2021. Many of our third-party production partners that were shut down during most of the second quarter of 2020 due to COVID-19 restrictions came back online in the third quarter of 2020 and, as a result, we have incurred additional costs to comply with various governmental regulations and implement certain safety measures for our employees, talent, and partners. Additionally, certain sporting events that we have rights to were cancelled or postponed, thereby eliminating or deferring the related revenues and expenses, including the Tokyo 2020 Olympic Games, which were postponed to 2021. The postponement of the Olympic Games deferred both Olympic-related revenues and significant expenses from fiscal year 2020 to fiscal year 2021.
In response to the impact of the pandemic, we employed and continue to employ innovative production and programming strategies, including producing content filmed by our on-air talent and seeking viewer feedback on which content to air. We continue to pursue a number of cost savings initiatives which began during the third and fourth quarters of 2020 and believe will offset a portion of anticipated revenue losses and deferrals, through the implementation of travel, marketing, production and other operating cost reductions, including personnel reductions, restructurings and resource reallocations to align our expense structure to ongoing changes within the industry. We also implemented remote work arrangements effective mid-March 2020 and, to date, these arrangements have not materially affected our ability to operate our business.
In addition, we implemented several measures to preserve sufficient liquidity in the near term. During March 2020, we drew down $500 million under our $2.5 billion revolving credit facility to increase our cash position and maximize flexibility in light of the current uncertainty surrounding the impact of COVID-19. In addition, in April 2020, we entered into an amendment to our revolving credit facility, which increased flexibility under our financial covenants and issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of senior notes due May 2030 and $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes due May 2050. The proceeds from the notes were used to fund a tender offer for $1.5 billion of certain Senior Notes with maturities ranging from 2021 through 2023 and to repay the $500 million outstanding under our revolving credit facility.
In light of the impact of COVID-19, we assessed goodwill, other intangibles, deferred tax assets, programming assets, and accounts receivable for recoverability based upon latest estimates and judgments with respect to expected future operating results, ultimate usage of content and latest expectations with respect to expected credit losses. We recorded goodwill and other intangible assets impairment charges of $124 million for our Asia-Pacific reporting unit during 2020. Adjustments to reflect increased expected credit losses were not material. Further, hedged transactions were assessed and we have concluded such transactions remain probable of occurrence. Due to significant uncertainty surrounding the impact of COVID-19, management’s judgments could change in the future. The effects of the pandemic may have further negative impacts on our financial position, results of operations, and cash flows. However, the current level of uncertainty over the economic and operational impacts of COVID-19 means the related financial impact cannot be reasonably and fully estimated at this time.
The nature and extent of COVID-19’s effects on our operations and results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning the severity and the extent of future surges of COVID-19, vaccine distribution and other actions to contain the virus or treat its impact, among others. We will continue to monitor COVID-19 and its impact on our business results and financial condition. Our consolidated financial statements reflect management’s latest estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and related disclosures as of the date of the consolidated financial statements and reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting periods presented. Actual results may differ significantly from these estimates and assumptions.
In the United States, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was enacted on March 27, 2020, and the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 was enacted on December 27, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we do not expect the CARES Act or the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 to have a material effect on our financial position and results of operations. We continue to monitor other relief measures taken by the U.S. and other governments around the world.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Items Impacting Comparability
The impact of exchange rates on our business is an important factor in understanding period-to-period comparisons of our results. For example, our international revenues are favorably impacted as the U.S. dollar weakens relative to other foreign currencies, and unfavorably impacted as the U.S. dollar strengthens relative to other foreign currencies. We believe the presentation of results on a constant currency basis (ex-FX), in addition to results reported in accordance with GAAP provides useful information about our operating performance because the presentation ex-FX excludes the effects of foreign currency volatility and highlights our core operating results. The presentation of results on a constant currency basis should be considered in addition to, but not a substitute for, measures of financial performance reported in accordance with GAAP.
The ex-FX change represents the percentage change on a period-over-period basis adjusted for foreign currency impacts. The ex-FX change is calculated as the difference between the current year amounts translated at a baseline rate, which is a spot rate for each of our currencies determined early in the fiscal year as part of our forecasting process (the “2020 Baseline Rate”), and the prior year amounts translated at the same 2020 Baseline Rate. In addition, consistent with the assumption of a constant currency environment, our ex-FX results exclude the impact of our foreign currency hedging activities, as well as realized and unrealized foreign currency transaction gains and losses. Results on a constant currency basis, as we present them, may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
Consolidated Results of Operations - 2020 vs. 2019
Our consolidated results of operations for 2020 and 2019 were as follows (in millions).
NM - Not meaningful
Revenues
Our advertising revenue is generated across multiple platforms and consists of consumer advertising, which is sold primarily on a national basis in the U.S. and on a pan-regional or local-language feed basis outside the U.S. Advertising contracts generally have a term of one year or less. Advertising revenue is dependent upon a number of factors, including the stage of development of television markets, the popularity of FTA television, the number of subscribers to our channels, viewership demographics, the popularity of our content and our ability to sell commercial time over a group of channels. Revenue from advertising is subject to seasonality, market-based variations, the mix in sales of commercial time between the upfront and scatter markets, and general economic conditions. Advertising revenue is typically highest in the second and fourth quarters. In some cases, advertising sales are subject to ratings guarantees that require us to provide additional advertising time if the guaranteed audience levels are not achieved. We also generate revenue from the sale of advertising through our digital products on a stand-alone basis and as part of advertising packages with our television networks.
Advertising revenue decreased 8% in 2020. Excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, advertising revenue decreased 7%. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decline in demand stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic at both U.S. and International Networks.
Distribution revenue consists principally of fees from affiliates for distributing our linear networks, supplemented by revenue earned from SVOD content licensing and other emerging forms of digital distribution. The largest component of distribution revenue is comprised of linear distribution services for rights to our networks from cable, DTH satellite and telecommunication service providers. We have contracts with distributors representing most cable and satellite service providers around the world, including the largest operators in the U.S. and major international distributors. Distribution revenues are largely dependent on the rates negotiated in the agreements, the number of subscribers that receive our networks or content, the number of platforms covered in the distribution agreement, and the market demand for the content that we provide. From time to time, renewals of multi-year carriage agreements include significant year one market adjustments to re-set subscriber rates, which then increase at rates lower than the initial increase in the following years. In some cases, we have provided distributors launch incentives, in the form of cash payments or free periods, to carry our networks. Distribution revenue also includes fees charged for bulk content arrangements and other subscription services for episodic content. These digital distribution revenues are impacted by the quantity, as well as the quality, of the content we provide.
As reported and excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, distribution revenue increased 1% in 2020 primarily attributable to changes in contractual affiliate rates at U.S. Networks and International Networks.
Other revenue decreased 16% in 2020. Excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, other revenue decreased 17%.
Costs of Revenues
Our principal component of costs of revenues is content expense. Content expense includes television series, television specials, films, sporting events and digital products. The costs of producing a content asset and bringing that asset to market consist of film costs, participation costs, exploitation costs and manufacturing costs.
As reported and excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, costs of revenues increased 1% in 2020 primarily attributable to increases in content amortization from investments to support our next generation initiatives at U.S. Networks.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist principally of employee costs, marketing costs, research costs, occupancy and back office support fees. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased 2% in 2020. Excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, selling, general and administrative decreased 1%. The decrease was primarily attributable to a reduction in travel costs as a result of COVID-19 and lower marketing-related expenses, partially offset by an increase in personnel costs to support our next generation platforms, including discovery+.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense includes depreciation of fixed assets and amortization of finite-lived intangible assets. As reported and excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, depreciation and amortization increased 1% in 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in capital expenditures.
Impairment of Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets was $124 million and $155 million in 2020 and 2019.
Restructuring and Other Charges
Restructuring and other charges were $91 million and $26 million in 2020 and 2019. Restructuring and other charges primarily include employee termination costs and other cost reduction efforts.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense decreased 4% in 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to a lower average debt balance in 2020, a more favorable interest rate profile on our outstanding senior notes, and incremental interest income related to the change in fair value of our cross-currency swaps.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
In 2020, we repurchased $1.5 billion aggregate principal amount of DCL's and Scripps Networks' senior notes. The repurchase resulted in a loss on extinguishment of debt of $76 million. The loss included $67 million of net premiums to par value and $9 million of other charges.
Loss from Equity Investees, net
We reported losses from our equity method investees of $105 million in 2020 compared to losses of $2 million in 2019. The changes are attributable to the Company's share of earnings and losses from its equity investees.
Other Income (Expense), net
The table below presents the details of other income (expense), net (in millions).
Income Taxes
The following table reconciles our effective income tax rate to the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate.
Income tax expense was $373 million and $81 million, and our effective tax rate was 22% and 4% for 2020 and 2019. The increase in income tax expense in 2020 was primarily attributable to the discrete, one-time, non-cash deferred tax benefit of $445 million from legal entity restructurings that was recorded in 2019. Additionally, the increase in income tax expense in 2020 was attributable to an increase in provision for uncertain tax positions and an increase in the effect of foreign operations. Those increases were partially offset by a decrease in pre-tax book income, a tax benefit from a favorable multi-year state resolution, and a favorable deferred tax adjustment in the U.S. that was recorded in 2020.
Segment Results of Operations - 2020 vs. 2019
We evaluate the operating performance of our operating segments based on financial measures such as revenues and Adjusted OIBDA. Adjusted OIBDA is defined as operating income excluding: (i) employee share-based compensation, (ii) depreciation and amortization, (iii) restructuring and other charges, (iv) certain impairment charges, (v) gains and losses on business and asset dispositions, (vi) certain inter-segment eliminations related to production studios, (vii) third-party transaction costs directly related to the acquisition and integration of Scripps Networks and other transactions, and (viii) other items impacting comparability, such as the non-cash settlement of a withholding tax claim. We use this measure to assess the operating results and performance of our segments, perform analytical comparisons, identify strategies to improve performance, and allocate resources to each segment. We believe Adjusted OIBDA is relevant to investors because it allows them to analyze the operating performance of each segment using the same metric management uses. We exclude share-based compensation, restructuring and other charges, certain impairment charges, gains and losses on business and asset dispositions, and acquisition and integration costs from the calculation of Adjusted OIBDA due to their impact on comparability between periods. We also exclude the depreciation of fixed assets and amortization of intangible assets, as these amounts do not represent cash payments in the current reporting period. Certain corporate expenses and inter-segment eliminations related to production studios are excluded from segment results to enable executive management to evaluate segment performance based upon the decisions of segment executives.
Adjusted OIBDA should be considered in addition to, but not a substitute for, operating income, net income and other measures of financial performance reported in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”).
The table below presents our Adjusted OIBDA by segment, with a reconciliation of consolidated net income available to Discovery, Inc. to Adjusted OIBDA (in millions).
The table below presents the calculation of Adjusted OIBDA (in millions).
U.S. Networks
The table below presents, for our U.S. Networks segment, revenues by type, certain operating expenses, and Adjusted OIBDA (in millions).
Revenues
Advertising revenue decreased 5% in 2020 primarily attributable to softer demand stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic, secular declines in the pay-TV ecosystem and, to a lesser extent, lower overall ratings and a decline in inventory, partially offset by increases in pricing and the continued monetization of content offerings on our next generation platforms (such as our GO suite of TVE applications and DTC subscription products).
Distribution revenue increased 4% in 2020 primarily attributable to increases in contractual affiliate rates and certain non-recurring items, partially offset by a decline in linear subscribers. Excluding these non-recurring items, distribution revenue increased 3% in 2020. Total portfolio subscribers at December 31, 2020 were 5% lower than at December 31, 2019, while subscribers to our fully distributed networks were 3% lower than the prior year.
Other revenue decreased $23 million in 2020.
Costs of Revenues
Costs of revenues increased 2% in 2020 primarily attributable to increases in content amortization from investments to support our next generation initiatives, partially offset by a reduction in production projects as a result of COVID-19 and a non-recurring reserve release established in purchase accounting. Content expense was $1.6 billion and $1.5 billion in 2020 and 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased 4% in 2020 primarily attributable to a reduction in travel costs as a result of COVID-19 and lower marketing-related expenses, partially offset by an increase in personnel costs to support our next generation platforms, including discovery+.
Adjusted OIBDA
Adjusted OIBDA decreased 3% in 2020.
International Networks
The following table presents, for our International Networks segment, revenues by type, certain operating expenses, and Adjusted OIBDA (in millions).
Revenues
Advertising revenue decreased 13% in 2020. Excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, advertising revenue decreased 12%. The decreases were attributable to a decline in demand stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic and the discontinuation of pay-TV distribution with certain European operators.
Distribution revenue decreased 4% in 2020. Excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, distribution revenue decreased 3%. The decreases were primarily attributable to lower contractual affiliate rates, the discontinuation of pay-TV distribution with certain European operators, and a disruption in the number of sporting events in Europe due to COVID-19, partially offset by higher next generation revenues due to subscriber growth.
Other revenue decreased $18 million in 2020. Excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, other revenue decreased $22 million.
Costs of Revenues
As reported and excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, costs of revenues decreased 1% in 2020. The decreases were primarily attributable to a reduction in the number of sporting events in Europe due to COVID-19. Content expense, excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, was $1.3 billion for 2020 and 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased 2% in 2020. Excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, selling, general, and administrative expenses increased 3%. The increases were primarily attributable to higher personnel costs to support our next generation platforms, partially offset by a reduction in travel costs as a result of COVID-19.
Adjusted OIBDA
Adjusted OIBDA decreased 32% in 2020. Excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, adjusted OIBDA decreased 28%.
Corporate, Inter-segment Eliminations, and Other
The following table presents our unallocated corporate amounts including certain operating expenses, and Adjusted OIBDA (in millions).
Corporate operations primarily consist of executive management, administrative support services, substantially all of our share-based compensation and transaction and integration costs related to the acquisition of Scripps Networks and other transactions.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity
Sources of Cash
Historically, we have generated a significant amount of cash from operations. During 2020, we funded our working capital needs primarily through cash flows from operations. As of December 31, 2020, we had $2.1 billion of cash and cash equivalents on hand. We are a well-known seasoned issuer and have the ability to conduct registered offerings of securities, including debt securities, common stock and preferred stock, on short notice, subject to market conditions. Access to sufficient capital from the public market is not assured. We also have a $2.5 billion revolving credit facility and commercial paper program described below.
Beginning in February 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic began adversely affecting the availability of borrowings in the commercial paper market. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we implemented several measures that we believed would preserve sufficient liquidity in the near term in response to the impact of COVID-19, as discussed further below.
•Debt
2020 Senior Notes Activity
During 2020, we commenced five separate private offers to exchange (the “Exchange Offers”) any and all of Discovery Communications, LLC's ("DCL"), our wholly-owned subsidiary, outstanding 5.000% Senior Notes due 2037, 6.350% Senior Notes due 2040, 4.950% Senior Notes due 2042, 4.875% Senior Notes due 2043 and 5.200% Senior Notes due 2047 (collectively, the “Old Notes”) for one new series of DCL 4.000% Senior Notes due September 2055 (the “New Notes”). We completed the Exchange Offers in September 2020, by exchanging $1.4 billion aggregate principal amount of the Old Notes validly tendered and accepted by us pursuant to the Exchange Offers, for $1.7 billion aggregate principal amount of the New Notes (before debt discount of $318 million). The New Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by us and Scripps Networks on an unsecured and unsubordinated basis. The Exchange Offers were accounted for as a debt modification and, as a result, third-party issuance costs totaling $11 million were expensed as incurred.
Also during 2020, we completed offers to purchase for cash (the “Cash Offers”) the Old Notes. Approximately $22 million aggregate principal amount of the Old Notes were validly tendered and accepted for purchase by us pursuant to the Cash Offers, for total cash consideration of $27 million, plus accrued interest. The Cash Offers resulted in a loss on extinguishment of debt of $5 million.
Finally, during 2020, DCL issued $2.0 billion aggregate principal amount of senior notes due in 2030 and 2050. All of DCL's outstanding senior notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on an unsecured and unsubordinated basis by Discovery and Scripps Networks and contain certain covenants, events of default and other customary provisions. DCL used the proceeds from the offering to fund a tender offer for $1.5 billion aggregate principal amount of DCL's and Scripps Networks' senior notes, which resulted in a loss on extinguishment of debt of $71 million, and to repay the $500 million outstanding under our revolving credit facility described below.
2019 Senior Notes Activity
During 2019, DCL issued $1.5 billion aggregate principal of senior notes (the "2029 Notes and 2049 Notes").
Revolving Credit Facility and Commercial Paper
We have access to a $2.5 billion revolving credit facility. Borrowing capacity under this credit facility is reduced by the outstanding borrowings under our commercial paper program. During March 2020, we drew down $500 million under the revolving credit facility to increase our cash position and maximize flexibility in light of the uncertainty surrounding the impact of COVID-19 and such amount was repaid during the second quarter of 2020. All obligations of DCL and the other borrowers under the revolving credit facility are unsecured and are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by Discovery.
The credit agreement governing the revolving credit facility (the “Credit Agreement”) contains customary representations, warranties and events of default, as well as affirmative and negative covenants. In the second quarter of 2020, to preserve flexibility in the current environment, we amended certain provisions of the Credit Agreement, including modifying the financial covenants to reset the Maximum Consolidated Leverage Ratio. (See Note 8 to the accompany consolidated financial statements.) As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants and there were no events of default under the Credit Agreement.
Under our commercial paper program and subject to market conditions, DCL may issue unsecured commercial paper notes guaranteed by Discovery and Scripps Networks from time to time up to an aggregate principal amount outstanding at any given time of $1.5 billion, including up to $500 million of Euro-denominated borrowings. The maturities of these notes vary but may not exceed 397 days. The notes may be issued at a discount or at par, and interest rates vary based on market conditions and the credit rating assigned to the notes at the time of issuance. As of December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding commercial paper borrowings. Borrowings under the commercial paper program reduce the borrowing capacity under the revolving credit facility described above.
Uses of Cash
Our primary uses of cash include the creation and acquisition of new content, capital expenditures, business acquisitions, repurchases of our capital stock, income taxes, personnel costs, principal and interest payments on our outstanding senior notes, and funding for various equity method and other investments, including next generation initiatives.
•Content Acquisition
We plan to continue to invest significantly in the creation and acquisition of new content. Additional information regarding contractual commitments to acquire content is set forth in "Commitments and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements" in this Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations."
•Capital Expenditures and Investments in Next Generation Initiatives
We effected capital expenditures of $402 million in 2020, including amounts capitalized to support our next generation platforms, such as discovery+. In addition, we expect to continue to incur significant costs to develop and market discovery+ in the future.
•Investments and Business Combinations
We made business acquisitions of $39 million and $73 million in 2020 and 2019.
During 2020, we purchased $250 million of time deposit investments.
Our uses of cash have included investments in various equity investments. We provide funding to our investees from time to time. We contributed $181 million and $254 million in 2020 and 2019, for investments in and advances to our investees.
•Redeemable Noncontrolling Interest and Noncontrolling Interest
Due to business combinations, we also have redeemable equity balances of $383 million, which may require the use of cash in the event holders of noncontrolling interests put their interests to the Company beginning in 2021. Distributions to redeemable noncontrolling interests and noncontrolling interests totaled $254 million and $250 million in 2020 and 2019.
•Common Stock Repurchases
Historically, we have funded our stock repurchases through a combination of cash on hand, cash generated by operations and the issuance of debt. In February 2020, our Board of Directors authorized additional stock repurchases of up to $2 billion upon completion of our existing $1 billion authorization announced in May 2019. Under the new stock repurchase authorization, management is authorized to purchase shares from time to time through open market purchases at prevailing prices or privately negotiated purchases subject to market conditions and other factors. (See Note 12 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.) During 2020 and 2019, we repurchased $969 million and $633 million of our Series C common stock.
•Income Taxes and Interest
We expect to continue to make payments for income taxes and interest on our outstanding senior notes. During 2020 and 2019, we made cash payments of $641 million and $562 million for income taxes and $673 million and $708 million for interest on our outstanding debt.
•Debt
2020 Debt Activity
In addition to the tender offers for $1.5 billion aggregate principal amount of DCL's and Scripps Networks' senior notes and repayment of the $500 million outstanding under our revolving credit facility described above, during 2020 we repaid $600 million of senior notes as they came due. We have an additional $335 million of senior notes coming due in June 2021, which will be redeemed on March 21, 2021.
2019 Debt Activity
During 2019, we used the net proceeds from the issuance of the 2029 Notes and 2049 Notes to redeem and repurchase $1.3 billion aggregate principal amount of senior notes. The repayment resulted in a loss on extinguishment of debt of $23 million.
Also during 2019, we redeemed $411 million aggregate principal senior notes, made open market bond repurchases of $55 million, resulting in a loss on extinguishment of debt of $5 million, and redeemed $900 million of senior notes and floating rate notes as they came due.
Cash Flows
Changes in cash and cash equivalents were as follows (in millions).
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities was $2.7 billion and $3.4 billion in 2020 and 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in net income excluding non-cash items and, to a lesser extent, a negative fluctuation in working capital activity, primarily due to the timing of payments, partially offset by an increase in receivables collected.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $703 million and $438 million in 2020 and 2019. The increase in cash used in investing activities was primarily driven by the purchase of $250 million in time deposit investments in 2020 and, to a lesser extent, an increase in purchases of property and equipment to support our next generation platforms, including discovery+, partially offset by a reduction in investments in and advances to equity investments.
Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities was $1.5 billion and $2.4 billion in 2020 and 2019. The decrease in cash used in financing activities was primarily attributable to lower net repayments and incremental borrowings of senior notes and the change in net activity under the revolving credit facility, partially offset by an increase in repurchases of stock.
Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, capital resources were comprised of the following (in millions).
We expect that our cash balance, cash generated from operations and availability under the Credit Agreement will be sufficient to fund our cash needs for the next twelve months. Our borrowing costs and access to capital markets can be affected by short and long-term debt ratings assigned by independent rating agencies which are based, in part, on our performance as measured by credit metrics such as interest coverage and leverage ratios.
As of December 31, 2020, we held $161 million of our $2.1 billion of cash and cash equivalents in our foreign subsidiaries. The 2017 Tax Act features a participation exemption regime with current taxation of certain foreign income and imposes a mandatory repatriation toll tax on unremitted foreign earnings. Notwithstanding the U.S. taxation of these amounts, we intend to continue to reinvest these funds outside of the U.S. Our current plans do not demonstrate a need to repatriate them to the U.S. However, if these funds are needed in the U.S., we would be required to accrue and pay non-U.S. taxes to repatriate them. The determination of the amount of unrecognized deferred income tax liability with respect to these undistributed foreign earnings is not practicable.
Summarized Guarantor Financial Information
Basis of Presentation
Each of the Company, DCL, Discovery Communications Holding LLC (“DCH”) and/or Scripps Networks has the ability to conduct registered offerings of debt securities under the Company’s shelf registration statement. As of December 31, 2020, all of the Company’s outstanding registered senior notes have been issued by DCL, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company and guaranteed by the Company and Scripps Networks, except for $32 million of senior notes outstanding as of December 31, 2020 that have been issued by Scripps Networks and are not guaranteed. (See Note 8 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.) DCL primarily includes the Discovery Channel and TLC networks in the U.S. DCL is a wholly owned subsidiary of DCH. The Company wholly owns DCH through a 33 1/3% direct ownership interest and a 66 2/3% indirect ownership interest through Discovery Holding Company (“DHC”), a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company. Scripps Networks is 100% owned by the Company.
The tables below present the summarized financial information as combined for Discovery, Inc. (the “Parent”), Scripps Networks and DCL (collectively, the “Obligors”). All guarantees of DCL's senior notes (the “Note Guarantees”) are full and unconditional, joint and several and unsecured, and cover all payment obligations arising under the senior notes. DCH currently is not an issuer or guarantor of any securities and therefore is not included in the summarized financial information included herein.
Note Guarantees issued by Scripps Networks or any subsidiary of the Parent that in the future issues a Note Guarantee (each, a “Subsidiary Guarantor”) may be released and discharged (i) concurrently with any direct or indirect sale or disposition of such Subsidiary Guarantor or any interest therein, (ii) at any time that such Subsidiary Guarantor is released from all of its obligations under its guarantee of payment by DCL, (iii) upon the merger or consolidation of any Subsidiary Guarantor with and into DCL or the Parent or another Subsidiary Guarantor, or upon the liquidation of such Subsidiary Guarantor and (iv) other customary events constituting a discharge of the Obligors’ obligations.
Summarized Financial Information
During 2020, the Company early adopted Rule 13-01 of the SEC's Regulation S-X. In lieu of providing separate unaudited financial statements for the Parent and Scripps Networks as a Subsidiary Guarantor, the Company has included the accompanying summarized combined financial information of the Obligors after the elimination of intercompany transactions and balances among the Obligors and the elimination of equity in earnings from and investments in any subsidiary of the Parent that is a non-guarantor (in millions).
Additional information regarding the changes in our outstanding indebtedness and the significant terms and provisions of our revolving credit facility and outstanding indebtedness is discussed in Note 8 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
COMMITMENTS AND OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, our significant contractual obligations, including related payments due by period, were as follows (in millions).
The above table does not include certain long-term obligations as the timing or the amount of the payments cannot be predicted. The current portion of the liability for cash-settled share-based compensation awards was $37 million as of December 31, 2020. Additionally, reserves for unrecognized tax benefits have been excluded from the above table because we are unable to predict reasonably the ultimate amount or timing of settlement. Our unrecognized tax benefits totaled $348 million as of December 31, 2020.
The above table also does not include DCL's revolving credit facility that allows DCL and certain designated foreign subsidiaries of DCL to borrow up to $2.5 billion, including a $100 million sublimit for the issuance of standby letters of credit and a $50 million sublimit for Euro-denominated swing line loans. Borrowing capacity under this agreement is reduced by the outstanding borrowings under the commercial paper program. As of December 31, 2020, the revolving credit facility agreement provided for a maturity date of August 2022 and the option for up to two additional 364-day renewal periods.
From time to time we may provide our equity method investees additional funding that has not been committed to as of December 31, 2020 based on unforeseen investee opportunities or cash flow needs.
Long-term Debt
Principal payments on long-term debt reflect the repayment of our outstanding senior notes, at face value, assuming repayment will occur upon maturity. Interest payments on our outstanding senior notes are projected based on their contractual rate and maturity.
Finance Lease Obligations
We acquire satellite transponders and other equipment through multi-year finance lease arrangements. Principal payments on finance lease obligations reflect amounts due under our finance lease agreements. Interest payments on our outstanding finance lease obligations are based on the stated or implied rate in our finance lease agreements.
Operating Lease Obligations
We obtain office space and equipment under multi-year lease arrangements. Most operating leases are not cancelable prior to their expiration. Payments for operating leases represent the amounts due under the agreements assuming the agreements are not canceled prior to their expiration.
Purchase Obligations
Content purchase obligations include commitments and liabilities associated with third-party producers and sports associations for content that airs on our television networks. Production contracts generally require: purchase of a specified number of episodes; payments over the term of the license; and include both programs that have been delivered and are available for airing and programs that have not yet been produced or sporting events that have not yet taken place. If the content is ultimately never produced, our commitments expire without obligation. The commitments disclosed above exclude content liabilities recognized on the consolidated balance sheet. We expect to enter into additional production contracts and content licenses to meet our future content needs.
Other purchase obligations include agreements with certain vendors and suppliers for the purchase of goods and services whereby the underlying agreements are enforceable, legally binding and specify all significant terms. Significant purchase obligations include transmission services, television rating services, marketing research, employment contracts, equipment purchases, and information technology and other services. We have contracts that do not require the purchase of fixed or minimum quantities and generally may be terminated with a 30-day to 60-day advance notice without penalty, and are not included in the table above past the 30-day to 60-day advance notice period. Amounts related to employment contracts include base compensation and do not include compensation contingent on future events.
Put Rights
We have granted put rights to certain consolidated subsidiaries, which have been excluded from the table above since we are unable to reasonably predict the ultimate amount or timing of any payment. We recorded the carrying value of the noncontrolling interest in the equity associated with the put rights as a component of redeemable noncontrolling interest in the amount of $383 million. (See Note 11 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.)
Pension Obligations
We sponsor a qualified defined benefit pension plan (“Pension Plan”) that covers certain U.S.-based employees. We also have a non-qualified Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan (“SERP”).
Contractual commitments summarized in the contractual obligations table include payments to meet minimum funding requirements of our Pension Plan in 2021 and estimated benefit payments for our SERP. Payments for the SERP have been estimated over a ten-year period. While benefit payments under these plans are expected to continue beyond 2030, we believe it is not practicable to estimate payments beyond this period.
Noncontrolling Interest
The Food Network and Cooking Channel are operated and organized under the terms of the TV Food Network Partnership (the "Partnership"). We hold interests in the Partnership, along with another noncontrolling owner. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Partnership agreement was extended and specifies a dissolution date of December 31, 2022. If the term of the Partnership is not extended prior to that date, the Partnership agreement permits us, as holder of 80% of the applicable votes, to reconstitute the Partnership and continue its business. If for some reason the Partnership is not continued, it will be required to limit its activities to winding up, settling debts, liquidating assets and distributing proceeds to the partners in proportion to their partnership interests.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no material off-balance sheet arrangements (as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K) that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into transactions with related parties, primarily the Liberty Entities and our equity method investees. Information regarding transactions and amounts with related parties is discussed in Note 21 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
NEW ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
We adopted certain accounting and reporting standards during 2020. Information regarding our adoption of new accounting and reporting standards is discussed in Note 2 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP, which requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and accompanying notes. Management considers an accounting policy to be critical if it is material to reporting our financial condition and results of operations, and if it requires significant judgment and estimates on the part of management in its application. The development and selection of these critical accounting policies have been determined by management and the related disclosures have been reviewed with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors of the Company. We believe the following accounting policies are critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations and involve the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Uncertain Tax Positions
We are subject to income taxes in numerous U.S. and foreign jurisdictions. From time to time, we engage in transactions or takes filing positions in which the tax consequences may be uncertain and may recognize tax liabilities based on estimates of whether additional taxes and interest will be due. We establish a reserve for uncertain tax positions unless we determine that such positions are more likely than not to be sustained upon examination based on their technical merits, including the resolution of any appeals or litigation processes. We include interest and where appropriate, potential penalties, in our tax reserves. This assessment relies on estimates and assumptions and may involve a series of complex judgments about future events including the status and results of income tax audits with the relevant tax authorities. Significant judgment is exercised in evaluating all relevant information, the technical merits of the tax positions, and the accurate measurement of uncertain tax positions when determining the amount of reserve and whether positions taken on our tax returns are more likely than not to be sustained. This also involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions with respect to the potential outcome of positions taken on tax returns that may be reviewed by tax authorities.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill is allocated to our reporting units, which are our operating segments or one level below our operating segments (the component level). Reporting units are determined by the discrete financial information available for the component and whether it is regularly reviewed by segment management. Components are aggregated into a single reporting unit if they share similar economic characteristics. Our reporting units are as follows: U.S. Networks, Europe, Latin America, and Asia-Pacific.
We evaluate our goodwill for impairment annually as of October 1 or earlier upon the occurrence of substantive unfavorable changes in economic conditions, industry trends, costs, cash flows, or ongoing declines in market capitalization. If we believe that as a result of our qualitative assessment it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount, a quantitative impairment test is required. The quantitative impairment test requires significant judgment in determining the fair value of the reporting units. We determine the fair value of our reporting units by using a combination of the income approach, which incorporates the use of the discounted cash flow (“DCF”) method and the market multiple approach, which incorporates the use of EBITDA multiples based on market data. For the DCF method, we use projections specific to the reporting unit, as well as those based on general economic conditions, which require the use of significant estimates and assumptions. Determining fair value specific to each reporting unit requires the Company to exercise judgment when selecting the appropriate discount rates, control premiums, terminal growth rates, assumed tax rates, relevant comparable company earnings multiples and the amount and timing of expected future cash flows, including revenue growth rates and profit margins. The cash flows employed in the DCF analysis for each reporting unit are based on the reporting unit's budget, long range plan, and recent operating performance. Discount rate assumptions are based on an assessment of the risk inherent in the future cash flows of the respective reporting unit and market conditions.
2020 Impairment Analysis
We concluded that the continued impacts of COVID-19 on the operating results of the Europe reporting unit represented a triggering event in the second quarter of 2020. During the second quarter, we performed a quantitative goodwill impairment analysis for our Europe reporting unit using a DCF valuation model. A market-based valuation model was not weighted in the analysis given the significant volatility in the equity markets. Significant judgments and assumptions in the DCF model included the amount and timing of future cash flows, including revenue growth rates, long-term growth rates of 2%, and a discount rate ranging from 10% to 10.5%. The estimated fair value of the Europe reporting unit exceeded its carrying value and, therefore, no impairment was recorded.
Also during the second quarter of 2020, we determined that it was more likely than not that the fair value was greater than the carrying value for all other reporting units with the exception of the Asia-Pacific reporting unit. We performed a quantitative goodwill impairment analysis for the Asia-Pacific reporting unit and determined that the estimated fair value did not exceed its carrying value, which resulted in a pre-tax impairment charge to write-off the remaining $36 million goodwill balance during the second quarter of 2020. The impairment charge was not deductible for tax purposes. Significant judgments and assumptions included the amount and timing of future cash flows, including revenue growth rates, long-term growth rates ranging from 2% to 2.5%, and a discount rate of 11%. The cash flows employed in the DCF analysis for the Asia-Pacific reporting unit were based on the reporting unit’s budget and long-term business plan. The determination of fair value of our Asia-Pacific reporting unit represents a Level 3 fair value measurement in the fair value hierarchy due to its use of internal projections and unobservable measurement inputs. The goodwill impairment charge did not have an impact on the calculation of our financial covenants under our debt arrangements.
During the third quarter of 2020, we realigned our International Networks management reporting structure. As a result, Australia and New Zealand, which were previously included in the Europe reporting unit, are now included in the Asia-Pacific reporting unit, including the associated goodwill. As a result of this realignment, we performed a quantitative goodwill impairment analysis for our Europe and Asia-Pacific reporting units using a DCF valuation model. A market-based valuation model was not weighted in the analysis given the significant volatility in the equity markets. Significant judgments and assumptions in the DCF model included the amount and timing of future cash flows, including revenue growth rates, long-term growth rates of 2% for Europe and 2% to 2.5% for Asia-Pacific, and a discount rate ranging from 10% to 10.5% for Europe and 11% for Asia-Pacific. The estimated fair value of both the Europe and Asia-Pacific reporting units exceeded their carrying values and, therefore, no impairment was recorded.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we performed our annual qualitative goodwill impairment assessment for all reporting units and we determined that it was more likely than not that the fair value of those reporting units exceeded their carrying values, except for our Europe and Asia-Pacific reporting units. Given limited headroom of below 20% in its Europe and Asia-Pacific reporting units during the third quarter of 2020, we performed a quantitative goodwill impairment analysis for each of these reporting units using a DCF valuation model. A market-based valuation model was not weighted in the analysis due to significant volatility in the reporting units' equity markets.
The quantitative goodwill impairment analysis for our Europe reporting unit indicated that the estimated fair value exceeded its carry value by approximately 20% and, therefore, no impairment was recorded. Significant judgments and assumptions included the amount and timing of future cash flows, including revenue growth rates, long-term growth rate of 2%, and discount rates ranging from 10.5% to 11%. We noted that a 1.0% increase in the discount rate and a 0.5% decrease in the long-term growth rate would not have resulted in an impairment loss. As of December 31, 2020, the carrying value of goodwill assigned to the Europe reporting unit was $1.9 billion.
The quantitative impairment analysis for our Asia-Pacific reporting unit indicated that estimated fair value did not exceed its carrying value, which resulted in a pre-tax impairment charge to write-off the remaining $85 million goodwill balance. The impairment was a result of increased cost projections for this region committed to during the fourth quarter of 2020 as part of our global discovery+ rollout strategy. The impairment charge was not deductible for tax purposes. Significant judgments and assumptions included the amount and timing of future cash flows, including revenue growth rates, long-term growth rates ranging from 2% to 2.5%, and a discount rate of 11%. The cash flows employed in the DCF analysis for the Asia-Pacific reporting unit were based on the reporting unit’s budget and long-term business plan. The determination of fair value of our Asia-Pacific reporting unit represents a Level 3 fair value measurement in the fair value hierarchy due to its use of internal projections and unobservable measurement inputs. The goodwill impairment charge did not have an impact on the calculation of our financial covenants under our debt arrangements.
Content Rights
Content rights principally consist of television series, specials, films and sporting events. Costs of produced and coproduced content consist of development costs, acquired production costs, direct production costs, certain production overhead costs and participation costs and is capitalized if we have previously generated revenues from similar content in established markets and the content will be used and revenues will be generated for a period of at least one year.
Linear content amortization expense for each period is recognized based on the revenue forecast model, which approximates the proportion that estimated distribution and advertising revenues for the current period represent in relation to the estimated remaining total lifetime revenues. Digital content amortization for each period is recognized based on estimated viewing patterns as there are no direct revenues to associate to the individual content assets and therefore, number of views is most representative of the use of the title. Judgment is required to determine the useful lives and amortization patterns of our content assets.
Critical assumptions used in determining content amortization include: (i) the grouping of content with similar characteristics, (ii) the application of a quantitative revenue forecast model or viewership model based on the adequacy of historical data, (iii) determining the appropriate historical periods to utilize and the relative weighting of those historical periods in the forecast model, (iv) assessing the accuracy of our forecasts and (v) incorporating secondary streams. We then consider the appropriate application of the quantitative assessment given forecasted content use, expected content investment and market trends. Content use and future revenues may differ from estimates based on changes in expectations related to market acceptance, network affiliate fee rates, advertising demand, the number of cable and satellite television subscribers receiving our networks, the number of subscribers to our digital services, and program usage. Accordingly, we continually review our estimates and planned usage and revise our assumptions if necessary.
Consolidation
We have ownership and other interests in and contractual arrangements with various entities, including corporations, partnerships, and limited liability companies. For each such entity, we evaluate our ownership, other interests and contractual arrangements to determine whether we should consolidate the entity or account for its interest as an investment at inception and upon reconsideration events. As part of its evaluation, we initially determine whether the entity is a variable interest entity ("VIE"). Management evaluates key considerations through a qualitative and quantitative analysis in determining whether an entity is a VIE including whether (i) the entity has sufficient equity to finance its activities without additional financial support from other parties, (ii) the ability or inability to make significant decisions about the entity’s operations, and (iii) the proportionality of voting rights of investors relative to their obligations to absorb the expected losses (or receive the expected returns) of the entity. If the entity is a VIE and if we have a variable interest in the entity, we use judgment in determining if we are the primary beneficiary and are thus required to consolidate the entity. In making this determination, we evaluate whether we or another party involved with the VIE (1) has the power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance and (2) has the obligation to absorb losses of or receive benefits from the VIE that could be significant to the VIE.
If it is concluded that an entity is not a VIE, we consider our proportional voting interests in the entity and consolidate majority-owned subsidiaries in which a controlling financial interest is maintained. A controlling financial interest is determined by majority ownership and the absence of substantive third-party participation rights. Key factors we consider in determining the presence of substantive third-party participation rights include, but are not limited to, control of the board of directors, budget approval or veto rights, or operational rights that significantly impact the economic performance of the business such as programming, creative development, marketing, and selection of key personnel. Ownership interests in unconsolidated entities for which we have significant influence are accounted for as equity method.
Revenue Recognition
As described in Note 2, we generate advertising revenues primarily from advertising sold on our television networks and websites and distribution revenues from fees charged to distributors of its network content, which include cable, direct-to-home satellite, telecommunications and digital service providers and bundled long-term content arrangements, as well as through DTC subscription services.
Revenue contracts with our advertising customers may include multiple distinct performance obligations. For example, linear and digital advertising contracts may include the airing of spots and/or the satisfaction of an audience guarantee. For such contracts, judgment is required in allocating the contract value to the individual performance obligations based on their relative standalone selling prices. Various factors such as prior transactions, rate cards and other market indicators are used to determine the standalone selling price of each performance obligation and accordingly, how much revenue is allocated to each performance obligation. For these contracts, revenue recorded when each performance obligation has been satisfied and value has been transferred to the customer.
A substantial portion of the advertising contracts in the U.S. and certain international markets guarantee the advertiser a minimum audience level that either the program in which their advertisements are aired or the advertisement will reach. These advertising campaigns are considered to represent a single, distinct performance obligation. For such contracts, judgement is required in measuring progress across the Company’s single performance obligation. Various factors such as pricing specific to the channel, daypart and targeted demographic, as well as estimated audience guarantees, are considered in determining how to appropriately measure progress across the campaigns. Revenues are ultimately recognized based on the audience level delivered multiplied by the average price per impression.
See Item 1A, "Risk Factors" for details on all significant risks that could impact our ability to successfully grow our cash flows.
For an in-depth discussion of each of our significant accounting policies, including our critical accounting policies and further information regarding estimates and assumptions involved in their application, see Note 2 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.