ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following presentation should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying Notes thereto of Webster Financial Corporation contained elsewhere in this report. For a comparison of the 2019 results to the 2018 results and other 2018 information not included herein, refer to the "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in the sections captioned "Financial Performance" through "Income Taxes" in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
COVID-19
COVID-19, or the Coronavirus, has continued to cause significant disruptions to the U.S. economy and disrupted banking and other financial activity in the areas in which the Company operates. The broad impact and preventive measures taken to contain or mitigate the outbreak have, and are likely to continue to have, significant negative effects on the U.S. and global economy, employment levels, employee productivity, and financial market conditions. The pandemic may cause increasingly negative effects on the ability of our borrowers to repay outstanding loans, the value of collateral securing loans, demand for loans and other financial services products, and consumer discretionary spending. As a result of these and other consequences, the outbreak has adversely affected our business, results of operations and financial condition. The extent to which COVID-19 will continue to impact our results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time, and include the duration, severity and scope of the outbreak, the actions taken to contain or mitigate its impact, and the pace and extent of economic recovery in the United States and, in particular, in the states in which we operate. COVID-19 vaccines have been developed with promising efficacy and the new administration is setting policies focused on increasing the quantity of vaccine made available and speed with which they are administered. The timing and extent to which these policies have a positive impact are uncertain at this time.
Webster has taken the following actions, through December 31, 2020, to support its employees, customers, and the communities we serve through the following initiatives:
Support for Employees: Webster transitioned to a remote work environment, where possible, with approximately 75% of employees currently working remotely, zero-interest loans were made available to assist employees and their families, expanded recognition programs were launched, and extra cleaning and safety protocols have been put in place for all properties where a slow and cautious return to the workplace is being implemented in compliance with state guidelines;
Support for Customers: Webster instituted a foreclosure moratorium for occupied Webster-owned residential mortgages, modified branch operations, increased deposit limits, waived penalties for early CD withdrawals, and waived or reduced certain fees. In addition, Webster continues to work with customers adversely impacted by COVID-19 through participation in the Small Business Administration Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) where it has funded nearly $1.5 billion in PPP loans to over 10,000 customers. Webster continues to engage with its customers and has provided accommodations through various loan modifications supporting over 2,500 customers; and
Support for Communities: Webster immediately provided nearly $2 million in donations to nonprofit and community organizations in our footprint including Feeding America, American Red Cross, and United Way (CT, RI, MA, NY, WI) to satisfy urgent basic needs brought on by the pandemic.
Information regarding the effects and potential effects of the ongoing Coronavirus pandemic on Webster's business, operating results, and financial condition is further described throughout this MD&A.
Strategic Initiatives
The Company has launched a strategic plan that is expected to drive revenue enhancements and cost saving opportunities across the organization. As these strategic initiatives are implemented, they are expected to drive incremental revenue, reduce costs, and enhance digital capabilities. Significant progress has been made in several areas including,
•Banking center consolidation: In December, the consolidation of 26 banking centers was announced that will drive expense savings beginning in the third quarter of 2021;
•Organization simplification: Organizational actions are underway and will begin delivering benefits in the second quarter of 2021; and
•Process optimization and ancillary spend reduction: Increased discipline around third party spend and redesigning processes to be more efficient; anticipated savings will be delivered throughout 2021.
Costs incurred in 2020 related to these strategic initiatives include $17.9 million in severance, $14.5 million in facilities optimization, and $10.3 million in other project costs. In addition, $4.1 million in debt prepayment penalty and related hedge termination costs were incurred in the fourth quarter of 2020. Additional costs are expected to be incurred in 2021 as the Company continues to implement these actions and additional initiatives.
Results of Operations
The Company's financial position and results of operations as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020 have been significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The economic environment and uncertainty related to the pandemic contributed to the $137.8 million provision for credit losses recognized under the new CECL accounting standard adopted by the Company on January 1, 2020. While the Company has not experienced a significant increase in charge-offs due to the COVID-19 pandemic to-date, the continued uncertainty regarding the severity and duration of the pandemic and related economic effects will continue to affect the Company’s estimate of its allowance for credit losses and resulting provision for credit losses. The Company’s interest income may also be negatively impacted in future periods as the Company continues to work with its affected borrowers to help them manage their financial position, by deferring payments, interest, and fees. Additionally, net interest margin has been reduced generally as a result of the low rate environment. These uncertainties and the resulting economic environment will continue to affect earnings and growth projections which may result in deterioration of asset quality in the Company's loan and investment portfolios, or fair value of other assets.
Selected financial highlights are presented in the following table:
The non-GAAP financial measures identified in the preceding table provide investors with information useful in understanding Webster's financial performance, performance trends and financial position. These measures are used by management for internal planning and forecasting purposes, as well as by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties to compare peer company operating performance. Management believes this presentation, together with the accompanying reconciliations provides a complete understanding of the factors and trends affecting the Company's business and allows investors to view its performance in a similar manner. Tangible book value per common share represents shareholders’ equity less preferred stock and goodwill and intangible assets divided by common shares outstanding at the end of the period. Tangible common equity ratio represents shareholders’ equity less preferred stock and goodwill and intangible assets divided by total assets less goodwill and intangible assets. Return on average tangible common shareholders' equity measures the Company’s net income available to common shareholders, adjusted for the tax-effected amortization of intangible assets, as a percentage of average shareholders’ equity less average preferred stock and average goodwill and intangible assets. The efficiency ratio, which measures the costs expended to generate a dollar of revenue, is calculated excluding certain non-operational items. These non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered a substitute for GAAP basis measures and results. Because non-GAAP financial measures are not standardized, it may not be possible to compare these measures with other companies that present measures having the same or similar names.
The following tables reconcile non-GAAP financial measures with financial measures defined by GAAP:
(1)Other expense (non-GAAP) includes business and facility optimization charges for the periods 2019 and prior. In addition, there was a $42.7 million charge for strategic initiatives in 2020, a $10.0 million charge relating to additional FDIC premiums in 2018, and a $3.8 million charge for debt prepayment penalties in 2017.
(2)Other (non-GAAP) represents low income housing credits for all periods, and also includes $3.7 million for loss on hedge terminations and $5.5 million for a discrete customer derivative fair value adjustment in 2020.
The following table presents daily average balances, interest, yield/rate, and net interest margin on a fully tax-equivalent basis:
(1)For purposes of yield/rate computation, unrealized gain (loss) balances on available-for-sale securities and senior fixed-rate notes hedges are excluded.
(2)Interest-bearing deposits are a component of cash and cash equivalents.
Net interest income and net interest margin are impacted by the level of interest rates, mix of assets earning and liabilities bearing those interest rates, and the volume of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. These factors are influenced by changes in economic conditions that impact interest rate policy, competitive conditions that impact loan and deposit pricing strategies, as well as the extent of interest lost to non-performing assets.
Net interest income is the difference between interest income on earning assets, such as loans and investments, and interest expense on liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings, which are used to fund those assets. Net interest income is the Company's largest source of revenue, representing 75.8% of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net interest margin is the ratio of tax-equivalent net interest income to average earning assets for the period.
Webster manages the risk of changes in interest rates on net interest income and net interest margin through ALCO and through related interest rate risk monitoring and management policies. ALCO meets at least monthly to make decisions on the investment securities and funding portfolios based on the economic outlook, its interest rate expectations, the portfolio risk position, and other factors.
Four main tools are used for managing interest rate risk:
•the size, duration and credit risk of the investment portfolio,
•the size and duration of the wholesale funding portfolio,
•interest rate contracts, and
•the pricing and structure of loans and deposits.
The federal funds rate target range was 0-0.25% at December 31, 2020, as compared to 1.50-1.75% at December 31, 2019 and 2.25-2.50% at December 31, 2018. The benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury rate decreased to 0.93% on December 31, 2020 from 1.92% on December 31, 2019 and 2.69% on December 31, 2018. Refer to the "Asset/Liability Management and Market Risk" section for further discussion of Webster's interest rate risk position.
Financial Performance
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net income of $220.6 million decreased 42.4% from the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a substantial increase in the provision for credit losses, impacted by CECL adoption and COVID-19 effects, as well as a reduction in net interest income driven by the interest rate environment, and to a lesser extent increases in non-interest expense. This was partially offset by a decrease in income tax expense driven by the lower level of pre-tax income.
Net interest margin decreased 55 basis points to 3.00% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 3.55% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income before income tax expense was $280.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $206.7 million from $486.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income tax expense was $59.4 million, for an effective tax rate of 21.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $104.0 million, for an effective rate of 21.4%, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net income of $220.6 million and diluted earnings per share of $2.35 for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased from net income of $382.7 million and diluted earnings per share of $4.06 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The efficiency ratio, a non-GAAP financial measure which quantifies the cost expended to generate a dollar of revenue, was 59.57% for 2020 and 56.77% for 2019. The increase in the ratio reflects the Company's commitment to its employees during a period of suppressed revenues in the COVID-19 environment of 2020.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income totaled $891.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $955.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $63.7 million. On a fully tax-equivalent basis, net interest income decreased $63.2 million when compared to 2019.
Net interest margin decreased 55 basis points to 3.00% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 3.55% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net interest margin is primarily due to asset sensitive yields, in the low rate environment, on average interest-earning assets compared to average interest-bearing liabilities.
Average interest-earning assets during 2020 increased $3.1 billion compared to 2019, primarily from loans and leases growth of $2.2 billion. The average yield on interest-earning assets decreased 92 basis points to 3.37% during 2020 from 4.29% during 2019, primarily impacted by lower market interest rates partially offset by changes in the volume and relative mix of interest-earning assets. Average interest-bearing liabilities during 2020 increased $3.0 billion compared to 2019, as deposits increased across all categories, with the exception of time deposits, while borrowings decreased $0.1 billion. The average cost of interest-bearing liabilities decreased 39 basis points to 0.39% during 2020 compared to 0.78% during 2019, from the effects of changes in the federal funds rate, borrowings mix, and the effect of the fair value hedge termination.
Changes in Net Interest Income
The following table presents the components of the change in net interest income attributable to changes in rate and volume, and reflects net interest income on a fully tax-equivalent basis:
(1)The change attributable to mix, a combined impact of rate and volume, is included with the change due to rate.
(2)Securities include: Investment securities, FHLB and FRB stock, and Interest-bearing deposits.
Average loans and leases for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $2.2 billion compared to the average for the year ended December 31, 2019. The loan and lease portfolio comprised 70.7% of the average interest-earning assets at both December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. The loan and lease portfolio yield decreased 112 basis points to 3.71% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 4.83% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in the yield on the average loan and lease portfolio is primarily due to the impact of variable rate loans resetting lower and the origination of low yielding PPP loans.
Average securities for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $911.4 million compared to the average for the year ended December 31, 2019. The securities portfolio comprised 29.2% of the average interest-earning assets at both December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. The securities portfolio yield decreased 44 basis points to 2.54% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2.98% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in the yield on the average securities portfolio is primarily due to lower yield on variable-rate securities, accelerated premium amortization as a result of increased prepayments, and the yield from newly purchased securities being less than that of securities maturing and paying down.
Average deposits for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $3.1 billion compared to the average for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was comprised of $1.4 billion in non-interest-bearing deposits and $1.7 billion in interest-bearing deposits. The increase was driven by transactional deposit products, which includes HSAs, as well as demand accounts. The average cost of deposits decreased 30 basis points to 0.26% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 0.56% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in the average cost of deposits is due to deposit product mix and reductions in the federal funds rate. Higher cost time deposits as a percentage of total interest-bearing deposits decreased to 13.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 17.5% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Average borrowings for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased $91.0 million compared to the average for the year ended December 31, 2019. Average securities sold under agreements to repurchase and other borrowings increased $283.9 million, while average FHLB advances decreased $471.7 million. Average long-term debt increased $96.8 million, as a result of an underwritten public offering of $300 million senior fixed-rate notes completed on March 25, 2019. The average cost of borrowings decreased 94 basis points to 1.68% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 2.62% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in the average cost of borrowings was largely a result of changes in the federal funds rate, borrowings mix, and the effect of fair value hedging.
Provision for Credit Losses
The provision for credit losses was $137.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which increased $100.0 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in the provision for credit losses is primarily the result of higher credit provisioning due to the implementation of CECL and the impact of economic conditions, caused by COVID-19, on the allowance for credit losses. Total net charge-offs were $45.1 million and $41.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The allowance for credit losses on loans and leases coverage ratio increased to 1.66% at December 31, 2020 from 1.04% at December 31, 2019. Refer to the sections captioned "Loans and Leases" through "Troubled Debt Restructurings" contained elsewhere in this report for further details.
Non-Interest Income
Total non-interest income was $285.3 million for both the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. Non-interest income remained unchanged primarily as higher mortgage banking activities and other income substantially offset lower deposit service fees and loan and lease related fees.
Deposit service fees totaled $156.0 million for 2020 compared to $168.0 million for 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower overdraft and account service fees primarily as a result of decreased consumer spending, partially offset by an increase in fees related to HSA third-party administrator account closures in 2020.
Loan and lease related fees totaled $29.1 million for 2020 compared to $31.3 million for 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower loan servicing fees and prepayment penalty partially offset by an increase in syndication and loan amendment fees.
Mortgage banking activities totaled $18.3 million for 2020 compared to $6.1 million for 2019. The increase was primarily the result of higher origination volume due to a lower mortgage interest rate environment.
Other income totaled $34.3 million for 2020 compared to $32.3 million for 2019. The increase was primarily due to higher customer derivative activity.
Non-Interest Expense
Total non-interest expense was $758.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $43.0 million compared to $716.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily attributable to costs associated with a strategic initiatives plan resulting in higher compensation and benefits, occupancy, and professional and outside services, as well as increased technology and equipment, partially offset by lower other expense.
Compensation and benefits totaled $428.4 million for 2020 compared to $395.4 million for 2019. The increase was due to severance costs associated with strategic initiatives, as well as annual merit increases and other benefit costs.
Occupancy totaled $71.0 million for 2020 compared to $57.2 million for 2019. The increase was due to right-of-use (ROU) impairment and related costs associated with strategic initiatives.
Technology and equipment totaled $112.3 million for 2020 compared to $105.3 million for 2019. The increase was primarily due to continued infrastructure investment.
Professional and outside services totaled $32.4 million for 2020 compared to $21.4 million for 2019. The increase was due to consulting fees for strategic initiatives.
Other expense totaled $78.2 million for 2020 compared to $98.6 million for 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower pension cost, legal expenses, variable operating expenses, and travel related expenses.
Income Taxes
Webster recognized income tax expense of $59.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $104.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, and the effective tax rates were 21.2% and 21.4%, respectively. The decrease in tax expense principally reflects the lower level of pre-tax income in 2020 compared to 2019, while the effect of the reduced pre-tax income on the effective tax rate in 2020 was largely offset by the effect of a $6.6 million reduction in net discrete tax benefits, from $6.7 million recognized in 2019 to $0.1 million in 2020.
The Company's gross DTAs applicable to its net operating loss and credit carryforwards of $66.8 million, or $29.5 million net of the $37.4 million related valuation allowance, pertain to state and local tax (SALT). The valuation allowance reflects management's estimates of Webster's taxable income and utilization of its net operating loss carryforwards projected through the year 2032 and includes assumptions about the content and apportionment of its income among its legal entities for SALT purposes. Those estimates and assumptions also reflect the Company's forecasted future results of operations, including its plans and strategies for growth from its ordinary and recurring operations over the near term by legal entity, as well as longer-term growth rate assumptions. Management believes the $29.5 million net DTAs are more likely than not realizable and their estimates form a reasonable basis for this determination. However it is possible that some or all of Webster's net operating loss or credit carryforwards could expire unused or that more net operating loss carryforwards could be utilized than estimated if future economic or market conditions or interest rates were to vary significantly from the Company's forecasts and impact its future results of operations.
For additional information on Webster's income taxes, including its DTAs, refer to Note 10: Income Taxes in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained elsewhere in this report.
Segment Reporting
Webster’s operations are organized into three reportable segments that represent its primary businesses - Commercial Banking, HSA Bank, and Community Banking. These segments reflect how executive management responsibilities are assigned, the type of customer served, how products and services are provided, and how discrete financial information is currently evaluated by executive management. Segments are evaluated using pre-tax pre-provision net revenue (PPNR). Certain Corporate Treasury activities, along with the amounts required to reconcile profitability metrics to amounts reported in accordance with GAAP, are included in the Corporate and Reconciling category. Strategic initiative charges in 2020 are included in the Corporate and Reconciling category. Refer to Note 21: Segment Reporting in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained elsewhere in this report for a reconciliation of segment information to amounts reported in accordance with GAAP and for a description of segment reporting methodology.
Beginning in 2020, to better align segment results with key measurements used to review segment performance, the funds transfer pricing calculation was refined to reflect the allocation of capital credit to net interest income. Prior period amounts were revised accordingly.
Effective for the first quarter of 2021, the Company will begin reporting segment operating results reflecting a realignment of operations between Community Banking and Commercial Banking. After the realignment, certain business banking and investment and securities-related services will be provided through Commercial Banking to better serve its customers.
The following segment reporting information and the segment reporting information contained throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K reflects the organization that remained in effect on December 31, 2020.
Commercial Banking is comprised of Commercial Banking and Private Banking operating segments.
Commercial Banking provides commercial and industrial lending and leasing, commercial real estate lending, and treasury and payment solutions. Specifically, Webster Bank deploys lending through middle market, commercial real estate, equipment financing, asset-based lending and specialty lending units. These groups utilize a relationship approach model throughout their footprint when providing lending, deposit, and cash management services to middle market companies. In addition, Commercial Banking serves as a referral source to the other lines of business.
Private Banking provides asset management, financial planning services, trust services, loan products, and deposit products for high net worth clients, not-for-profit organizations, and business clients. These client relationships generate fee revenue on assets under management or administration, while a majority of the relationships also include lending and/or, deposit accounts which generates net interest income and other ancillary fees.
HSA Bank offers comprehensive consumer directed healthcare solutions that include, health savings accounts, health reimbursement accounts, flexible spending accounts, and other financial solutions. Health savings accounts are used in conjunction with high deductible health plans in order to facilitate tax advantages for account holders with respect to health care spending and savings, in accordance with applicable laws. Health savings accounts are offered through employers for the benefit of their employees or directly to individual consumers and are distributed nationwide directly as well as through national and regional insurance carriers, benefit consultants and financial advisors.
HSA Bank deposits provide long duration low-cost funding that is used to minimize the Company’s use of wholesale funding in support of the Company’s loan growth. In addition, non-interest revenue is generated predominantly through service fees and interchange income.
Community Banking is comprised of Personal Banking and Business Banking operating segments.
Through a distribution network consisting of, 155 banking centers and 297 ATMs as of December 31, 2020, a customer care center, and a full range of web and mobile-based banking services, Community Banking serves consumer and business customers primarily throughout southern New England and into Westchester County, New York.
Personal Banking offers consumer deposit and fee-based services, residential mortgages, home equity lines and/or loans, unsecured consumer loans, and credit card products. In addition, investment and securities-related services, including brokerage and investment advice are offered through a strategic partnership with LPL, a broker dealer registered with the SEC, a registered investment advisor under federal and applicable state laws, a member of the FINRA, and a member of the SIPC. Webster Bank has employees located throughout its banking center network, who, through LPL, are registered representatives.
Business Banking offers credit, deposit, and cash flow management products to businesses and professional service firms with annual revenues of up to $25 million. This group builds broad customer relationships through business bankers and business certified banking center managers, supported by a team of customer care center bankers and industry and product specialists.
Commercial Banking
Operating Results:
Comparison of 2020 to 2019
Pre-tax, pre-provision net revenue increased $13.9 million in 2020 compared to 2019. Net interest income increased $20.6 million, primarily due to loan and deposit growth, which was partially offset by the lower rate environment. Non-interest income decreased $0.7 million. Non-interest expense increased $6.0 million, primarily due to compensation related expenses.
Comparison of 2019 to 2018
Pre-tax, pre-provision net revenue increased $8.9 million in 2019 compared to 2018. Net interest income increased $22.2 million, primarily due to loan growth. Non-interest income decreased $5.7 million, driven by less syndication and client interest rate hedging activity. Non-interest expense increased $7.5 million, related to investments in people and technology.
Selected Balance Sheet and Off-Balance Sheet Information:
Loans and leases increased $1.1 billion at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, which included $0.4 billion of PPP loans, and increased $1.1 billion at December 31, 2019 compared to December 31, 2018, in line with our strategic priority to expand commercial banking. Loan originations were $4.2 billion, $4.1 billion and $4.4 billion in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Deposits increased $1.6 billion at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, primarily driven by the liquidity needs of business clients and municipalities due to the uncertain economic environment, PPP loan funding, and new business development. Deposits increased $351.5 million at December 31, 2019 compared to December 31, 2018, as a result of new business development and customers holding more balances at the bank.
Total assets under management and assets under administration increased $381.9 million at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, primarily due to both new business and market appreciation over the year. Total assets under management and assets under administration increased $374.2 million at December 31, 2019 compared to December 31, 2018, primarily due to both new business and market appreciation over the year.
HSA Bank
Operating Results:
Comparison of 2020 to 2019
Pre-tax, net revenue decreased $11.6 million in 2020 compared to 2019. Net interest income decreased $10.3 million, reflecting a decline in deposit spreads partially offset by a growth in deposits. Non-interest income increased $3.8 million, primarily due to fees related to third-party-administrator account closures in 2020. Non-interest expense increased $5.1 million, primarily due to annual merit increases, expenses to support incremental core account growth and investments in expanded sales and relationship management teams.
Comparison of 2019 to 2018
Pre-tax, net revenue increased $21.5 million in 2019 compared to 2018. Net interest income increased $24.8 million, reflecting growth in deposits and improvement in deposit spreads. Non-interest income increased $7.7 million, primarily due to a higher volume of fee and interchange income due to growth in the number of accounts. Non-interest expense increased $11.0 million, primarily due to increased compensation and benefits, processing costs related to incremental account growth, and investments in expanded sales and relationship management teams.
Selected Balance Sheet and Off-Balance Sheet Information:
Deposits increased $0.7 billion at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 and increased $0.7 billion at December 31, 2019 compared to December 31, 2018. The increase in 2020 is related to organic deposit and core account growth plus the addition of $133 million from a portfolio acquisition, partially offset by the reduction in third party administrator deposits. The 2019 increase is related to organic deposit and account growth.
HSA Bank deposits accounted for 26.0% and 27.5% of the Company’s total deposits as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Assets under administration, through linked brokerage accounts, increased $782.0 million at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, primarily due to the increasing number of account holders with investment accounts plus increases in market values of investments over the year. Assets under administration, through linked brokerage accounts, increased $610.7 million at December 31, 2019 compared to December 31, 2018, primarily due to the increasing number of account holders with investment accounts plus increases in market values of investments over the year.
Community Banking
Operating Results:
Comparison of 2020 to 2019
Pre-tax, pre-provision net revenue decreased $3.1 million in 2020 compared to 2019. Net interest income increased $2.1 million, primarily due to lower interest expense on the deposits portfolio stemming from lower interest rate environment, which was partially offset by growth in balances for both the loan and deposit portfolios. Non-interest income decreased $3.0 million, resulting from lower income from deposit related fees and lower loan servicing fees partially offset by increased income from mortgage banking activities. Non-interest expense increased $2.2 million, primarily due to annual merit increases and continued infrastructure investments, partially offset by lower loan and deposit operations costs and marketing expenses.
Comparison of 2019 to 2018
Pre-tax, pre-provision net revenue decreased $5.4 million in 2019 compared to 2018. Net interest income decreased $1.2 million, primarily due to decline in interest rate spreads in loans and deposits portfolio stemming from lower interest rate environment. Decrease in rate spreads was partially offset by growth in balances for loan and deposit portfolios. Non-interest income decreased $0.4 million, as increased income from mortgage banking activities and increased fees from loan servicing and interest rate hedging activities were offset by a $4.6 million gain from the sale of six banking centers recorded in the prior year. Non-interest expense increased $3.8 million, primarily due to higher compensation and benefits and continued investment in technology, partially offset by lower marketing costs and occupancy expenses.
Selected Balance Sheet and Off-Balance Sheet Information:
Loan portfolio balances increased $454.9 million at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019. The increase is due to the originations of PPP loans by Business Banking, partially offset by lower residential mortgage balances due to increased refinancing activity and the continuing net paydowns in the home equity portfolio. Loan portfolio balances increased $509.2 million at December 31, 2019 compared to December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily driven by growth in residential mortgage balances, which included a $242.2 million portfolio purchase in the first quarter, as well as growth in business banking balances. This overall growth was partially offset by continued net attrition in home equity balances as loan principal paydowns exceeded new loan production.
Loan originations were $3.6 billion, $2.2 billion, and $1.3 billion for the years ended 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase of $1.4 billion in originations for the year ended December 31, 2020 is driven by the originations of $949 million in PPP loans. To a lesser extent, an increase in residential mortgage originations was partially offset by a decline in home equity originations.
Deposits increased $1.7 billion at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, resulting from growth in savings and transaction account products, offset by decreases in certificates of deposits. The balance increases were driven by proceeds from the PPP loans and CARES Act stimulus payments. Deposits increased $671.3 million at December 31, 2019 compared to December 31, 2018, resulting from growth in savings, transaction, and time deposit products.
Additionally, at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, Webster Bank's investment services division held $3.9 billion, $3.7 billion, and $3.4 billion, respectively, of assets under administration through its strategic partnership with LPL.
Financial Condition
Webster had total assets of $32.6 billion at December 31, 2020 compared to $30.4 billion at December 31, 2019, an increase of $2.2 billion, or 7.2% as:
•loans and leases of $21.3 billion, net of ACL on loans and leases of $359.4 million, at December 31, 2020 increased $1.5 billion compared to loans and leases of $19.8 billion, net of ACL on loans and leases of $209.1 million, at December 31, 2019. The net increase was primarily due to PPP loan funding activity, while;
•total deposits of $27.3 billion at December 31, 2020 increased $4.0 billion compared to $23.3 billion at December 31, 2019. Non-interest-bearing deposits increased 38.4%, and interest-bearing deposits increased 12.2% during the year ended December 31, 2020, as balances rose across all categories, with the exception of time deposits, as customers addressed liquidity concerns amid the pandemic.
At both December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, total shareholders' equity was $3.2 billion, representing an increase of $26.9 million or, 0.8%. Changes in shareholders' equity for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily include:
•an increase of $220.6 million for net income;
•an increase of $78.3 million for other comprehensive income (OCI), primarily from higher market values for the available-for-sale securities portfolio;
•reductions of $145.4 million for common share dividends and $7.9 million for preferred share dividends;
•a reduction of $80.1 million for purchases of treasury stock, at cost, and:
•a reduction of $51.2 million for the impact of the adoption of Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2016-13 (CECL).
The quarterly cash dividend to common shareholders remained at $0.40 per common share during 2020. On January 26, 2021, Webster Financial Corporation’s Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.40 per share. Given the current economic forecast, anticipated earnings, and capital position, the Company anticipates continuation of the dividend at its current level. The Company will continue to monitor its ability to pay dividends at this level. Refer to the "Selected Financial Highlights" section contained elsewhere in this item and Note 15: Regulatory Matters in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained elsewhere in this report for information on Webster’s regulatory capital levels and ratios.
As of December 31, 2020, both the Company and the Bank were considered well-capitalized, meeting all capital requirements under the Basel III Capital Rules. In accordance with regulatory capital rules, the Company elected an option to delay the impact of CECL on its regulatory capital over a two-year deferral and subsequent three-year transition period ending December 31, 2024. Therefore, capital ratios and amounts exclude the impact of the increased allowance for credit losses on loans and leases, held-to-maturity debt securities and unfunded loan commitments attributed to the adoption of CECL. This resulted in a 30, 29, 29, and 21 basis point benefit to the Company's CET1 risk based capital, total risk based capital, tier 1 risk based capital, and tier 1 leverage capital, respectively, at December 31, 2020. The Company's capital ratios remain strong, in excess of well capitalized even without the benefit of the CECL impact delay.
Investment Securities
Webster Bank's investment securities are managed within regulatory guidelines and corporate policy, which include limitations on aspects such as concentrations in and type of investments as well as minimum risk ratings per type of security. The OCC may establish additional individual limits on a certain type of investment if the concentration in such investment presents a safety and soundness concern. In addition to Webster Bank, the Holding Company also may directly hold investment securities from time-to-time. At December 31, 2020, the Company had no holdings in obligations of individual states, counties, or municipalities which exceeded 10% of consolidated shareholders’ equity.
Webster maintains, through its Corporate Treasury function, investment securities that are primarily used to provide a source of liquidity for operating needs, to generate interest income, and as a means to manage interest-rate risk. Investment securities are classified into two major categories, available-for-sale which currently consists of agency collateralized mortgage obligations (Agency CMO), agency mortgage-backed securities (Agency MBS), agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (Agency CMBS), non-agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS), CLO, and corporate debt; and held-to-maturity which currently consists of Agency CMO, Agency MBS, Agency CMBS, municipal bonds and notes, and CMBS. Investment securities had a carrying value and an average risk weighting for regulatory purposes of $8.9 billion and 13%, respectively, at December 31, 2020 and $8.2 billion and 16%, respectively, at December 31, 2019.
Available-for-sale investment securities increased by $400.9 million, primarily due to Agency CMBS net purchase activity partially offset by net principal paydowns for Agency MBS. The tax-equivalent yield in the portfolio was 2.35% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2.94% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Available-for-sale investment securities are evaluated for credit losses on a quarterly basis. Unrealized losses on these securities are attributable to factors other than credit loss and therefore no ACL has been recorded. Further, the Company does not have the intent to sell these investment securities, and it is more likely than not that it will not be required to sell these securities before the recovery of their cost basis. Gross unrealized loss on available-for-sale investment securities was $9.5 million at December 31, 2020.
Held-to-maturity investment securities increased by $274.3 million, primarily due to Agency CMBS net purchase activity partially offset net principal paydowns for Agency MBS. The tax-equivalent yield in the portfolio was 2.67% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2.98% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Held-to-maturity investment securities are evaluated for credit losses on a quarterly basis under CECL. The ACL on investment securities held-to-maturity was $299 thousand at December 31, 2020. Gross unrealized loss on held-to-maturity investment securities was $2.5 million at December 31, 2020.
The following table summarizes the amortized cost and fair value of investment securities:
(1)The amortized cost balance at December 31, 2020 in the table above excludes an allowance for credit losses on investment securities held-to-maturity of $299 thousand.
The following table summarizes debt securities period-end amount by contractual maturity, or a firm call date, and the respective weighted-average coupon yields:
Webster Bank has the ability to use its investment portfolio as well as interest-rate derivative financial instruments, within internal policy guidelines to manage interest rate risk as part of its asset/liability strategy. Refer to Note 17: Derivative Financial Instruments in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained elsewhere in this report for additional information concerning the use of derivative financial instruments.
Loans and Leases
The following table provides the composition of loans and leases:
Total commercial non-mortgage and asset-based loans were $8.0 billion at December 31, 2020, a net increase of $1.6 billion from December 31, 2019. The net increase is primarily related to PPP loan funding of $1.4 billion.
Commercial real estate loans were $6.3 billion at December 31, 2020, a net increase of $0.4 billion from December 31, 2019. The increase is a result of originations of $1.2 billion, partially offset by loan payments.
Equipment financing loans and leases were $602.2 million at December 31, 2020, a net increase of $64.9 million from December 31, 2019. The increase is a result of originations of $252.0 million during the year, partially offset by loan payments.
Residential loans were $4.8 billion at December 31, 2020, a net decrease of $190.7 million from December 31, 2019. The net decrease is a result of higher prepayments, essentially offset by originations of $1.4 billion.
Total home equity and other consumer loans were $2.0 billion at December 31, 2020, a net decrease of $275.5 million from December 31, 2019. The net decrease is primarily the result of net principal paydowns within the home equity lines.
The following table provides information for the contractual maturity and interest-rate profile of loans and leases:
Credit Policies and Procedures
Webster Bank has credit policies and procedures in place designed to support lending activity within an acceptable level of risk. Management reviews and approves these policies and procedures on a regular basis. To assist management with its review, reports related to loan production, loan quality, concentrations of credit, loan delinquencies, non-performing loans, and potential problem loans are generated by loan reporting systems. The Company has implemented additional monitoring procedures in connection with COVID-19.
Commercial and industrial loans are underwritten after evaluating and understanding the borrower’s ability to operate and service its debt. Assessment of management is a critical element of the underwriting process and credit decision. Once it is determined that the borrower’s management possesses sound ethics and solid business acumen, current and projected cash flows are examined to determine the ability of the borrower to repay obligations as agreed. Commercial and industrial loans are primarily made based on the identified cash flows of the borrower and secondarily on the underlying collateral provided by the borrower. The cash flows of borrowers, however, may not be as expected, and the collateral securing these loans may fluctuate in value. Most commercial and industrial loans are secured by the assets being financed and may incorporate personal guarantees of the principals.
Commercial real estate loans are subject to underwriting standards and processes similar to commercial and industrial loans, in addition to those specific to real estate loans. These loans are viewed primarily as cash flow loans and secondarily as loans secured by real estate. Repayment of these loans is largely dependent on the successful operation of the property securing the loan, the market in which the property is located, and the tenants of the property securing the loan. The properties securing the Company’s commercial real estate portfolio are diverse in terms of type and geographic location, which reduces the Company's exposure to adverse economic events that may affect a particular market. Management monitors and evaluates commercial real estate loans based on collateral, geography, and risk grade criteria. All transactions are appraised to validate market value. Commercial real estate loans may be adversely affected by conditions in the real estate markets or in the general economy. Management periodically utilizes third-party experts to provide insight and guidance about economic conditions and trends affecting its commercial real estate loan portfolio.
Consumer loans are subject to policies and procedures developed to manage the risk characteristics of the portfolio. Policies and procedures, coupled with relatively small individual loan amounts and predominately collateralized structures, spread across many different borrowers, minimize risk. Trend and outlook reports are reviewed by management on a regular basis, with policies and procedures modified, or developed, as needed. Underwriting factors for mortgage and home equity loans include the borrower’s Fair Isaac Corporation (FICO) score, the loan amount relative to property value, and the borrower’s debt to income level and are also influenced by regulatory requirements. Additionally, Webster Bank originates both qualified mortgage and non-qualified mortgage loans as defined by applicable Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) rules.
Loan Modifications
Webster works with customers to modify loan agreements when borrowers are experiencing financial difficulty. Webster will modify a loan to minimize the risk of loss and achieve the best possible outcome for both the borrower and the Company. Loan modifications can take various forms including payment deferral, rate reduction, covenant waiver, term extension, or other actions. Depending on the nature of modification, it may, or may not, be accounted for as a troubled debt restructuring (TDR).
COVID-19 Payment Modification Activities
The Company has accommodated over 2,500 customers impacted by COVID-19 through payment-related deferrals. As of December 31, 2020, loan balances associated with these modifications, in their deferral period, totaled approximately $315 million. This balance includes all loans associated with a customer relationship where at least one loan has been modified or is in process of modification. A significant portion of the loan balances associated with these modifications would not be considered a TDR based on the nature of the modification. Certain other modifications that would otherwise be considered a TDR are subject to TDR accounting relief through the CARES Act and Interagency Statement. Included in the $315 million are $201 million of loan balances associated with the CARES Act and Interagency Statement as discussed below. The Company continues to actively monitor customer relationships associated with these modified loans. The impact of these modifications is reflected in our allowance for credit losses on loans and leases.
The CARES Act and Interagency Statement
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, financial institutions were provided relief from certain TDR accounting and disclosure requirements for qualifying loan modifications. Specifically, Section 4013 of the CARES Act provided temporary relief from certain GAAP requirements for modifications related to COVID-19. In addition, the federal banking agencies issued a revised interagency statement that offers practical expedients for evaluating whether COVID-19 loan modifications are TDRs.
As of December 31, 2020, loan balances associated with loan modifications designated in connection with these relief provisions in their deferral period totaled approximately $201 million. These modifications represent payment deferrals, generally three to six months in length. The decrease of $82 million, from $283 million at September 30, 2020, is primarily the result of borrowers exiting their payment deferral period. The Company will continue to evaluate the effectiveness of the loan modification program as the deferral periods end. For additional information on the accounting for loan modifications under Section 4013 of the CARES Act and the revised interagency statement refer to Note 1: Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements contained elsewhere in this report.
Troubled Debt Restructurings
A modified loan is considered a TDR when two conditions are met: (i) the borrower is experiencing financial difficulties; and (ii) the modification constitutes a concession. Modified terms are dependent upon the financial position and needs of the individual borrower. The Company considers all aspects of the restructuring in determining whether a concession has been granted, including the debtor's ability to access market rate funds. In general, a concession exists when the modified terms of the loan are more attractive to the borrower than standard market terms. Common modifications include material changes in covenants, pricing, and forbearance. Loans for which the borrower has been discharged under Chapter 7 bankruptcy are considered collateral dependent TDRs and thus, impaired at the date of discharge and charged down to the fair value of collateral less cost to sell.
The Company’s policy is to place consumer loan TDRs, except those that were performing prior to TDR status, on non-accrual status for a minimum period of six months. Commercial TDRs are evaluated on a case-by-case basis for determination of accrual status. Loans qualify for return to accrual status once they have demonstrated performance with the restructured terms of the loan agreement for a minimum of six months. Generally, a TDR is classified and reported as a TDR for the remaining life of the loan. TDR classification may be removed if the loan was restructured under market conditions and the borrower demonstrates compliance with the modified terms for a minimum of six months. In the limited circumstance that a loan is removed from TDR classification, it is the Company’s policy to continue to base its measure of credit loss on the contractual terms specified by the loan agreement.
The following tables provide information for TDRs:
(1)Represents the balance of TDR as a percentage of the outstanding balance within the comparable loan and lease category. The percentage includes the impact of deferred costs and unamortized premiums.
Overall, TDR balances decreased $2.0 million at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019. Specific reserves for TDRs also decreased from year end reflective of management’s current assessment of reserve requirements. Qualifying loan modifications in connection with Section 4013 of the CARES Act or Interagency Statements are excluded from TDR identification.
Past Due Loans and Leases
The following table provides information regarding loans and leases past due 30 days or more and accruing income:
(1)Past due loan and lease balances exclude non-accrual loans and leases.
(2)Represents the principal balance of past due loans and leases as a percentage of the outstanding principal balance within the comparable loan and lease category. The percentage excludes the impact of deferred costs and unamortized premiums, net.
Non-performing Assets
The following table provides information regarding lending-related non-performing assets:
(1)Represents the principal balance of non-accrual loans and leases as a percentage of the outstanding principal balance within the comparable loan and lease category.
(2)Includes non-accrual TDRs of $95.3 million, $101.0 million, $91.9 million, $74.3 million and $75.7 million as of December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
The following table provides detail of non-performing loan and lease activity:
Asset Quality
The Company manages asset quality leveraging established risk tolerance levels through its underwriting standards, servicing, and portfolio management of loan and leases. Loans and leases, particularly where a heightened risk of loss has been identified, are regularly monitored to mitigate further deterioration which could potentially impact key measures of asset quality in future periods. Past due loans and leases, non-performing assets, and credit loss levels are considered to be key measures of asset quality.
The following table provides key asset quality ratios:
(1)The Company adopted the CECL accounting standard on January 1, 2020. The ACL on loans and leases was calculated in accordance with applicable GAAP for their respective periods.
Potential Problem Loans and Leases
Potential problem loans and leases are defined by management as certain loans and leases that, for:
•the commercial portfolio are performing loans and leases that are classified as Substandard and have a well-defined weakness that could jeopardize the full repayment of the debt; and
•the consumer portfolio are performing loans 60-89 days past due and accruing.
Potential problem loans and leases exclude loans and leases past due 90 days or more and accruing, non-accrual loans and leases, and TDRs. Certain loans with modifications related to COVID-19 are not reflected as potential problem loans and are not reported as TDRs due to relief provisions of the CARES Act and Interagency Statements as discussed elsewhere in this document. As there are many uncertainties related to the pandemic there is a risk that some of these modified loans may become potential problem loans.
Management monitors potential problem loans and leases due to a higher degree of risk associated with those loans and leases. The current expectation of lifetime losses is included in the ACL on loans and leases; however, management cannot predict whether these potential problem loans and leases ultimately will become non-performing or result in a loss. The Company had potential problem loans and leases of $335.1 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $216.7 million at December 31, 2019.
Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans and Leases
On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted a new accounting standard which introduced the CECL impairment model that applies to most financial assets measured at amortized cost and certain other instruments including the Company’s loans, net investment in leases, off-balance sheet credit exposures, and held-to-maturity debt securities. CECL requires the measurement of expected credit losses over the life of the instrument to be recognized at purchase or origination, and also requires consideration of a broader range of reasonable and supportable information including economic forecasts.
Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans and Leases Methodology
The Company's policy for ACL on loans and leases is considered a critical accounting policy. The ACL on loans and leases is a contra-asset account that offsets the amortized cost basis of loans and leases for the credit losses expected to occur over the life of the asset. Executive management reviews and advises on the adequacy of the reserve which is maintained at a level management deems sufficient to cover expected losses within the loan and lease portfolios.
The ACL on loans and leases is determined using the CECL model which requires recognition of expected lifetime credit losses at the purchase or origination of an asset. Expected losses are determined through pooled, collective assessment of loans and leases with similar risk characteristics. If the risk characteristics of a loan or lease change and no longer match that of the collective assessment pool it is removed and individually assessed for credit impairment. Management applies significant judgments and assumptions that influence the loss estimate and ACL on loan and lease balances.
Collectively Assessed Loans and Leases. Collectively assessed loans and leases are segmented based on the commercial and consumer portfolios and expected losses are determined using a Probability of Default/Loss Given Default/Exposure at Default (PD/LGD/EAD) framework. Expected credit losses are calculated as the product of the probability of a loan defaulting, expected loss given the occurrence of a default, and the expected exposure of a loan at default. Summing the product across loans over their lives yields the lifetime expected credit losses for a given portfolio. The Company’s PD and LGD calculations are predictive models that measure the current risk profile of the loan pools using forecasts of future macroeconomic conditions, historical loss information, and credit risk ratings. The Company’s models incorporate a single economic forecast scenario and macroeconomic assumptions over a two year reasonable and supportable forecast period. Macroeconomic variables are selected based on the correlation of the variables to credit losses for each class of financing receivable. Data from the baseline forecast scenario is used as the input to the modeled loss calculation. After the reasonable and supportable forecast period, the Company reverts to historical loss rates for the remaining life of the loans and leases on a straight-line basis over a one year reversion period. The calculation of exposure at default follows an iterative process to determine the expected remaining principal balance of a loan based on historical paydown rates for loans of similar segment within the same portfolio. The calculation of portfolio exposure in future quarters incorporates expected losses and principal paydown (PPD). PPD is the combination of contractual repayment and prepayment. A portion of the collective ACL is comprised of qualitative adjustments for risk characteristics which are not reflected or captured in the quantitative models but are likely to impact the measurement of estimated credit losses.
Individually Assessed Loans and Leases. When loans and leases no longer match the risk characteristics of the collective assessment pool, they are removed from the collectively assessed population and individually assessed for credit losses. Generally, all non-accrual loans, TDRs, potential TDRs, loans with a charge-off, and collateral dependent loans when the borrower is experiencing financial difficulty, are individually assessed. Individual assessment calculations are based on the fair value of the collateral less estimated cost to sell, the present value of the expected cash flows from operation of the collateral, a discounted cash flow, or other appropriate individual assessment approach.
A fair value shortfall relative to the amortized cost balance is reflected as an impairment reserve within the ACL on loans and leases. Subsequent to an appraisal or other fair value estimate, should reliable information come to management's attention that the value has declined further, additional impairment may be recorded to reflect the particular situation, thereby increasing the ACL on loans and leases. Any individually assessed loan for which no specific valuation allowance is necessary is the result of either sufficient cash flow or sufficient collateral coverage relative to the amortized cost. If the credit quality subsequently improves the allowance is reversed up to a maximum of the previously recorded credit losses.
The ACL on loans and leases represents the total of estimated losses calculated through collective and individual assessments. To assist management with its review, reports related to loan production, loan quality, concentrations of credit, loan delinquencies, non-performing loans, and potential problem loans are generated by loan reporting systems. While actual future conditions and losses realized may vary significantly from present judgments and assumptions, management believes the ACL on loans and leases is adequate as of December 31, 2020. For information on the ACL methodology, refer to Note 1: Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements contained elsewhere in this report.
Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans and Leases Balances and Ratios
The Company adopted the CECL accounting standard on January 1, 2020, with a cumulative effect adjustment recorded upon adoption which increased the ACL on loans and leases by $57.6 million. Upon adoption, the allowance reflects expected lifetime credit losses of the portfolio. The Company's ACL calculation reflects management's best estimate of expected lifetime credit losses as of period end, including current forecasts of macro-economic activity and borrower risk ratings.
At December 31, 2020, the ACL on loans and leases was $359.4 million compared to $209.1 million at December 31, 2019. The increase of $150.3 million in the reserve at December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 is primarily due to the adoption of the CECL lifetime loss accounting model, and the impact of current and forecasted macroeconomic conditions on credit models, which were negatively affected by the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. The ACL on loans and leases reserve remains adequate to cover the current expectation of lifetime losses in the loan and lease portfolios. ACL on loans and leases as a percentage of loans and leases, also known as the reserve coverage, increased to 1.66% at December 31, 2020 as compared to 1.04% at December 31, 2019, and reflects an updated assessment of inherent losses and impaired reserves conducted throughout the year. ACL on loans and leases as a percentage of non-performing loans and leases increased to 213.94% at December 31, 2020 from 138.56% at December 31, 2019.
For information on the impact of adoption of the CECL model, refer to Note 1: Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements contained elsewhere in this report.
The following table provides information about the allocation of the ACL on loans and leases:
(1)The Company adopted the CECL accounting standard on January 1, 2020. The ACL on loans and leases was calculated in accordance with applicable GAAP for their respective periods.
(2)Percentage represents allocated ACL on loans and leases to total loans and leases within the comparable category. The allocation of a portion of the allowance to one category of loans and leases does not preclude its availability to absorb losses in other categories.
The adoption of CECL, which changed the ACL from an incurred loss model to a lifetime loss model, compounded with declines in current and forecasted macroeconomic conditions due to COVID-19 resulted in a significant increase to ACL relative to prior periods.
The ACL on loans and leases reserve allocated to commercial non-mortgage loans at December 31, 2020 increased $54.8 million compared to December 31, 2019. The year-over-year increase is primarily attributable to a decline in the macroeconomic forecasts used in the loss models, as well as the impact of changes in credit quality and loan growth.
The ACL on loans and leases reserve allocated to asset-based loans at December 31, 2020 decreased $2.5 million compared to December 31, 2019. The year-over-year decrease is primarily attributable to a decline in loan balances of $156.3 million and improved net rating migration.
The ACL on loans and leases reserve allocated to commercial real estate loans at December 31, 2020 increased $94.0 million compared to December 31, 2019. The year-over-year increase is primarily attributable to the adoption of CECL and decline in macroeconomic forecasts, as well as loan growth of $373.3 million.
The ACL on loans and leases reserve allocated to equipment financing loans at December 31, 2020 increased $4.4 million compared to December 31, 2019. The year-over-year increase is primarily attributable to decline in macroeconomic forecasts, and to a lesser extent, loan growth of $64.9 million.
The ACL on loans and leases reserve allocated to residential loans at December 31, 2020 decreased $6.9 million compared to December 31, 2019. The year-over-year decrease is primarily attributable to improved net rating migration and a decline in the loan balance of $190.7 million.
The ACL on loans and leases reserve allocated to the home equity loans at December 31, 2020 increased $11.2 million compared to December 31, 2019. The year-over-year increase is primarily attributable to the impact of the adoption of the CECL, partially offset by a decline in loan balances of $211.7 million.
The ACL on loans and leases reserve allocated to the other consumer loans at December 31, 2020 decreased $4.5 million compared to December 31, 2019. The year-over-year decrease is primarily attributable to a decrease in loan balances of $63.8 million.
The following table provides detail of activity in the ACL on loans and leases:
Net charge-offs for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $45.1 million and $41.1 million, respectively. Net charge-offs increased by $4.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Although net charge-offs increased, net charge-offs as a percent to average loans and leases remained consistent overall.
The following table provides a summary of total net charge-offs to average loans and leases by category:
Allowance for Credit Losses on Unfunded Loan Commitments
An allowance for credit losses is recorded to provide for losses inherent in the unused portion of commitments to lend that are not unconditionally cancellable by the Company. The adoption of CECL represented a significant change in methodology for the measurement of the allowance for credit losses on unfunded loan commitments. The calculation of the allowance generally includes the probability of funding to occur and a corresponding estimate of expected lifetime credit losses on amounts assumed to be funded. Loss calculation factors are consistent with the ACL methodology for funded loans using PD and LGD applied to the underlying borrower risk and facility grades, a draw down factor applied to utilization rates, relevant forecast information, and management's qualitative factors. The level of ACL is monitored quarterly against key metrics from the funded portfolio.
The following table provides detail of activity in the allowance for credit losses on unfunded loan commitments:
Sources of Funds and Liquidity
Sources of Funds. The primary source of Webster Bank’s cash flows for use in lending and meeting its general operational needs is deposits. Operating activities, such as loan and mortgage-backed securities repayments, and other investment securities sale proceeds and maturities also provide cash flows. While scheduled loan and investment security repayments are a relatively stable source of funds, loan and investment security prepayments and deposit inflows are influenced by prevailing interest rates and local economic conditions and are inherently uncertain. Additional sources of funds are provided by FHLB advances or other borrowings.
Federal Home Loan Bank and Federal Reserve Bank Stock. Webster Bank is a member of the FHLB System, which consists of eleven district Federal Home Loan Banks, each subject to the supervision and regulation of the Federal Housing Finance Agency. An activity-based capital stock investment in the FHLB of Boston is required in order for Webster Bank to access advances and other extensions of credit for sources of funds and liquidity purposes. The FHLB capital stock investment is restricted in that there is no market for it, and it can only be redeemed by the FHLB. Webster Bank held FHLB Boston capital stock of $17.5 million at December 31, 2020 compared to $89.3 million at December 31, 2019 for its membership and for outstanding advances and other extensions of credit. Webster Bank received $2.7 million in dividends from the FHLB Boston during 2020. The most recent FHLB quarterly cash dividend was paid on November 3, 2020 in an amount equal to an annual yield of 3.76%.
Additionally, Webster Bank is required to hold FRB of Boston stock equal to 6% of its capital and surplus of which 50% is paid. The remaining 50% is subject to call when deemed necessary by the Federal Reserve System. The FRB capital stock investment is restricted in that there is no market for it, and it can only be redeemed by the FRB. Webster Bank held $60.1 million and $59.8 million of FRB of Boston capital stock at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Webster Bank received $0.5 million in dividends from the FRB of Boston during 2020. The most recent FRB semi-annual cash dividend was paid on December 31, 2020 in an amount equal to an annual yield of 0.95%.
Deposits. Webster Bank offers a wide variety of deposit products for checking and savings (including ATM and debit card use, direct deposit, ACH payments, mobile banking services, internet-based banking, bank by mail, as well as overdraft protection via line of credit or transfer from another deposit account) designed to meet the transactional, savings, and investment needs for both consumer and business customers throughout its primary market area. Webster Bank manages the flow of funds in its deposit accounts and provides a variety of accounts and rates consistent with FDIC regulations. Webster Bank’s Retail Pricing Committee and its Commercial and Institutional Liability Pricing Committee meet regularly to determine pricing and marketing initiatives.
Total deposits were $27.3 billion, $23.3 billion, and $21.9 billion at December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The increase was driven by balances across all categories, with the exception of time deposits, as customers addressed liquidity concerns amid the pandemic. Time deposits that exceed the FDIC limit, presently $250 thousand, represent approximately 1.8%, 2.8%, and 2.5%, of total deposits at December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. For additional information related to period-end balances, refer to Note 11: Deposits in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained elsewhere in this report.
Daily average balances of deposits by type and weighted-average rates paid thereon for the periods as indicated:
Total average deposits increased $3.1 billion, or 13.5%, in 2020 compared to 2019 and increased $1.3 billion, or 6.0%, in 2019 compared to 2018. The increase was driven by balances across all categories, with the exception of time deposits, as customers addressed liquidity concerns amid the pandemic.
The following table presents time deposits with a denomination of $100,000 or more at December 31, 2020 by maturity periods:
Borrowings. FHLB advances are utilized as a source of funding for liquidity and interest rate risk management purposes. At December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, FHLB advances totaled $0.1 billion and $1.9 billion, respectively. Webster Bank had additional borrowing capacity from the FHLB of approximately $4.7 billion and $2.9 billion at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Webster Bank also had additional borrowing capacity from the FRB of $1.3 billion and $0.9 billion at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Securities sold under agreements to repurchase, whereby securities are delivered to counterparties under an agreement to repurchase the securities at a fixed price in the future are also utilized as a source of funding. Unpledged investment securities of $4.9 billion at December 31, 2020 could have been used for collateral on borrowings such as repurchase agreements or, alternatively, to increase borrowing capacity by approximately $4.6 billion with the FHLB or approximately $4.8 billion with the FRB. In addition, Webster Bank may utilize term and overnight Fed funds to meet short-term borrowing needs.
Long-term debt consists of senior fixed-rate notes maturing in 2024 and 2029, and junior subordinated notes maturing in 2033, which totaled $568 million and $540 million at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The Holding Company completed an underwritten public offering of $300 million senior fixed-rate notes on March 25, 2019, of which it invested the net proceeds in Webster Bank as permanent capital, to be used for working capital needs and other general purposes. During 2019, the Company initiated a fair value hedging relationship for the notes maturing in 2029 to swap the fixed interest rate to a variable rate and then during 2020, the Company terminated the swaps. The recognition of a fair value hedge adjustment to long-term debt impacted the balances in both periods.
Total borrowed funds were $1.7 billion, $3.5 billion and $2.6 billion, and represented 5.2%, 11.6% and 9.5% of total assets at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The decrease in 2020 compared to 2019 is due to deposit growth exceeding loan and securities growth. For additional information related to period-end balances and rates, refer to Note 12: Borrowings in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained elsewhere in this report.
Daily average balances of borrowings by type and weighted-average rates paid thereon for the periods as indicated:
Total average borrowings decreased $91.0 million, or 3.4%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to prepayment of FHLB balances. Total average borrowings increased $328.3 million, or 14.0%, in 2019 compared to 2018. The increase in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to the issuance of $300 million of senior fixed-rate notes in March 2019 and a related $17.5 million basis adjustment reflecting changes in the benchmark rate. Average borrowings represented 8.0%, 9.2%, and 8.7% of average total assets for December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
The following table sets forth additional information for short-term borrowings:
The following table summarizes contractual obligations to make future payments as of December 31, 2020:
(1)Amounts for borrowings do not include interest.
The Company also has the following obligations which have been excluded from the above table:
•unfunded commitments remaining for particular investments in private equity funds of $38.4 million, for which neither the payment timing, nor eventual obligation is certain;
•credit related financial instruments with contractual amounts totaling $6.8 billion, of which many of these commitments are expected to expire unused or only partially used, and therefore, the total amount of these commitments does not necessarily reflect future cash payments; and
•liabilities for uncertain tax positions totaling $5.0 million, for which uncertainty exists regarding the amount that may ultimately be paid, as well as the timing of any such payment.
Liquidity. Webster meets its cash flow requirements at an efficient cost under various operating environments through proactive liquidity management at both the Holding Company and Webster Bank. Liquidity comes from a variety of cash flow sources such as operating activities, including principal and interest payments on loans and investments; financing activities, including unpledged securities which can be sold or utilized to secure funding; and new deposits. Webster is committed to maintaining a strong, increasing base of core deposits, consisting of demand, checking, savings, health savings, and money market accounts, to support growth in its loan and lease portfolio. Liquidity is reviewed and managed in order to maintain stable, cost effective funding to promote overall balance sheet strength.
Holding Company Liquidity. The primary source of liquidity at the Holding Company is dividends from Webster Bank. Webster Bank paid $20 million in dividends to the Holding Company during the year ended December 31, 2020. To a lesser extent, investment income, net proceeds from investment sales, borrowings, and public offerings may provide additional liquidity. The main uses of liquidity are the payment of principal and interest to holders of senior notes and junior subordinated debt, the payment of dividends to preferred and common shareholders, repurchases of its common stock, and purchases of investment securities. There are certain restrictions on the payment of dividends by Webster Bank to the Holding Company, which are described in the section captioned "Supervision and Regulation" in Item 1 contained elsewhere in this report. At December 31, 2020, there was $361.0 million of retained earnings available for the payment of dividends by Webster Bank to the Holding Company.
The Company has a common stock repurchase program authorized by the Board of Directors, with $123.4 million of remaining repurchase authority at December 31, 2020. In addition, Webster periodically acquires common shares outside of the repurchase program related to stock compensation plan activity. The Company records the purchase of shares of common stock at cost based on the settlement date for these transactions. During the year ended December 31, 2020, a total of 2,186,519 shares of common stock were repurchased at a cost of approximately $80.1 million, of which 2,104,195 shares were purchased under the common stock repurchase program at a cost of approximately $76.6 million, and 82,324 shares were purchased at market prices for a cost of approximately $3.5 million relating to stock compensation plan activity. Due to the economic environment resulting from the pandemic in 2020, the Company temporarily suspended repurchases under its common stock repurchase program, but will resume repurchases when market conditions warrant.
Webster Bank Liquidity. Webster Bank's primary source of funding is core deposits. The primary use of this funding is for loan portfolio growth. Including time deposits, Webster Bank had a loan to total deposit ratio of 79.2% and 85.9% at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Webster Bank is required by OCC regulations to maintain liquidity sufficient to ensure safe and sound operations. Whether liquidity is adequate, as assessed by the OCC, depends on such factors as the overall asset/liability structure, market conditions, competition, and the nature of the institution’s deposit and loan customers. Webster Bank exceeded all regulatory liquidity requirements as of December 31, 2020. The Company has a detailed liquidity contingency plan designed to respond to liquidity concerns in a prompt and comprehensive manner. The plan is designed to provide early detection of potential problems, and details specific actions required to address liquidity stress scenarios.
Applicable OCC regulations require Webster Bank, as a commercial bank, to satisfy certain minimum leverage and risk-based capital requirements. As an OCC regulated commercial institution, it is also subject to minimum tangible capital requirements. As of December 31, 2020, Webster Bank was in compliance with all applicable capital requirements and exceeded the FDIC requirements for a well-capitalized institution. Refer to Note 15: Regulatory Matters in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained elsewhere in this report for a further discussion of regulatory requirements applicable to Webster Financial Corporation and Webster Bank.
The liquidity position of the Company is continuously monitored, and adjustments are made to the balance between sources and uses of funds as deemed appropriate. Management is not aware of any events that are reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on the Company’s liquidity, capital resources, or operations. In addition, management is not aware of any regulatory recommendations regarding liquidity, which, if implemented, would have a material adverse effect on the Company.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Webster engages in a variety of financial transactions that, in accordance with GAAP, are not recorded in the financial statements or are recorded in amounts that differ from the notional amounts. Such transactions are utilized in the normal course of business, for general corporate purposes or for customer financing needs. Corporate purpose transactions are structured to manage credit, interest rate, and liquidity risks, or to optimize capital. Customer transactions are structured to manage their funding requirements or facilitate certain trade arrangements. These transactions give rise to, in varying degrees, elements of credit, interest rate, and liquidity risk. For the year ended December 31, 2020, Webster did not engage in any off-balance sheet transactions that would have a material effect on its financial condition.
Asset/Liability Management and Market Risk
An effective asset/liability management process must balance the risks and rewards from both short and long-term interest rate risks in determining management strategy and action. To facilitate and manage this process, interest rate sensitivity is monitored on an ongoing basis by ALCO. The primary goal of ALCO is to manage interest rate risk to maximize net income and net economic value over time in changing interest rate environments subject to Board approved risk limits. The Board sets policy limits for earnings at risk for parallel ramps in interest rates over twelve months of plus and minus 100, 200, and 300 basis points, as well as interest rate curve twist shocks of plus and minus 50 and 100 basis points. Economic value, or equity at risk, limits are set for parallel shocks in interest rates of plus and minus 100, 200, and 300 basis points.
Due to the federal funds rate target range set at 0-0.25% as of December 31, 2020, the declining interest rate scenarios of minus 100 and 200 basis points, or more, for both earnings at risk and equity at risk were not run per ALCO policy. Instead, scenarios were run with short and long-term rates declining to zero, but not below. In 2019, ALCO implemented a balance sheet repositioning strategy with the goal of reducing asset sensitivity to falling rates which included the purchase of interest rate floors. ALCO also regularly reviews earnings at risk scenarios for non-parallel changes in rates, as well as longer-term scenarios of up to four years in the future.
Management measures interest rate risk using simulation analysis to calculate earnings and equity at risk. These risk measures are quantified using simulation software. Key assumptions relate to the behavior of interest rates and spreads, prepayment speeds, and the run-off of deposits. From such simulations, interest rate risk is quantified, and appropriate strategies are formulated and implemented.
Earnings at risk is defined as the change in earnings, excluding provision for loan and lease losses and income tax expense, due to changes in interest rates. Interest rates are assumed to change up or down in a parallel fashion, and earnings results are compared to a flat rate scenario as a base. The flat rate scenario holds the end of the period yield curve constant over the twelve month forecast horizon. Earnings simulation analysis incorporates assumptions about balance sheet changes such as asset and liability growth and mix changes and loan and deposit pricing. It is a measure of short-term interest rate risk.
Equity at risk is defined as the change in the net economic value of assets and liabilities due to changes in interest rates compared to a base net economic value. Equity at risk analyzes sensitivity in the present value of cash flows over the expected life of existing assets, liabilities, and off-balance sheet contracts. It is a measure of the long-term interest rate risk to future earnings streams embedded in the current balance sheet.
Asset sensitivity is defined as earnings or net economic value increasing compared to a base scenario when interest rates rise and decreasing when interest rates fall. In other words, assets are more sensitive to changing interest rates than liabilities and, therefore, re-price faster. Likewise, liability sensitivity is defined as earnings or net economic value decreasing compared to a base scenario when interest rates rise and increasing when interest rates fall.
Key assumptions underlying the present value of cash flows include the behavior of interest rates and spreads, asset prepayment speeds, and attrition rates on deposits. Cash flow projections from the model are compared to market expectations for similar collateral types and adjusted based on experience with Webster Bank's own portfolio. The model's valuation results are compared to observable market prices for similar instruments whenever possible. The behavior of deposit and loan customers is studied using historical time series analysis to model future customer behavior under varying interest rate environments.
The equity at risk simulation process uses multiple interest rate paths generated by an arbitrage-free trinomial lattice term structure model. The Base Case rate scenario, against which all others are compared, uses the month-end LIBOR/Swap yield curve as a starting point to derive forward rates for future months. Using interest rate swap option volatilities as inputs, the model creates multiple rate paths for this scenario with forward rates as the mean. In shock scenarios, the starting yield curve is shocked up or down in a parallel fashion. Future rate paths are then constructed in a similar manner to the Base Case.
Cash flows for all instruments are generated using product specific prepayment models and account specific system data for properties such as maturity date, amortization type, coupon rate, repricing frequency, and repricing date. The asset/liability simulation software is enhanced with a mortgage prepayment model and a collateralized mortgage obligation database. Instruments with explicit options such as caps, floors, puts and calls, and implicit options such as prepayment and early withdrawal ability require such a rate and cash flow modeling approach to more accurately quantify value and risk.
On the asset side, risk is impacted the most by mortgage loans and mortgage-backed securities, which can typically prepay at any time without penalty and may have embedded caps and floors. In the loan portfolio, floors are a benefit to interest income in low rate environments. Floating-rate loans at floors pay a higher interest rate than a loan at a fully indexed rate without a floor, as with a floor there is a limit on how low the interest rate can fall. As market rates rise, however, the interest rate paid on these loans does not rise until the fully indexed rate rises through the contractual floor.
On the liability side, there is a large concentration of customers with indeterminate maturity deposits who have options to add or withdraw funds from their accounts at any time. Implicit floors on deposits, based on historical data, are modeled. Webster Bank also has the option to change the interest rate paid on these deposits at any time.
Webster's earnings at risk model incorporates net interest income (NII) and non-interest income and expense items, some of which vary with interest rates. These items include mortgage banking income, servicing rights, cash management fees, and derivative mark-to-market adjustments.
Four main tools are used for managing interest rate risk:
•the size, duration, and credit risk of the investment portfolio;
•the size and duration of the wholesale funding portfolio;
•interest rate contracts; and
•the pricing and structure of loans and deposits.
ALCO meets at least monthly to make decisions on the investment and funding portfolios based on the economic outlook, the Committee's interest rate expectations, the risk position, and other factors. ALCO delegates pricing and product design responsibilities to individuals and sub-committees but monitors and influences their actions on a regular basis.
Various interest rate contracts, including futures and options, interest rate swaps, and interest rate caps and floors can be used to manage interest rate risk. These interest rate contracts involve, to varying degrees, credit risk and interest rate risk. Credit risk is the possibility that a loss may occur if a counterparty to a transaction fails to perform according to the terms of the contract. The notional amount of interest rate contracts is the amount upon which interest and other payments are based. The notional amount is not exchanged, and therefore, should not be taken as a measure of credit risk. Refer to Note 17: Derivative Financial Instruments in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained elsewhere in this report for additional information.
Certain derivative instruments, primarily forward sales of mortgage-backed securities, are utilized by Webster Bank in its efforts to manage risk of loss associated with its mortgage banking activities. Prior to closing and funds disbursement, an interest-rate lock commitment is generally extended to the borrower. During such time, Webster Bank is subject to risk that market rates of interest may change impacting pricing on loan sales. In an effort to mitigate this risk, forward delivery sales commitments are established, thereby setting the sales price.
The following table summarizes the estimated impact that gradual parallel changes in interest rates of 100 and 200 basis points, over a twelve month period starting December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, might have on Webster’s NII for the subsequent twelve month period compared to NII assuming no change in interest rates:
The following table summarizes the estimated impact that gradual parallel changes in interest rates of 100 and 200 basis points, over a twelve month period starting December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, might have on Webster’s PPNR for the subsequent twelve month period, compared to PPNR assuming no change in interest rates:
Interest rates are assumed to change up or down in a gradual parallel fashion, and NII and PPNR results in each scenario are compared to a flat rate scenario as a base. The flat rate scenario holds the end of period yield curve constant over a twelve month forecast horizon. The flat rate scenario as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 assumed a federal funds rate of 0.25% and 1.75%, respectively. Asset sensitivity for both NII and PPNR on December 31, 2020 was lower as compared to December 31, 2019, in the +100 basis point scenario. This lower asset sensitivity is primarily due to $3.4 billion of loans at their floors as of December 31, 2020 versus $26 million as of December 31, 2019. Many of these loans will require a rate increase greater than 100 basis points to rise above their floors.
Webster can also hold futures, options, and forward foreign currency contracts to minimize the price volatility of certain assets and liabilities. Changes in the market value of these positions are recognized in earnings.
Webster also analyzes the estimated impact of immediate non-parallel changes in interest rates in addition to analyzing gradual parallel changes in interest rates. The following table summarizes the estimated impact that immediate non-parallel changes in interest rates might have on Webster’s NII for the subsequent twelve month period starting December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
The following table summarizes the estimated impact that immediate non-parallel changes in interest rates might have on Webster’s PPNR for the subsequent twelve month period starting December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019:
The non-parallel scenarios are modeled with the short end of the yield curve moving up or down 50 and 100 basis points while the long end of the yield curve remains unchanged, and vice versa. The short end of the yield curve is defined as terms of less than eighteen months, and the long end as terms of greater than eighteen months. The results above reflect the annualized impact of immediate rate changes.
Sensitivity to increases in the short end of the yield curve for NII and PPNR decreased from December 31, 2019 due primarily to an increase in loans at floors. NII and PPNR were less sensitive to changes in the long end of the yield curve as of December 31, 2020 when compared to December 31, 2019 due to lower reinvestment rates and an increase in forecasted prepayment speeds resulting from decreases in the long end of the yield curve, which shortens asset duration by increasing prepayments for MBS and residential mortgages.
The following table summarizes the estimated economic value of assets, liabilities, and off-balance sheet contracts at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 and the projected change to economic values if interest rates instantaneously increase or decrease by 100 basis points:
Changes in economic value can be best described using duration. Duration is a measure of the price sensitivity of financial instruments for small changes in interest rates. For fixed-rate instruments, it can also be thought of as the weighted-average expected time to receive future cash flows. For floating-rate instruments, it can be thought of as the weighted-average expected time until the next rate reset. The longer the duration, the greater the price sensitivity for given changes in interest rates. Floating-rate instruments may have durations as short as one day and, therefore, have very little price sensitivity due to changes in interest rates. Increases in interest rates typically reduce the value of fixed-rate assets as future discounted cash flows are worth less at higher discount rates. A liability's value decreases for the same reason in a rising rate environment. A reduction in value of a liability is a benefit to Webster.
Duration gap is the difference between the duration of assets and the duration of liabilities. A duration gap near zero implies that the balance sheet is matched and would exhibit no change in estimated economic value for a small change in interest rates. Webster's duration gap was negative 1.9 years at December 31, 2020 and negative 0.8 years at December 31, 2019. A negative duration gap implies that liabilities are longer than assets and, therefore, they have more price sensitivity than assets and will reset their interest rates slower than assets. Consequently, Webster's net estimated economic value would generally be expected to increase when interest rates rise as the benefit of the decreased value of liabilities would more than offset the decreased value of assets. The opposite would generally be expected to occur when interest rates fall. Earnings would also generally be expected to increase when interest rates rise and decrease when interest rates fall over the longer term absent the effects of new business booked in the future. As of December 31, 2020, long-term rates fell by 97 basis points when compared to December 31, 2019. This lower starting point shortens asset duration by increasing residential loans and MBS prepayment speeds.
These estimates assume that management does not take any action to mitigate any positive or negative effects from changing interest rates. The earnings and economic value estimates are subject to factors that could cause actual results to differ. Management believes that Webster's interest rate risk position at December 31, 2020 represents a reasonable level of risk given the current interest rate outlook. Management, as always, is prepared to act in the event that interest rates do change rapidly.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
The consolidated financial statements and related data presented herein have been prepared in accordance with GAAP, which generally requires the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without considering changes in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation.
Unlike most industrial companies, substantially all of the assets and liabilities of a banking institution are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates have a more significant impact on Webster's performance than the effects of general levels of inflation. Interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or in the same magnitude as the price of goods and services.
Critical Accounting Policies and Accounting Estimates
The Company's significant accounting policies, as described in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, are fundamental to understanding its results of operations and financial condition. As stated in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 of this report, the preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires management to make judgments and accounting estimates that affect the amounts reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying Notes. While the Company bases estimates on historical experience, current information and other factors deemed to be relevant, actual results could differ materially from those estimates.
Accounting estimates are necessary in the application of certain accounting policies and procedures and can be susceptible to significant change. Critical accounting policies are defined as those that are most important to the portrayal of the Company's financial condition and results of operation, and that require management to make the most difficult, subjective, and complex judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain and which could potentially result in materially different amounts using different assumptions or under different conditions. The critical accounting policy identified by management, which is discussed with the appropriate committees of the Board of Directors, is summarized below.
Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans and Leases
The ACL on loans and leases is a reserve established through a provision for credit losses charged to expense, which represents management’s best estimate of lifetime credit loss within the Company’s loan and lease portfolios as of the balance sheet date. Changes to the ACL on loans and leases and, therefore, to the related provision for credit losses can materially affect financial results.
Determination of the ACL on loans and leases requires management to make estimates and assumptions which are based on information available as of the balance sheet date. These estimates and assumptions include, but are not limited to; credit risk in the portfolios, expectations of future economic conditions, adequacy of underlying collateral, present value of expected future cash flows, and management’s qualitative factors to reflect credit risk not captured in quantitative models. The ACL on loans and leases also includes consideration of the Company’s historic loss experience and the current macroeconomic environment.
While management utilizes its best judgment and information available, the ultimate adequacy of the ACL on loans and leases is dependent on a variety of internal and external factors including the performance of the Company’s loan and lease portfolios; the mix and level of loan balances outstanding; the general health of the economy, as evidenced by fluctuations in gross domestic product (GDP), changes in real estate demand and values, interest rates, unemployment rates, bankruptcy filings, other macroeconomic metrics; and the effects of unforeseen events such as natural disasters and pandemics. Changes in these variables may result in actual losses that differ from the originally estimated amounts.
Management evaluates the adequacy of the ACL on loans and leases on a quarterly basis. Although the overall balance is determined based on specific portfolio segments and individually assessed assets, the entire balance is available to absorb credit losses for any of the loan and lease portfolios. Determination of the ACL on loans and leases, including valuation methodology, is more fully described in Note 1: Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained elsewhere in this report and within this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, included in the section captioned "Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans and Leases Methodology."
Recently Issued Accounting Standards Updates
Refer to Note 1 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 of this report for a summary of recently issued ASUs and the expected impact on the Company's financial statements.