ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION.
You should read the following discussion together with our financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based on our current expectations, estimates and projections about our business and operations. Our actual results may differ materially from those currently anticipated and expressed in such forward-looking statements.
Overview
Since inception, the Company acquired the Webstar eCampus assets from Webstar Networks, a related party that is controlled by our controlling stockholder, on May 12, 2018 in exchange for issuance of 17,000,000 shares of our common stock. In addition, we signed two letters of intent to license proprietary software from Soft Tech, a related party that is wholly owned by our founder and controlling stockholder James Owens; i.e., Gigabyte Slayer and WARP-G. The Company began to operate and market the Webstar eCampus website on May 12, 2018 when it acquired those assets from Webstar Networks. Previously, we had been focused in large part on organizational activities and the development of our business plans to license the Gigabyte Slayer software application that is designed to deliver live video streams, video downloads and large data files more efficiently by using new proprietary data compression technology and to license the WARP-G software application that is designed to enable enterprise customers that transmit live video streams, video downloads and large data files to push such data over existing pipelines at higher speeds in less time also by using new proprietary data compression technology. On April 21, 2020, we entered into the License Agreement with Soft Tech Development Corporation to exclusively license, market and distribute Soft Tech’s Gigabyte Slayer and WARP-G software (the “Licensed Technology”) and further develop and commercialize these softwares throughout the world. James Owens, our controlling stockholder, owns Soft Tech. Pursuant to the terms of the License Agreement, we agreed to pay a contingent licensing fee of $650,000 for each of the two components of Soft Tech’s technology, for a total of $1,300,000 for the Licensed Technology. The contingent licensing fee becomes due and payable only upon the earlier of: (i) the closing of an aggregate of $20 million in net capital offering of our stock or (ii) when our cumulative net sales from the Licensed Technology reaches $20 million. Further, we have agreed to pay a royalty rate of 7% based on the net sales of the Licensed Software. The term of the license agreement is five years with one automatic renewal period. However, the royalty will continue as long as we are selling the Licensed Technology. See “Item 1 Business”. As of December 31, 2020, we have generated an accumulated deficit of $8,573,059.
Recent Developments
Series A Preferred Stock
On December 14, 2019, the Company’s Board of Directors designated 1,000 shares of the preferred stock as Series A Preferred Stock, par value $0.0001 per share. On March 16, 2020, the Company amended its Articles of Incorporation as filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Wyoming to designate as set forth in the Certificate of Designations (the “Certificate”) the Series A Preferred Stock as a series of preferred stock of the Company, effective March 16, 2020. 1,000 shares of Series A Preferred Stock are authorized. The Series A Preferred Stock has voting rights equivalent to three times the total voting power of the total common stock outstanding at any time. The Series A Preferred Stock has no transfer rights, no conversion rights, no dividends, and no liquidation preference.
On April 2, 2020, pursuant to the terms of a subscription agreement (the “Preferred Subscription Agreement”) the Company issued and sold to James Owens, the Company’s Chairman of the Board, Chief Technology Officer, founder, and controlling shareholder one thousand (1,000) shares of the Series A Preferred Stock, at a total purchase price of $250,000. The total price of $250,000 was recorded as a reduction to the due to stockholder account and an increase to the additional paid-in capital due to the related party nature of the transaction.
Common Stock
On April 21, 2020, the Company’s Board of Directors approved a common stock dividend to issue each holder of the Company’s common stock a common stock dividend of .218723 shares per share of the Company’s outstanding common stock.
On April 21, 2020, the Company issued 25,000,000 shares of its common stock to the Company’s common stockholders of record per the common stock dividend declaration. The table below shows all the Company’s stockholders of common stock and the number of shares held by each before and after the common stock dividend:
Initial Public Offering
On April 24, 2020, the Company filed a Post-Effective Amendment to its original Form S-1 Registration Statement. The Securities and Exchange Commission deemed the Post-Effective Amendment effective on May 1, 2020. Under the amended Registration Statement, on September 17, 2020, the Company completed the initial public offering of 600,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.0001 per share of the Company, for gross proceeds of $60,000.
Employment Agreements
On January 1, 2020, the Company entered into an Employment Agreement with each James Owens, in his capacity as the Company’s Chief Technology Officer, Don Roberts, in his capacity as the Company’s President and Chief Executive Officer and Harold Hutchins, in his capacity as the Company’s Chief Financial Officer and Secretary (referred to herein together as the “Employment Agreements” and each as an “Employment Agreement”). Pursuant to each Employment Agreement the Company agreed to compensate, each Mr. Owens, Mr. Roberts and Mr. Hutchins for their services with an annual wage of $350,000 to be paid bi-weekly with an annual performance evaluation. Further, pursuant to the Employment Agreements, each Mr. Owens, Mr. Roberts and Mr. Hutchins will be eligible for an annual bonus as determined by the Company’s Board of Directors (the “Board”). Further, pursuant to each Employment Agreement, in addition to the foregoing compensation, each Mr. Owens, Mr. Roberts and Mr. Hutchins will also receive a $1,000 monthly automobile/mileage allowance and will also be eligible for stock options or grants as granted by the Board. Pursuant to the Employment Agreements, all reasonable expenses arising out of each Mr. Owens, Mr. Roberts and Mr. Hutchins’ employment will be reimbursed by the Company so long as they are incurred for business purposes and supported by appropriate receipts. Each of the Employment Agreements may be terminated by either party with prior notice to the other party of twenty (20) days. If the Company provides a notice of termination of any of the Employment Agreements for a reason other than “Cause,” the Company will pay each Mr. Owens, Mr. Roberts and Mr. Hutchins a one-time payment equivalent to one (1) time the annual salary within thirty (30) days of termination. If a termination of the any of the Employment Agreements is made due to a change of control of the Company, each Mr. Owens, Mr. Roberts and Mr. Hutchins will be paid a one-time payment equivalent to two (2) times the annual salary within thirty (30) days of termination.
Plan of Operations
Webstar eCampus
Beginning in the second quarter of 2021, we plan to initiate our eCampus marketing plan. Our marketing campaign will consist of creating and establishing brand awareness and industry positioning and implementing a go-to-market program that includes a responsive website, social media marketing and communications via LinkedIn and Google search engine optimization. We expect to outsource parts of our planned marketing campaign to providers with expertise in these areas. We intend to hire an in-house sales manager who will be responsible for sales and coordination with technical support for implementation and operation of customer eCampus website operations. Our sales efforts will be further supported by other members of our executive management team who are expected to use their industry contacts and expertise to assist in the sales process.
Gigabyte Slayer Software and WARP-G Software
We have entered into a license agreement for the WARP-G software and the Gigabyte Slayer software. We will further develop and commercialize these software programs throughout the world by sub-licensing the software.
Gigabyte Slayer. Gigabyte Slayer is a retail-oriented software application that will be sub-licensed to targeted companies who provide data streaming services. The software is expected to be available for download via Google Play and other Android app platforms. We expect to use outsourced providers with expertise in online marketing campaigns and have targeted a goal of 768,000 retail customers within 12 months after we sub-license the software.
WARP-G. WARP-G is a business-to-business software solution that companies can use on an enterprise wide basis to transmit more data over existing data streams to optimize their data usage. We plan to engage in sales through licensing transactions with data delivery companies such as Verizon, AT&T, T-Mobile, Amazon, Google, cable operators, Netflix, Electronic Arts and other gaming companies. In addition, we expect to explore the broader technology channel for implementation of a reseller program to optimize scaling our planned business.
Results of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following comparative analysis on results of operations were based primarily on the comparative financial statements, footnotes and related information for the periods identified below and should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes to those statements that are included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The results discussed below are for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Subsequent to the purchase of the Webstar eCampus assets, we have had minimal revenues and have funded our operating expenses through loans from our controlling stockholder and accrual of various costs and expenses. Revenue earned from the eCampus Software totaled $6,739 and $4,442 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase is due to the larger classroom sizes of our sole customer. Total operating expenses which are comprised of salaries and related expenses, consulting fees, and general and administrative expenses were $1,357,014 and $1,097,375 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase is primarily attributable to an increase in salaries and related expenses arising from the officer employment agreements signed in 2020 and partially offset by a material decrease in consulting fees and a minor decrease in general and administrative expenses.
The net loss was $1,351,875 and $1,097,378 for the years ended, 2020 and 2019, respectively. This increase is a result of the increase in total operating expenses discussed above.
Liquidity, Going Concern and Uncertainties
Liquidity is the ability of an enterprise to generate adequate amounts of cash to meet its needs for cash requirements. As of December 31, 2020, our working capital deficit amounted to $1,900,814 an increase of $1,040,408 as compared to working capital deficit of $860,406 as of December 31, 2019. This increase is primarily a result of an increase in accrued salaries and related expenses as well as accounts payable and a decrease in cash, partially offset by a decrease in the amount due to stockholder.
Net cash used in operating activities was $273,123 during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $351,727 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change in cash from operating activities is primarily attributable to decreases in consulting fees and general and administrative expenses partially offset by an increase in accounts payable.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $238,093 during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $383,021 in the year ended December 31, 2019. The change in cash from financing activities was the result of a decrease in cash received from a related party and cash received from a note payable partially offset by proceeds from the sale of common stock.
Generally, the Company’s operations are subject to a number of factors that can affect its operating result and financial condition. Such factors include, but are not limited to, the results of our marketing efforts to promote users for our software solutions, successful launch and acceptance of our software solutions in the marketplace, competition of our software solutions, attraction of talented and skilled employees to support the business and the ability to raise capital to support its operations.
In order to continue as a going concern, we will need, among other things, additional capital resources. Management’s plan is to obtain such resources for our capital needs by obtaining capital from management and significant stockholders sufficient to meet its operating expenses. Further, management cannot provide any assurances that we will be successful in accomplishing any of our plans. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to successfully accomplish the plans described in the preceding paragraph and eventually secure other sources of financing and attain profitable operations. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if we were unable to continue as a going concern.
Commitments and Contingencies
The Company follows subtopic 450-20 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification to report accounting for contingencies. Certain conditions may exist as of the date the financial statements are issued, which may result in a loss to the Company but which will only be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur. The Company assesses such contingent liabilities, and such assessment inherently involves an exercise of judgment.
If the assessment of a contingency indicates that it is probable that a material loss has been incurred and the amount of the liability can be estimated, then the estimated liability would be accrued in the Company’s financial statements. If the assessment indicates that a potentially material loss contingency is not probable but is reasonably possible, or is probable but cannot be estimated, then the nature of the contingent liability, and an estimate of the range of possible losses, if determinable and material, would be disclosed.
Loss contingencies considered remote are generally not disclosed unless they involve guarantees, in which case the guarantees would be disclosed. The Company’s legal costs associated with contingent liabilities are recorded to expense as incurred.
Income taxes
We are a corporation for U.S. federal income tax purposes. As such we are subject to U.S. federal, state and local income taxes and are taxed at the prevailing corporate tax rates. We recognize the effect of income tax positions only if these positions are more likely than not to be sustained. Changes in recognition or measurement are reflected in the period in which the change in judgment occurs. The financial statements included in this annual report do not include a provision for federal income taxes since each of our statements of operations have a net loss. In the future, if we determine that such tax benefits are likely to be realized by us, we will record a deferred tax asset based on the then effective income tax rate.
JOBS Act
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” pursuant to the provisions of the JOBS Act. For as long as we are an “emerging growth company,” we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not “emerging growth companies,” including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements, reduced disclosure obligations relating to the presentation of financial statements in Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations and exemptions from the requirements of holding advisory “say-on-pay” votes on executive compensation and stockholder advisory votes on golden parachute compensation. We have availed ourselves of the reduced reporting obligations and executive compensation disclosure in this annual report and expect to continue to avail ourselves of the reduced reporting obligations available to emerging growth companies in future filings.
In addition, an emerging growth company can delay its adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. However, we are choosing to take advantage of such extended transition period, and as a result, we may not comply with any new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which non-emerging growth companies must adopt such standards.
We will continue to qualify as an emerging growth company until the earliest of:
● The last day of our fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the date of our IPO;
● The last day of our fiscal year in which we have annual gross revenues of $1.0 billion or more;
● The date on which we have, during the previous three-year period, issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt;
● The date on which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer”, which will occur at such time as we (1) have an aggregate worldwide market value of common equity securities held by non-affiliates of $700 million or more as of the last business day of our most recently completed second quarter, (2) have been required to file annual and quarterly reports under the Exchange Act for a period of at least 12 months and (3) have filed at least one annual report pursuant to the Exchange Act.
Inflation
In the opinion of management, inflation has not and will not have a material effect on our operations in the immediate future. Management will continue to monitor inflation and evaluate the possible future effects of inflation on our business and operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on its financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors. The term “off-balance sheet arrangement” generally means any transaction, agreement or other contractual arrangement to which an entity unconsolidated with us is a party, under which we have any obligation arising under a guarantee contract, derivative instrument or variable interest or a retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to such entity or similar arrangement that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support for such assets.
Critical Accounting Policies
We have identified the following policies below as critical to our business and results of operations. Our reported results are impacted by the application of the following accounting policies, certain of which require management to make subjective or complex judgments. These judgments involve making estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may significantly impact quarterly or annual results of operations. For all of these policies, management cautions that future events rarely develop exactly as expected, and the best estimates routinely require adjustment. Specific risks associated with these critical accounting policies are described in the following paragraphs.
Pursuant to the JOBS Act, as an emerging growth company, we can elect to opt out of the extended transition period for adopting any new or revised accounting standards. We have elected not to opt out of such extended transition period, which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, we may adopt the standard for the private company. This may make comparison of our financial statements with any other public company that is neither an emerging growth company, nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period, difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
We have elected to take advantage of the scaled disclosures and other relief under the JOBS Act described above in this annual report (see “Implications of Being an Emerging Growth Company”), and we may take advantage of some or all of the reduced regulatory and reporting requirements that will be available to us under the JOBS Act, so long as we qualify as an emerging growth company, including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
Estimates. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Stock-based Compensation. We follow the provisions of ASC 718 which requires all share-based payments to employees and non-employees, including grants of employee and non-employee stock options, to be recognized in the statement of operations based on their grant date fair values.
Revenue. The Company recognizes revenues when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. For student fees, the Company generates student fee revenue by registering each student that participates in an on-line classroom utilizing our eCampus platform. This revenue is earned at the time the on-line class takes place and is accrued during the period whether or not actually billed. The student fees are billed to the college conducting the classes during the period the classes are conducted. There are no prepayments for student fees so there is no deferred revenue related to student fees.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
We implemented all new accounting standards that are in effect and that may impact our financial statements. We do not believe that there are any other new accounting pronouncements that have been issued that might have a material impact on the financial position or results of operations.