Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Company Overview
WESCO International, Inc. (“WESCO International”), incorporated in 1993 and effectively formed in February 1994 upon acquiring a distribution business from Westinghouse Electric Corporation, is a leading provider of business-to-business distribution, logistics services and supply chain solutions.
On June 22, 2020, WESCO completed its previously announced acquisition of Anixter, a Delaware corporation. Pursuant to the terms of the Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated January 10, 2020 (the “Merger Agreement”), by and among Anixter, WESCO and Merger Sub, Merger Sub was merged with and into Anixter (the “Merger”), with Anixter surviving the Merger and continuing as a wholly owned subsidiary of WESCO. On June 23, 2020, Anixter merged with and into Anixter Inc., with Anixter Inc. surviving to become a wholly owned subsidiary of WESCO.
As a result of the Merger, the Company now employs nearly 18,000 people, maintains relationships with approximately 30,000 suppliers, and serves more than 125,000 customers worldwide. With nearly 1,500,000 products, end-to-end supply chain services, and extensive digital capabilities, WESCO provides innovative solutions to meet current customer needs across commercial and industrial businesses, contractors, government agencies, institutions, telecommunications providers, and utilities. WESCO has approximately 800 branches, warehouses and sales offices with operations in more than 50 countries, providing a local presence for customers and a global network to serve multi-location businesses and multi-national corporations.
Prior to the completion of its merger with Anixter on June 22, 2020, as described in Note 6, "Acquisitions" of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, WESCO had four operating segments that had been aggregated as one reportable segment. Effective on the date of acquisition, the Company added Anixter as a separate reportable segment for the quarterly period ended June 30, 2020. At the beginning of the third quarter of 2020, the Company identified new operating segments organized around three strategic business units consisting of Electrical & Electronic Solutions ("EES"), Communications & Security Solutions ("CSS") and Utility and Broadband Solutions ("UBS"). The applicable comparative financial information reported in the Company's previously issued consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 have been recast in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to conform to the basis of the new segments.
The following is a description of each of the Company's reportable segments and their business activities.
Electrical & Electronic Solutions
The EES segment supplies a broad range of products and supply chain solutions primarily to the Construction, Industrial and Original Equipment Manufacturer ("OEM") markets. Product categories include a broad range of electrical equipment and supplies, wire and cable, lubricants, pipe, valves, fittings, fasteners, cutting tools, power transmission, and safety products. In addition, OEM customers require a reliable supply of assemblies and components to incorporate into their own products as well as value-added services such as supplier consolidation, design and technical support, just-in-time supply and electronic commerce, and supply chain management. EES includes the “Electrical and Electronic Solutions” business acquired from Anixter and the majority of the legacy WESCO industrial and construction businesses.
Communications & Security Solutions
The CSS segment supplies products and customized supply chain solutions to customers in a diverse range of industries including technology, finance, telecommunications service providers, transportation, education, government, healthcare and retail. CSS sells these products directly to end users or through various channels including data communications contractors, security, network, professional audio/visual and systems integrators. CSS has a broad product portfolio that includes copper and fiber optic cable and connectivity, access control, video surveillance, intrusion and fire/life safety, cabinets, power, cable management, wireless, professional audio/video, voice and networking switches and other ancillary products. CSS includes the “Network and Security Solutions” business acquired from Anixter and the legacy WESCO data communications and safety businesses.
Utility & Broadband Solutions
The UBS segment supplies electrical transmission and distribution products, power plant maintenance, repair and operations supplies and smart-grid products, and arranges materials management and procurement outsourcing for the power generation, power transmission and electricity distribution industries. The UBS segment combines the “Utility Power Solutions” business acquired from Anixter, the legacy WESCO utility business, the legacy WESCO broadband business and the legacy WESCO integrated supply business.
Overall Financial Performance
Our 2020 financial results reflect the half year impact of the merger with Anixter, partially offset by unfavorable business conditions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Net sales increased $4.0 billion, or 47.5%, over the prior year. Cost of goods sold as a percentage of net sales and gross profit margin was 81.1% and 18.9%, respectively, for both 2020 and 2019. Cost of goods sold for 2020 includes merger-related fair value adjustments of $43.7 million, as well as an out-of-period adjustment of $18.9 million related to inventory absorption accounting. Adjusted for these amounts, gross profit as a percentage of net sales for 2020 was 19.4%. Selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expenses as a percentage of net sales were 15.1% and 14.0% for 2020 and 2019, respectively. SG&A expenses for 2020 include merger-related costs of $132.2 million, as well as a gain on the sale of a U.S. operating branch of $19.8 million. Adjusted for these amounts, SG&A expenses for 2020 were $1.7 billion, or 14.2% of net sales, reflecting lower sales and the merger with Anixter, partially offset by cost reduction actions taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. SG&A expenses for 2019 include $3.1 million of merger-related costs. Operating income was $347.0 million for 2020, compared to $346.2 million for 2019. Operating income for 2020 includes the aforementioned merger-related costs, merger-related fair value adjustments, out-of-period adjustment, and gain on the sale of a U.S. operating branch. Adjusted for these items, operating profit was $522.0 million, or 4.2% of net sales. For 2019, operating profit adjusted for merger-related costs of $3.1 million was $349.3 million, or 4.2% of net sales. Net income attributable to common stockholders for 2020 and 2019 was $70.4 million and $223.4 million, respectively. As adjusted for the aforementioned items, including the related income tax effects, net income attributable to common stockholders was $203.6 million and $225.9 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. Earnings per diluted share attributable to common stockholders was $1.51 in 2020, based on 46.6 million diluted shares, compared with earnings per diluted share of $5.14 in 2019, based on 43.5 million diluted shares. As adjusted, earnings per diluted share for 2020 and 2019 was $4.37 and $5.20, respectively.
During 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic had a significant impact on our business and adversely impacted our results of operations. We expect these negative impacts to continue during the first quarter of 2021, and potentially longer, depending on the duration and severity of the pandemic, any resurgence of COVID-19, the development and availability of effective treatments and vaccines, and other future developments that are currently uncertain and cannot be predicted.
Events and factors relating to the COVID-19 pandemic include limitations on the ability of our suppliers to manufacture or procure the products we sell or to meet delivery requirements and commitments; disruptions to our global supply chains; limitations on the ability of our employees to perform their work due to travel or other restrictions; limitations on the ability of carriers to deliver our products to our customers; limitations on the ability of our customers to conduct their business and purchase our products and services, or pay us on a timely basis; and disruptions to our customers’ purchasing patterns. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have taken actions focused on protecting the health and safety of our employees, which is our top priority. We have restricted non-essential business travel, implemented remote work protocols, and instituted preventive measures at our facilities, including enhanced health and safety protocols, temperature screening and requiring face coverings for employees.
The products and services that we provide are integral to the daily operations of our essential business customers and accordingly, we have taken actions to maintain the continuity of our operations in response to the pandemic. To date, our branch locations have remained operational consistent with governmental and public health authority directives. Beginning in March 2020, and continuing throughout 2020, we have taken, and continue to take, actions to reduce costs consistent with the expected decline in demand, including reductions in administrative expenses, payroll and benefits, and other spending across the company. Given the ongoing uncertainty regarding the duration, severity and scope of the COVID-19 pandemic, we are continuing to monitor the situation and may take further actions in light of future developments.
We have experienced, and may continue to experience, reduced customer demand for certain of our products and services, including delays or cancellations of ongoing or anticipated projects due to our clients’, suppliers’ and other third parties’ diminished financial conditions. We cannot predict the timeframe for recovery of our customer’s demand for our products and services. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact our business and financial results going forward is highly uncertain and will depend on many factors outside of our control, including the duration and scope of the crisis, the development and availability of effective treatments and vaccines, imposition of protective public safety measures, and the overall impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy and capital markets.
Certain triggering events occurred during the first quarter of 2020, including the effect of the ongoing macroeconomic disruption and uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the decline in our share price and market capitalization, both of which indicated that the carrying value of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets may not be recoverable. Accordingly, we performed an interim test for impairment as of March 31, 2020. There were no impairment losses identified as a result of this interim test.
As disclosed in Note 2, "Accounting Policies" of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, we identified new operating segments during the third quarter of 2020, which changed the composition of our reporting units. Accordingly, we reassigned goodwill to the new reporting units using a relative fair value allocation approach. We performed a goodwill impairment test immediately before and after we reorganized our reporting structure. Goodwill was tested for impairment on a reporting unit level and the evaluation involved comparing the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. The fair values of our reporting units were determined using a discounted cash flow analysis, and consideration was also given to market multiples. In performing the quantitative assessments, management used expected operating margins supported by a combination of historical results, current forecasts, market data and recent economic events, which are categorized within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy. We used a discount rate that reflects market participants' cost of capital. There were no impairment losses identified as a result of these tests. Although our reorganized reporting units had fair values that exceeded the respective carrying values, the EES reporting unit had an estimated fair value that exceeded its respective carrying value by less than 10%. As a result, the EES reporting unit is more susceptible to impairment risk from adverse macroeconomic conditions and if such conditions were to persist the underlying cash flows used to estimate fair value may impact the recoverability of goodwill.
We performed our annual impairment tests of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets during the fourth quarter of 2020 by assessing qualitative factors to determine whether it was more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit was less than its carrying amount. In performing this qualitative assessment, we assessed relevant events and circumstances, including macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, overall financial performance, other relevant events such as changes in key personnel, changes in the composition or carrying amount of the net assets of a reporting unit, and sustained decreases in share price. As a result of this assessment, we determined that the fair values of our reporting units continued to exceed the respective carrying amounts and, therefore, a quantitative impairment test was unnecessary.
The determination of fair value of the reporting units involves significant management judgment, particularly as it relates to the underlying assumptions and factors around expected operating margins and discount rate. Due to the ongoing uncertainty surrounding the current macroeconomic environment and conditions in the markets in which we operate, as well as the risk that we may not fully realize cost savings, operating synergies or revenue improvement as a result of its acquisition of Anixter, there can be no assurance that the fair values of our reporting units will exceed their carrying values in the future, and that goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets will be fully recoverable.
Cash Flow
We generated $543.9 million in operating cash flow during 2020. Cash provided by operating activities included net income of $100.0 million, adjustments to net income totaling $113.7 million, and changes in assets and liabilities of $330.2 million. Investing activities included $3,707.6 million to fund a portion of the merger with Anixter, as described in Note 6, "Acquisitions" of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, and $56.7 million of capital expenditures. Financing activities were comprised of $2,815.0 million of net proceeds from the issuance of senior unsecured notes to finance a portion of the merger with Anixter, borrowings and repayments of $1.2 billion and $948.0 million, respectively, related to our prior and new revolving credit facilities, as well as borrowings and repayments of $1.1 billion and $565.0 million, respectively, related to our prior and amended accounts receivable securitization facility. Financing activities for 2020 also included net repayments related to our various international lines of credit of $9.7 million, $80.2 million of debt issuance costs associated with financing the merger with Anixter, and $30.1 million of dividends paid to holders of our Series A Preferred Stock.
Free cash flow for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $586.1 million and $180.3 million, respectively.
The following table sets forth the components of free cash flow:
Note: The table above reconciles cash flow provided by operations to free cash flow. Free cash flow is a non-GAAP financial measure of liquidity. Capital expenditures are deducted from operating cash flow to determine free cash flow. Free cash flow is available to fund investing and financing activities. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, the Company paid certain fees, expenses and other costs to consummate the merger with Anixter. Such expenditures have been added back to cash flow provided by operations to determine free cash flow for such period.
Financing Availability
On June 22, 2020, in connection with the Merger, we entered into a $1,100 million revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Credit Facility”), as a replacement of our existing revolving credit facility entered into on September 26, 2019. Also concurrent with the completion of the Merger, we amended our accounts receivable securitization facility (the “Receivables Facility”). On December 14, 2020, we amended the Revolving Credit Facility and Receivables Facility to permit an increase of the borrowing capacities under such facilities from $1,100 million to $1,200 million, and from $1,025 million to $1,200 million, respectively. Borrowings under the amended revolving credit and accounts receivable securitization facilities will be used to redeem our $500 million aggregate principal amount of 5.375% Senior Notes due 2021, as described in Note 19, "Subsequent Events" of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $801.5 million in total available borrowing capacity under our Revolving Credit Facility, which was comprised of $684.3 million of availability under the U.S. sub-facility and $117.3 million of availability under the Canadian sub-facility. Available borrowing capacity under our Receivables Facility was $75.0 million. The Revolving Credit Facility and the Receivables Facility mature in June 2025 and June 2023, respectively.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (U.S. GAAP). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to supplier rebate income, expected credit losses, inventories, insurance costs, goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, income taxes, contingencies and litigation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates. If actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, additional adjustments to reserve items may be required. We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue arrangements generally consist of single performance obligations to transfer a promised good or service, or a combination of goods and services. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring goods or providing services. Revenue is recognized when control has transferred to the customer, which is generally when the product has shipped from our facility or directly from a supplier. However, transfer may occur at a later date depending on the agreed upon terms, such as delivery at the customer's designated location, or based on consignment terms. For products that ship directly from suppliers to customers, we act as the principal in the transaction and recognize revenue on a gross basis. When providing services, sales are recognized over time as control transfers to the customer, which occurs as services are rendered. We generally satisfy our performance obligations within a year or less.
We generally do not have significant financing terms associated with our contracts; payments are normally received within 60 days. There are generally no significant costs associated with obtaining customer contracts. We typically pass through warranties offered by manufacturers or suppliers to our customers. Sales taxes (and value added taxes in foreign jurisdictions) collected from customers and remitted to governmental authorities are excluded from net sales.
Supplier Volume Rebates
We receive volume rebates from certain suppliers based on contractual arrangements with such suppliers. Volume rebates are included within other accounts receivable in the Consolidated Balance Sheets, and represent the estimated amounts due to us based on forecasted purchases and the rebate provisions of the various supplier contracts. The corresponding volume rebate income is recorded as a reduction to cost of goods sold.
Allowance for Expected Credit Losses
We recognize expected credit losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments through an allowance account that is measured each reporting date. We estimate credit losses over the life of our trade accounts receivable using a combination of historical loss data, current credit conditions, specific customer circumstances, and reasonable and supportable forecasts of future economic conditions.
Inventories
Inventories primarily consist of merchandise purchased for resale and are stated at the lower of cost and net realizable value. Cost is determined principally under the average cost method. We reduce the carrying value of our inventories at the earlier of identifying an item that is considered to be obsolete or in excess of supply relative to demand, or no movement in the past 15 months.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment annually during the fourth quarter using information available at the end of September, or more frequently if triggering events occur, indicating that their carrying value may not be recoverable. We test for goodwill impairment on a reporting unit level. We first assess qualitative factors, including macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, overall financial performance, other relevant events such as changes in key personnel, changes in the composition or carrying amount of the net assets of a reporting unit, and sustained decreases in share price, to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting units are less than their carrying values. If the qualitative assessment indicates that the fair values of our reporting units may not exceed their respective carrying values, then we perform a quantitative test for impairment by comparing the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. We determine the fair values of our reporting units using a discounted cash flow analysis and consideration of market multiples. The discounted cash flow analysis uses certain assumptions, including expected operating margins supported by a combination of historical results, current forecasts, market data and recent economic events, which are categorized within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy. We use a discount rate that reflects market participants' cost of capital. We evaluate the recoverability of indefinite-lived intangible assets using the relief-from-royalty method based on projected financial information.
The determination of fair value involves significant management judgment, particularly as it relates to the underlying assumptions and factors around expected operating margins and discount rate. Management applies its best judgment when assessing the reasonableness of financial projections. Fair values are sensitive to changes in underlying assumptions and factors. As a result, there can be no assurance that the estimates and assumptions made for purposes of the annual goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible impairment tests will prove to be an accurate prediction of future results.
Intangible Assets
We account for certain economic benefits purchased as a result of our acquisitions, including customer relations, distribution agreements, technology and trademarks, as intangible assets. Most trademarks have an indefinite life. We amortize all other intangible assets over a useful life determined by the expected cash flows produced by such intangibles and their respective tax benefits. Useful lives vary between 2 and 20 years, depending on the specific intangible asset.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred income taxes for events that have future tax consequences. Under this method, deferred income taxes are recognized (using enacted tax laws and rates) based on the future income tax effects of differences in the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting and tax purposes. The effect of a tax rate change on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period of change.
We recognize deferred tax assets at amounts that are expected to be realized. To make such determination, management evaluates all positive and negative evidence, including but not limited to, prior, current and future taxable income, tax planning strategies and future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences. A valuation allowance is recognized if it is “more-likely-than-not” that some or all of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. We regularly assess the realizability of deferred tax assets.
We account for uncertainty in income taxes using a "more-likely-than-not" recognition threshold. Due to the subjectivity inherent in the evaluation of uncertain tax positions, the tax benefit ultimately recognized may materially differ from the estimate recognized in the consolidated financial statements. We recognize interest and penalties related to uncertain tax benefits as part of interest expense and income tax expense, respectively.
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (the “TCJA”) imposed a one-time tax on the deemed repatriation of undistributed foreign earnings (the “transition tax”). Except for a portion of foreign earnings previously taxed in the U.S. that can effectively be distributed without further material U.S. or foreign taxation, we continue to assert that the undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries are indefinitely reinvested. To the extent the earnings of our foreign subsidiaries are distributed in the form of dividends, such earnings may be subject to additional taxes. We believe that we are able to maintain a sufficient level of liquidity for our domestic operations and commitments without incurring any material tax cost to repatriate cash held by our foreign subsidiaries.
The provisions of the TCJA also introduced U.S. taxation on certain global intangible low-taxed income ("GILTI"). We have elected to account for GILTI tax as a component of income tax expense.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth the percentage relationship to net sales of certain items in our Consolidated Statements of Income and Comprehensive Income for the periods presented:
2020 Compared to 2019
Net Sales
The following table sets forth net sales by segment for the periods presented:
Net sales were $12.3 billion in 2020 compared with $8.4 billion in 2019, an increase of 47.5% due to the merger with Anixter that was completed on June 22, 2020, partially offset by the impact of weakened demand from the COVID-19 pandemic.
EES reported net sales of $5.5 billion in 2020, compared to $4.9 billion in 2019, an increase of 12.7%. The increase reflects the impact of the merger with Anixter, partially offset by weakened global demand in construction and industrial markets due to local and government shutdowns associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as related disruptions to our suppliers and customers that have caused delays to projects.
CSS reported net sales of $3.3 billion in 2020, compared to $0.9 billion in 2019, an increase of 265.4%. The increase reflects the impact of the merger with Anixter. The COVID-19 pandemic had an overall negative impact on CSS sales, although some customers and end users are considered essential businesses that saw increased demand.
UBS reported net sales of $3.5 billion in 2020, compared to $2.6 billion in 2019, an increase of 36.1%. The increase reflects the impact of the merger with Anixter. The COVID-19 pandemic had a limited impact on UBS sales as the primary customers in this segment are public power and investor owned utilities, which are considered essential business and have maintained normal operations.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold for 2020 was $10.0 billion, compared to $6.8 billion for 2019. Cost of goods sold as a percentage of net sales was 81.1% in both 2020 and 2019. Cost of goods sold for 2020 includes merger-related fair value adjustments of $43.7 million, as well as an out-of-period adjustment of $18.9 million related to inventory absorption accounting. Adjusted for these amounts, cost of goods sold as a percentage of net sales for 2020 was 80.6%.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses include costs associated with personnel, shipping and handling, travel, advertising, facilities, utilities and credit losses. SG&A expenses for 2020 were $1.9 billion, an increase of $685.9 million, or 58.5%, from 2019. SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales increased to 15.1% in 2020 from 14.0% in 2019. SG&A expenses for 2020 include merger-related costs of $132.2 million, as well as a gain on the sale of a U.S. operating branch of $19.8 million. Adjusted for these amounts, SG&A expenses for 2020 were $1.7 billion, or 14.2% of net sales, reflecting the merger with Anixter and lower sales, partially offset by cost reduction actions taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. SG&A expenses for 2019 include $3.1 million of merger-related costs.
SG&A payroll expenses for 2020 of $1.2 billion increased by $398.1 million compared to 2019 primarily due to the merger with Anixter. Excluding the impact of the merger, SG&A payroll expenses were down $35.0 million due to lower salaries and wages, variable compensation expense and benefit costs resulting from cost reduction actions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
The remaining SG&A expenses for 2020 of $648.0 million increased by $287.8 million compared to 2019. The increase in the remaining SG&A expenses was primarily due to the impact of the merger with Anixter.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization increased $59.5 million to $121.6 million in 2020, compared with $62.1 million in 2019. The current period includes $33.0 million of amortization attributable to identifiable intangible assets acquired in the merger with Anixter.
Income from Operations
The following tables set forth income from operations by segment for the periods presented:
EES reported operating profit of $260.2 million in 2020, compared to $261.8 million in 2019. The decrease reflects lower demand caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, offset by the merger with Anixter and cost reduction actions taken in response to the lower demand.
CSS reported operating profit of $217.2 million in 2020, compared to $43.8 million in 2019. The increase reflects the impact of the merger with Anixter. The benefits of cost reduction actions taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as operating synergies resulting from the business combination, had a favorable impact on operating profit.
UBS reported operating profit of $231.7 million in 2020, compared to $184.9 million in 2019. The increase reflects the impact of the merger with Anixter. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the UBS segment was limited as many of its primary customers are public power and investor owned utilities that are considered essential businesses and have maintained normal operations.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net totaled $226.6 million in 2020, compared with $65.7 million in 2019, an increase of 244.8%. The increase in interest expense was driven by financing activity related to the Anixter merger.
Other, net
Other non-operating income ("other, net") totaled $2.4 million in 2020, compared to $1.6 million in 2019.
Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate was 18.6% in 2020 compared to 21.2% in 2019. The lower effective tax rate in the current year was primarily due to one-time impacts from the merger with Anixter.
Net Income and Earnings per Share
Net income for 2020 was $100.0 million, compared to $222.2 million for 2019.
Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests in 2020 and 2019 was $0.5 million and $1.2 million, respectively.
Preferred stock dividends expense of $30.1 million in 2020 relates to the fixed-rate reset cumulative perpetual preferred stock, Series A, that was issued in connection with the merger.
Net income and earnings per diluted share attributable to common stockholders were $70.4 million and $1.51 per diluted share, respectively, in 2020, compared with $223.4 million and $5.14 per diluted share, respectively, in 2019. Adjusted for the items mentioned above, net income and earnings per diluted share attributable to common stockholders were $203.6 million and $4.37 per diluted share, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020. Adjusted net income and adjusted earnings per diluted share attributable to common stockholders were $225.9 million and $5.20 per diluted share, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The following tables reconcile income from operations, provision for income taxes and earnings per diluted share to adjusted net income from operations, adjusted provision for income taxes and adjusted earnings per diluted share, which are non-GAAP financial measures, for the periods presented:
(1) The adjustments to income from operations have been tax effected at a rate of 23.9% and 21.2% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Note: For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, income from operations, the provision for income taxes and earnings per diluted share have been adjusted to exclude merger-related costs and fair value adjustments, an out-of-period adjustment related to inventory absorption accounting, gain on sale of a U.S. operating branch, and the related income tax effects. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, income from operations, the provision for income taxes and earnings per diluted share have been adjusted to exclude merger-related costs and the related income tax effects. These non-GAAP financial measures provide a better understanding of the Company's financial results on a comparable basis.
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin %
The following tables reconcile net income attributable to common stockholders to EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin % by segment, which are non-GAAP financial measures, for the periods presented:
Note: EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin % are non-GAAP financial measures that provide indicators of our performance and ability to meet debt service requirements. EBITDA is defined as earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as EBITDA before other non-operating expenses ("other, net"), non-cash stock-based compensation, merger-related costs and fair value adjustments, an out-of-period adjustment related to inventory absorption accounting, and gain on sale of a U.S. operating branch. Adjusted EBITDA margin % is calculated by dividing Adjusted EBITDA by net sales.
Adjusted EBITDA for EES was $294.9 million in 2020, or 5.4% of net sales, compared to $291.5 million in 2019, or 6.0% of net sales.
Adjusted EBITDA for CSS was $289.6 million in 2020, or 8.7% of net sales, compared to $51.1 million in 2019, or 5.6% of net sales.
Adjusted EBITDA for UBS was $264.6 million in 2020, or 7.5% of net sales, compared to $198.7 million in 2019, or 7.7% of net sales.
2019 Compared to 2018
Net Sales
The following table sets forth net sales by segment for the periods presented:
Net sales were $8.4 billion in 2019 compared with $8.2 billion in 2018, an increase of 2.2%.
EES reported net sales of $4.9 billion in both 2019 and 2018. The moderate decline of 0.4% reflects skilled labor constraints and overall uncertainty related to the macroeconomic environment and international trade concerns.
CSS reported net sales of $909.5 million in 2019, compared to $857.5 million in 2018. The increase of 6.1% reflects growth in the data communications and security categories.
UBS reported net sales of $2.6 billion in 2019, compared to $2.4 billion in 2018. The increase of 6.1% reflects the benefit of secular trends in the utility sector, including grid hardening and reliability projects, construction market growth, higher industrial output and increased demand for renewable energy.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold for 2019 was $6.8 billion, compared to $6.6 billion for 2018. Cost of goods sold as a percentage of net sales was 81.1% and 80.8% in 2019 and 2018, respectively. Cost of goods sold as a percentage of net sales was negatively impacted by a challenging pricing environment, as well as business mix.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses include costs associated with personnel, shipping and handling, travel, advertising, facilities, utilities and credit losses. SG&A expenses for 2019 were $1.2 billion, an increase of $21.2 million, or 1.8%, from 2018. SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales improved to 14.0% in 2019 from 14.1% in 2018. The increase in SG&A expenses reflects the impact of the SLS acquisition and merger-related costs, partially offset by lower variable payroll expenses and the absence of a bad debt charge that was recorded in the prior year.
SG&A payroll expenses for 2019 of $812.9 million increased by $8.7 million compared to 2018. The increase in SG&A payroll expenses was primarily due to wage inflation and the impact of the SLS acquisition, which were partially offset by lower variable compensation expense and benefit costs.
The remaining SG&A expenses for 2019 of $360.2 million increased by $12.4 million compared to 2018. The increase in the remaining SG&A expenses was primarily due to the impact of the SLS acquisition.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization decreased $0.9 million to $62.1 million in 2019, compared with $63.0 million in 2018.
Income from Operations
The following tables set forth income from operations by segment for the periods presented:
EES reported operating profit of $261.8 million in 2019, compared to $289.1 million in 2018. The decrease in operating profit is due to the impact of higher SG&A expenses resulting from the SLS acquisition.
CSS reported operating profit of $43.8 million in 2019, compared to $34.6 million in 2018. The increase in operating profit is due to higher sales, as described above.
UBS reported operating profit of $184.9 million in 2019, compared to $165.1 million in 2018. The increase in operating profit is due to higher sales, as described above.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net totaled $65.7 million in 2019, compared with $68.7 million in 2018, a decrease of 4.3%. The resolution of transfer pricing matters associated with the Canadian taxing authority resulted in non-cash interest income of $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other, net
Other non-operating income ("other, net") totaled $1.6 million in 2019, compared to expense of $2.8 million in 2018. For the year ended December 31, 2018, other non-operating expense includes a foreign exchange loss of $3.0 million from the remeasurement of a financial instrument, as well as accelerated amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs totaling $0.8 million due to early repayments of our then outstanding term loan facility.
Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate was 21.2% in 2019 compared to 19.8% in 2018. The higher effective tax rate in 2019 as compared to the prior year was primarily due to the full application of the international provisions of U.S. tax reform.
Net Income and Earnings per Share
Net income decreased by $3.2 million, or 1.4%, to $222.2 million in 2019, compared to $225.4 million in 2018.
Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests in 2019 and 2018 was $1.2 million and $2.0 million, respectively.
Net income and earnings per diluted share attributable to common stockholders were $223.4 million and $5.14 per share, respectively, in 2019, compared with $227.3 million and $4.82 per share, respectively, in 2018. Adjusted net income and earnings per diluted share attributable to common stockholders were $225.9 million and $5.20 per share, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The following tables reconcile income from operations, provision for income taxes and earnings per diluted share to adjusted net income from operations, adjusted provision for income taxes and adjusted earnings per diluted share, which are non-GAAP financial measures, for the periods presented:
(1) The adjustment to income from operations has been tax effected at a rate of 21.2% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Note: Income from operations, the provision for income taxes and earnings per diluted share for the year ended December 31, 2019 are adjusted to exclude merger-related costs and the related income tax effect. These non-GAAP financial measures provide a better understanding of our financial results on a comparable basis.
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin %
The following tables reconcile net income attributable to common stockholders to EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin % by segment, which are non-GAAP financial measures, for the periods presented:
Note: EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin % are non-GAAP financial measures that provide indicators of our performance and ability to meet debt service requirements. EBITDA is defined as earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as EBITDA before other non-operating expenses ("other, net"), non-cash stock-based compensation, and costs associated with the merger with Anixter. Adjusted EBITDA margin % is calculated by dividing Adjusted EBITDA by net sales.
Adjusted EBITDA for EES was $291.5 million in 2019, or 6.0% of net sales, compared to $319.9 million in 2018, or 6.6% of net sales.
Adjusted EBITDA for CSS was $51.1 million in 2019, or 5.6% of net sales, compared to $42.1 million in 2018, or 4.9% of net sales.
Adjusted EBITDA for UBS was $198.7 million in 2019, or 7.7% of net sales, compared to $178.9 million in 2018, or 7.3% of net sales.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Total assets were $11.9 billion and $5.0 billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Total liabilities at December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $8.5 billion and $2.8 billion, respectively. Total stockholders’ equity was $3.3 billion and $2.3 billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The following table sets forth our outstanding indebtedness:
The required annual principal repayments for all indebtedness for the next five years and thereafter, as of December 31, 2020, is set forth in the following table:
Our liquidity needs generally arise from fluctuations in our working capital requirements, capital expenditures, acquisitions and debt service obligations. As of December 31, 2020, we had $801.5 million in available borrowing capacity under our Revolving Credit Facility and $75.0 million in available borrowing capacity under our Receivables Facility, which combined with available cash of $259.5 million, provided liquidity of $1.1 billion. Cash included in our determination of liquidity represents cash in certain deposit and interest bearing investment accounts. We believe cash provided by operations and financing activities will be adequate to cover our operational and business needs for at least the next twelve months. In addition, we regularly review our mix of fixed versus variable rate debt, and we may, from time to time, issue or retire borrowings and/or refinance existing debt in an effort to mitigate the impact of interest rate and foreign exchange rate fluctuations, and to maintain a cost-effective capital structure consistent with our anticipated capital requirements. At December 31, 2020, approximately 75% of our debt portfolio was comprised of fixed rate debt.
In connection with the Merger, we obtained debt financing comprised of senior unsecured notes in aggregate principal amount of $2.8 billion, a new senior secured asset-based revolving credit facility in aggregate principal amount of $1.1 billion, and an amended accounts receivable securitization facility with a purchase limit up to $1.0 billion. Prior to the completion of the Merger, we also simultaneously entered into tender offers and consent solicitations with respect to Anixter's 5.50% Senior Notes due 2023 and 6.00% Senior Notes due 2025 (collectively, the "Anixter Senior Notes"). Upon the expiration and settlement of the tender offers and consent solicitations, $62.8 million in aggregate principal amount of the Anixter Senior Notes remain outstanding.
We used the net proceeds from the issuance of senior unsecured notes, together with borrowings under the new senior secured asset-based revolving credit facility and amended accounts receivable securitization facility, as well as existing cash on hand to consummate the merger. Since the acquisition, we have reduced our outstanding indebtedness by approximately $205 million. Over the next several quarters, it is expected that excess liquidity will be directed primarily at debt reduction and merger-related integration activities, and we expect to maintain sufficient liquidity through our credit facilities and cash balances. We expect to spend between $100 million to $120 million on capital expenditures in 2021, much of which will be invested to align the systems of our legacy businesses and enhance our digital tools.
We monitor the depository institutions that hold our cash and cash equivalents on a regular basis, and we believe that we have placed our deposits with creditworthy financial institutions. We also communicate on a regular basis with our lenders regarding our financial and working capital performance, liquidity position and financial leverage. Our financial leverage ratio was 5.3 as of December 31, 2020, on a pro forma basis, and 2.7 as of December 31, 2019, as reported. In addition, we are in compliance with all covenants and restrictions contained in our debt agreements as of December 31, 2020.
The following table sets forth our financial leverage ratio, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, for the periods presented:
(1) Pro forma EBITDA and pro forma adjusted EBITDA for the trailing twelve month period ended December 31, 2020 gives effect to the combination of WESCO and Anixter as if it had occurred at the beginning of such period.
(2) Long-term debt is presented in the consolidated balance sheets net of debt discount and debt issuance costs, and include adjustments to record the long-term debt assumed in the merger with Anixter at its acquisition date fair value.
Note: Financial leverage is a non-GAAP financial measure of the use of debt. Financial leverage ratio is calculated by dividing total debt, excluding debt discount, debt issuance costs and fair value adjustments, less cash and cash equivalents, by adjusted EBITDA. EBITDA is defined as the trailing twelve months earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as the trailing twelve months EBITDA before foreign exchange and other non-operating expenses, non-cash stock-based compensation, merger-related costs and fair value adjustments, an out-of-period adjustment related to inventory absorption accounting, and gain on sale of a U.S.operating branch. Pro forma financial leverage ratio is calculated by dividing total debt, excluding debt discount and debt issuance costs, less cash and cash equivalents, by pro forma adjusted EBITDA.
Undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries amounted to approximately $1,835.0 million at December 31, 2020. Most of these earnings have been taxed in the U.S. under either the one-time transition tax or the GILTI tax regime imposed by the TCJA. Except for a portion of foreign earnings previously taxed in the U.S. that can effectively be distributed without further material U.S. or foreign taxation, we continue to assert that the undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries are indefinitely reinvested. To the extent the earnings of our foreign subsidiaries are distributed in the form of dividends, such earnings may be subject to additional taxes. We estimate that additional taxes of approximately $75.0 million would be payable upon the remittance of foreign earnings as dividends at December 31, 2020, based upon the laws in effect on that date. We
believe that we are able to maintain a sufficient level of liquidity for our domestic operations and commitments without incurring any material tax cost to repatriate cash held by our foreign subsidiaries.
We finance our operating and investing needs as follows:
International Lines of Credit
Certain foreign subsidiaries of WESCO have entered into uncommitted lines of credit, some of which are overdraft facilities, to support local operations. The maximum borrowing limit varies by facility and ranges between $2.0 million and $31.0 million. The international lines of credit generally are renewable on an annual basis and certain facilities are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by WESCO Distribution. Accordingly, certain borrowings under these lines directly reduce availability under the Revolving Credit Facility. The applicable interest rate for borrowings under these lines of credit varies by country and is governed by the applicable loan agreement. The average interest rate for these facilities was 3.4% and 6.3% at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Accounts Receivable Securitization Facility
On June 22, 2020, WESCO Distribution amended its Receivables Facility pursuant to the terms and conditions of a Fifth Amended and Restated Receivables Purchase Agreement (the “Receivables Purchase Agreement”), by and among WESCO Receivables Corp. (“WESCO Receivables”), WESCO Distribution, the various purchaser groups from time to time party thereto and PNC Bank, National Association, as Administrator. The Receivables Purchase Agreement amends and restates the amended and restated receivables purchase agreement entered into on September 24, 2015 (the “Existing Receivables Purchase Agreement”).
The Receivables Purchase Agreement, among other things, increased the purchase limit under the Existing Receivables Purchase Agreement from $600 million to $1,025 million, with the opportunity to exercise an accordion feature that permits increases in the purchase limit of up to $375 million, extended the term of the Receivables Facility to June 22, 2023 and added and amended certain defined terms. Borrowings under the Receivables Facility bear interest at the 30-day LIBOR rate, with a LIBOR floor of 0.5%, plus applicable spreads. The interest rate spread of the Receivables Facility increased from 0.95% to 1.20%. The commitment fee remained unchanged at 0.45%.
On December 14, 2020, WESCO Distribution amended its Receivables Facility pursuant to the terms and conditions of a First Amendment to the Fifth Amended and Restated Receivables Purchase Agreement (the “Receivables Amendment”). The Receivables Amendment amends the Receivables Purchase Agreement and permits an increase to the purchase limit from $1,025 million to $1,200 million. The maturity date, interest rate spread, and commitment fee of the Receivables Facility remain unchanged.
Under the Receivables Facility, WESCO sells, on a continuous basis, an undivided interest in all domestic accounts receivable to WESCO Receivables, a wholly owned special purpose entity (the “SPE”). The SPE sells, without recourse, a senior undivided interest in the receivables to financial institutions for cash while maintaining a subordinated undivided interest in the receivables, in the form of overcollateralization. Since WESCO maintains control of the transferred receivables, the transfers do not qualify for “sale” treatment. As a result, the transferred receivables remain on the balance sheet, and WESCO recognizes the related secured borrowing. WESCO has agreed to continue servicing the sold receivables for the third-party conduits and financial institutions at market rates; accordingly, no servicing asset or liability has been recorded.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, accounts receivable eligible for securitization totaled $1,476.1 million and $809.5 million, respectively. The Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 include $950.0 million and $415.0 million, respectively, of accounts receivable balances legally sold to third parties, as well as borrowings for equal amounts. At December 31, 2020, the interest rate for this facility was approximately 1.6%.
Revolving Credit Facility
On June 22, 2020, WESCO, WESCO Distribution and certain other subsidiaries of WESCO entered into a $1,100 million revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Credit Facility”), as a replacement of WESCO Distribution’s revolving credit facility entered into on September 26, 2019, pursuant to the terms and conditions of a Fourth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated as of June 22, 2020 (the “Revolving Credit Agreement”), among WESCO Distribution, the other U.S. borrowers party thereto (collectively, the “U.S. Borrowers”), WESCO Distribution Canada LP (“WESCO Canada”), the other Canadian borrowers party thereto (collectively, the “Canadian Borrowers”), WESCO, the lenders party thereto and Barclays Bank PLC, as the administrative agent. The Revolving Credit Facility contains a letter of credit sub-facility of up to $175 million and an accordion feature allowing WESCO Distribution to request increases to the borrowing commitments under the Revolving Credit Facility of up to $500 million in the aggregate, subject to customary conditions. The Revolving Credit Facility matures in June 2025.
On December 14, 2020, WESCO Distribution and certain other subsidiaries of WESCO entered into an amendment to the Revolving Credit Facility pursuant to the terms and conditions of a First Amendment to Fourth Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated as of December 14, 2020 (the “Revolver Amendment”), among WESCO Distribution, the other U.S. borrowers party thereto, WESCO Distribution Canada LP, the other Canadian borrowers party thereto, WESCO, the lenders party thereto and Barclays Bank PLC, as administrative agent. The Revolver Amendment permits an increase to the revolving commitments from $1,100 million to $1,200 million and amends certain other defined terms. No other material terms were changed.
The obligations of WESCO Distribution and the other U.S. Borrowers under the Revolving Credit Facility have been guaranteed by WESCO and certain of WESCO Distribution’s subsidiaries (including certain subsidiaries of Anixter). The obligations of WESCO Canada and the other Canadian Borrowers under the Revolving Credit Facility (including certain subsidiaries of Anixter) have been guaranteed by certain subsidiaries of WESCO Canada and the other Canadian Borrowers. The Revolving Credit Facility is secured by (i) substantially all assets of WESCO Distribution, the other U.S. Borrowers and certain of WESCO Distribution’s subsidiaries (including certain subsidiaries of Anixter), other than, among other things, real property and accounts receivable sold or intended to be sold pursuant to WESCO Distribution’s Receivables Facility, and (ii) substantially all assets of WESCO Canada, the other Canadian Borrowers and certain of WESCO Canada’s subsidiaries, other than, among other things, real property, in each case, subject to customary exceptions and limitations. The applicable interest rate for borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility includes interest rate spreads based on available borrowing capacity that range between 1.25% and 1.50% for LIBOR-based borrowings and 0.25% and 0.50% for prime rate-based borrowings. At December 31, 2020, the interest rate for this facility was approximately 1.6%.
The Revolving Credit Agreement requires compliance with conditions that must be satisfied prior to any borrowing as well as ongoing compliance with certain customary affirmative and negative covenants. The Revolving Credit Agreement contains customary events of default. Upon the occurrence and during the continuance of an event of default, the commitments of the lenders may be terminated, and all outstanding obligations of the loan parties under the Revolving Credit Facility may be declared immediately due and payable.
During 2020, WESCO borrowed $1,197.9 million under the prior and new revolving credit facilities and made repayments in the aggregate amount of $948.0 million. During 2019, aggregate borrowings and repayments under prior revolving credit agreements were $715.4 million and $767.4 million, respectively. WESCO had $801.5 million available under the Revolving Credit facility at December 31, 2020, after giving effect to $48.5 million of outstanding letters of credit, as compared to $563.8 million available under the prior revolving credit facility at December 31, 2019, after giving effect to $28.4 million of outstanding letters of credit, $36.1 million of surety bonds, and $7.8 million of other reserves.
5.375% Senior Notes due 2021
In November 2013, WESCO Distribution issued $500 million aggregate principal amount of 5.375% Senior Notes due 2021 (the "2021 Notes") through a private offering exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). The 2021 Notes were issued at 100% of par and are governed by an indenture (the “2021 Indenture”) entered into on November 26, 2013 between WESCO International and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee. The 2021 Notes are unsecured senior obligations of WESCO Distribution and are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by WESCO International. The 2021 Notes bear interest at a stated rate of 5.375% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on June 15 and December 15 of each year. In addition, WESCO incurred costs related to the issuance of the 2021 Notes totaling $8.4 million, which are recorded as a reduction to the carrying value of the debt and are being amortized over the life of the notes. The 2021 Notes mature on December 15, 2021 and at any time all or a part may be redeemed by WESCO Distribution. The net proceeds of the 2021 Notes were used to prepay a portion of the U.S. sub-facility of the term loan due 2019.
Under the terms of a registration rights agreement dated as of November 26, 2013 among WESCO Distribution, WESCO International and Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated, as the representative of the initial purchasers of the 2021 Notes, WESCO Distribution and WESCO International agreed to register under the Securities Act notes having terms identical in all material respects to the 2021 Notes (the “2021 Exchange Notes”) and to make an offer to exchange the 2021 Exchange Notes for the 2021 Notes. WESCO Distribution launched the exchange offer on June 12, 2014 and the exchange offer expired on July 17, 2014.
On December 15, 2020, WESCO Distribution exercised its right to redeem the entire $500 million aggregate principal amount of the 2021 Notes, and U.S. Bank, National Association, as trustee under the indenture governing the 2021 Notes, issued a notice of redemption to registered holders of the 2021 Notes. The date fixed for the redemption of the 2021 Notes is January 14, 2021 (the “Redemption Date”). The 2021 Notes will be redeemed at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 2021 Notes plus accrued interest on the 2021 Notes to, but not including, the Redemption Date.
5.375% Senior Notes due 2024
In June 2016, WESCO Distribution issued $350 million aggregate principal amount of 5.375% Senior Notes due 2024 (the "2024 Notes") through a private offering exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act. The 2024 Notes were issued at 100% of par and are governed by an indenture (the “2024 Indenture”) entered into on June 15, 2016 among WESCO Distribution, as issuer, WESCO International, as parent guarantor, and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee. The 2024 Notes are unsecured senior obligations of WESCO Distribution and are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by WESCO International. The 2024 Notes bear interest at a stated rate of 5.375% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on June 15 and December 15 of each year. WESCO incurred costs totaling $6.0 million to issue the 2024 Notes, which are recorded as a reduction to the carrying value of the debt and are being amortized over the life of the notes. The 2024 Notes mature on June 15, 2024. The Company used the net proceeds to redeem its 6.0% Convertible Senior Debentures due 2029 on September 15, 2016.
Under the terms of a registration rights agreement dated as of June 15, 2016 among WESCO Distribution, as the issuer, WESCO International, as parent guarantor, and Goldman, Sachs & Co., as representative of the initial purchasers of the 2024 Notes, WESCO Distribution and WESCO International agreed to register under the Securities Act notes having terms identical in all material respects to the 2024 Notes (the “2024 Exchange Notes”) and to make an offer to exchange the 2024 Exchange Notes for the 2024 Notes. WESCO Distribution launched the exchange offer on December 28, 2016 and the exchange offer expired on January 31, 2017.
Any time between June 15, 2020 and June 14, 2021, WESCO Distribution may redeem all or a part of the 2024 Notes at a redemption price equal to 102.688% of the principal amount. Between June 15, 2021 and June 14, 2022, WESCO Distribution may redeem all or a part of the 2024 Notes at a redemption price equal to 101.344% of the principal amount. On and after June 15, 2022, WESCO Distribution may redeem all or a part of the 2024 Notes at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount.
The 2024 Indenture contains customary covenants and events of default. Upon a change of control, the holders of the 2024 Notes have the right to require WESCO Distribution to repurchase all or any part of the 2024 Notes at a redemption price equal to 101% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
5.50% Senior Notes due 2023
6.00% Senior Notes due 2025
On April 30, 2020, in connection with the Merger, WESCO Distribution commenced offers to purchase for cash (each, a “WESCO Tender Offer” and, together the “WESCO Tender Offers”) any and all of Anixter Inc.’s outstanding (i) 5.50% Senior Notes due 2023 (the “Anixter 2023 Senior Notes”), $350.0 million aggregate principal amount, issued under the Indenture, dated as of August 18, 2015 (the “Anixter 2023 Indenture”), by and among Anixter Inc., Anixter and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee, and (ii) 6.00% Senior Notes due 2025 (the “Anixter 2025 Senior Notes” and, together with the Anixter 2023 Senior Notes, the "Anixter Senior Notes"), $250.0 million aggregate principal amount, issued under the Indenture, dated as of November 13, 2018 (the “Anixter 2025 Indenture” and, together with the Anixter 2023 Indenture, the “Anixter Indentures”) by and among Anixter Inc., Anixter and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee.
Concurrent with the WESCO Tender Offers, Anixter Inc. commenced consent solicitations to amend the definition of "Change of Control" under the applicable Indenture to exclude the Merger and related transactions and expressly permit a merger between Anixter Inc. and Anixter (the “Anixter Consent Solicitations”).
On June 23, 2020 (the "Expiration Date"), following the completion of the Merger, the WESCO Tender Offers and Anixter Consent Solicitations expired and settled. Pursuant to the terms of the Offer to Purchase and Consent Solicitation Statement, dated April 30, 2020, holders of the Anixter Senior Notes that validly tendered and did not validly withdraw prior to such date, received total tender offer consideration of $1,012.50 per $1,000 principal amount of Anixter Senior Notes, which amount, in each case, included an early tender payment of $50.00 per $1,000 principal amount of Anixter Senior Notes. Holders who validly delivered their consents at or prior to the Expiration Date received a consent fee of $2.50 per $1,000 principal amount of Anixter Senior Notes.
As of December 31, 2020, $58.6 million and $4.2 million aggregate principal amount of the Anixter 2023 Senior Notes and Anixter 2025 Senior Notes, respectively, were outstanding.
7.125% Senior Notes due 2025
7.250% Senior Notes due 2028
On June 12, 2020, WESCO Distribution issued $1,500 million aggregate principal amount of 7.125% Senior Notes due 2025 (the “2025 Notes”) and $1,325 million aggregate principal amount of 7.250% Senior Notes due 2028 (the “2028 Notes” and, together with the 2025 Notes, the “Notes”). The 2025 Notes were issued at a price of 100.000% of the aggregate principal amount. The 2028 Notes were issued at a price of 99.244% of the aggregate principal amount. WESCO incurred costs related to the issuance of the 2025 Notes and 2028 Notes totaling $33.1 million and $29.3 million, respectively, which were recorded as a reduction to the carrying value of the debt and are being amortized over the respective lives of the notes.
The Notes were issued pursuant to, and are governed by, an indenture (the “Notes Indenture”), dated as of June 12, 2020, between the Company, WESCO Distribution and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee (the “Trustee”). The Notes and related guarantees were issued in a private transaction exempt from the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) and have not been, and will not be, registered under the Securities Act and may not be offered or sold in the U.S. absent registration or an applicable exemption from, or in a transaction not subject to the registration requirements of the Securities Act and other applicable securities laws.
The Company used the net proceeds from the issuance of the Notes, together with borrowings under its new and amended credit facilities and existing cash on hand, to finance the Merger and the other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement. The use of proceeds included (i) paying the cash portion of the Merger consideration to stockholders of Anixter, (ii) refinancing certain existing indebtedness of Anixter contemplated by the Merger Agreement, including financing the satisfaction and discharge, defeasance, redemption or other repayment in full of the 5.125% Senior Notes due 2021 of Anixter Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of Anixter, and financing payments in connection with the Anixter Consent Solicitations and WESCO Tender Offers, as described above, (iii) refinancing other indebtedness of the Company, and (iv) paying fees, costs and expenses in connection with the foregoing.
The Notes are unsecured and unsubordinated obligations of WESCO Distribution and are guaranteed on an unsecured, unsubordinated basis by the Company and Anixter Inc. The 2025 Notes accrue interest at a rate of 7.125% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on June 15 and December 15 of each year. The 2025 Notes will mature on June 15, 2025. The 2028 Notes accrue interest at a rate of 7.250% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on June 15 and December 15 of each year. The 2028 Notes will mature on June 15, 2028.
WESCO Distribution may redeem all or a part of the 2025 Notes at any time prior to June 15, 2022 by paying a “make-whole” premium plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to but excluding the redemption date. In addition, at any time prior to June 15, 2022, WESCO Distribution may redeem up to 35% of the 2025 Notes with the net cash proceeds from certain equity offerings. On or after June 15, 2022, WESCO Distribution may redeem all or a part of the 2025 Notes on the redemption dates and at the redemption prices specified in the Notes Indenture. WESCO Distribution may redeem all or a part of the 2028 Notes at any time prior to June 15, 2023 by paying a “make-whole” premium plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to but excluding the redemption date. In addition, at any time prior to June 15, 2023, WESCO Distribution may redeem up to 35% of the 2028 Notes with the net cash proceeds from certain equity offerings. On or after June 15, 2023, WESCO Distribution may redeem all or a part of the 2028 Notes on the redemption dates and at the redemption prices specified in the Notes Indenture.
The Notes Indenture contains certain covenants that, among other things, limit (i) the Company’s and its subsidiaries’ ability to pay dividends on or repurchase the Company’s capital stock, incur liens on assets, engage in certain sale and leaseback transactions or sell certain assets, and (ii) the Company’s and any guarantor’s ability to sell all or substantially all of its assets to, or merge or consolidate with or into, other persons, in the case of each of the foregoing, subject to certain qualifications and exceptions, including the termination of certain of these covenants upon the Notes receiving investment grade credit ratings.
The Notes Indenture contains certain events of default, including, among other things, failure to make required payments, failure to comply with certain agreements or covenants, failure to pay or acceleration of certain other indebtedness, certain events of bankruptcy and insolvency, and failure to pay certain judgments. An event of default under the Notes Indenture will allow either the Trustee or the holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the applicable series of the then-outstanding Notes to accelerate, or in certain cases, will automatically cause the acceleration of the amounts due under the applicable series of Notes.
Covenant Compliance
We were in compliance with all relevant covenants and restrictions contained in our debt agreements as of December 31, 2020.
Cash Flow
An analysis of cash flows for 2020 and 2019 follows:
Operating Activities. Cash provided by operating activities for 2020 totaled $543.9 million, compared with $224.4 million of cash generated in 2019. Cash provided by operating activities included net income of $100.0 million and adjustments to net income totaling $113.7 million. Other sources of cash in 2020 were generated from a decrease in inventories of $203.8 million, an increase in other current and noncurrent liabilities of $78.2 million, an increase in accrued payroll and benefit costs of $75.6 million, and a decrease in trade accounts receivable of $47.9 million. Primary uses of cash in 2020 included a decrease in accounts payable of $54.1 million and an increase in other current and noncurrent assets of $21.2 million.
Cash provided by operating activities for 2019 totaled $224.4 million, compared with $296.7 million of cash generated in 2018. Cash provided by operating activities included net income of $222.2 million and adjustments to net income totaling $83.2 million. Sources of cash in 2019 were generated from an increase in accounts payable of $23.5 million and a decrease in trade accounts receivable of $11.5 million. Primary uses of cash in 2019 included: an increase in inventories of $47.3 million; a decrease in accrued payroll and benefit costs of $39.1 million; an increase in other current and noncurrent assets of $28.8 million; and, a decrease in other current and noncurrent liabilities of $0.8 million.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities in 2020 was $3,735.1 million, compared with $60.8 million in 2019. Included in 2020 was $3,707.6 million to fund a portion of the merger with Anixter, as described in Note 6, "Acquisitions" of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. In 2019, we made payments of $27.6 million to acquire Sylvania Lighting Solutions ("SLS"). Capital expenditures were $56.7 million in 2020, compared to $44.1 million in 2019. Proceeds from the sale of assets were $6.7 million and $16.8 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Other investing activities in 2020 included $22.4 million of cash inflows.
Net cash used in investing activities in 2019 was $60.8 million, compared with $34.1 million in 2018. Capital expenditures in 2019 of $44.1 million increased from $36.2 million in 2018 to support the growth of our business. Included in 2019 were payments of $27.6 million for the acquisition of SLS. Proceeds from the sale of assets were $16.8 million and $12.5 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively. Other investing activities in 2019 included $5.9 million of cash outflows.
Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 was $3,480.7 million, compared with $109.8 million of net cash used in financing activities for 2019. During 2020, financing activities consisted of $2,815.0 million of net proceeds from the issuance of senior unsecured notes to finance a portion of the merger with Anixter, borrowings and repayments of $1.2 billion and $948.0 million, respectively, related to our prior and new revolving credit facilities, as well as borrowings and repayments of $1.1 billion and $565.0 million, respectively, related to our prior and amended accounts receivable securitization facilities. Financing activities for 2020 also included net repayments related to our various international lines of credit of $9.7 million, $80.2 million of debt issuance costs associated with financing the merger with Anixter, and $30.1 million of dividends paid to holders of our Series A Preferred Stock.
Net cash used in financing activities in 2019 was $109.8 million, compared with $275.1 million in 2018. During 2019, financing activities consisted of borrowings and repayments of $715.4 million and $767.4 million, respectively, related to our prior revolving credit facility, borrowings and repayments of $590.0 million and $450.0 million, respectively, related to our prior accounts receivable securitization facility, $24.8 million applied to fully repaying our Term Loan Facility, as well as net repayments of $5.0 million related to our various international lines of credit. Additionally, financing activities for 2019 included the repurchase of $150.0 million of the Company's common stock pursuant to the share repurchase plan announced on December 13, 2017 and amended on October 31, 2018.
Contractual Cash Obligations and Other Commercial Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at December 31, 2020, including interest, and the effect such obligations are expected to have on liquidity and cash flow in future periods.
(1) Interest on the variable rate debt was calculated using the rates and balances outstanding at December 31, 2020.
(2) WESCO Distribution and Anixter Inc. each sponsor a deferred compensation plan that permits select employees to make pre-tax deferrals of salary and bonus. The plans provide for benefit payments upon retirement, death, disability, termination or other scheduled dates determined by the participant. As a result of the termination of the Anixter Inc. deferred compensation plan, we estimate that $45.1 million of lump sum payments will be made directly to participants of this plan in 2021.
(3) The majority of our various pension plans are non-contributory and, with the exception of the U.S. and Canada, cover substantially all full-time employees in their respective countries. Retirement benefits are provided based on compensation as defined in the plans. Our policy is to fund these plans as required by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act, the Internal Revenue Service and local statutory law. We currently estimate that we will contribute $11.4 million to our foreign pension plans in 2021. Due to the future impact of various market conditions, rates of return and changes in plan participants, we cannot provide a meaningful estimate of our future contributions beyond 2021. In addition, as a result of the termination of our two domestic non-qualified pension plans, we estimate that $18.1 million of lump sum payments will be made directly to participants of those plans during 2021.
Purchase orders for inventory requirements and service contracts are not included in the table above. Generally, our purchase orders and contracts contain clauses allowing for cancellation. We do not have significant agreements to purchase material or goods that would specify minimum order quantities.
Liabilities related to unrecognized tax benefits, including interest and penalties, of $75.1 million were excluded from the table above as we cannot reasonably estimate the timing of these potential cash settlements with taxing authorities. See Note 12, “Income Taxes” in our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information related to unrecognized tax benefits.
Inflation
The rate of inflation, as measured by changes in the producer price index, affects different commodities, the cost of products purchased and ultimately the pricing of our different products and product classes to our customers. For the year ended December 31, 2020, pricing related to inflation did not have a material impact on our sales.
Seasonality
Our operating results are not significantly affected by seasonal factors. Sales during the first and fourth quarters are usually affected by a reduced level of activity due to the impact of weather on projects. Sales typically increase beginning in March, with slight fluctuations per month through October. During periods of economic expansion or contraction, our sales by quarter have varied significantly from this pattern.
Impact of Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 2, "Accounting Policies" of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding the effect of new accounting pronouncements.
Guarantor Financial Statements
WESCO Distribution (the “Issuer”) has outstanding $500 million in aggregate principal amount of 5.375% Senior Notes due 2021 (the “2021 Notes”) and $350 million in aggregate principal amount of 5.375% Senior Notes due 2024 (the “2024 Notes” and, together with the 2021 Notes, the “Notes”).
The Notes are unsecured senior obligations of WESCO Distribution and are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by WESCO International and Anixter Inc. (the “Guarantors”), ranking pari passu in right of payment with all other existing and future senior obligations of the Issuer, including obligations under other unsubordinated indebtedness. The Notes are effectively subordinated to all existing and future obligations of the Issuer that are secured by liens on any property or assets of the Issuer, including the Issuer’s Revolving Credit Facility and the then outstanding term loan facility (the “Senior Secured Credit Facilities”), to the extent of the value of the collateral securing such obligations, and are structurally subordinated to all liabilities (including trade payables) of any of the Guarantors’s or the Issuer’s subsidiaries (the “non-Guarantor Subsidiaries”) and senior in right of payment to all existing and future obligations of the Issuer that are, by their terms, subordinated in right of payment to the Notes.
The Notes are guaranteed by the Guarantors and not by the non-Guarantor Subsidiaries. In the event of a bankruptcy, liquidation or reorganization of any of the non-Guarantor Subsidiaries, such non-Guarantor Subsidiaries will pay the holders of their debt and their trade creditors before they will be able to distribute or contribute, as the case may be, any of their assets to the Issuer or the Guarantors. Therefore, the Notes and the guarantee of the Guarantors (the “Guarantee”) are effectively subordinated to the liabilities of the non-Guarantor Subsidiaries.
The Guarantee constitutes a senior obligation of the Guarantors, ranking pari passu in right of payment with all other senior obligations of the Guarantors, including obligations under other unsubordinated indebtedness. The Guarantee is effectively subordinated to all existing and future obligations incurred by the Guarantors that are secured by liens on any property or assets of the Guarantors, including the Senior Secured Credit Facilities, to the extent of the value of the collateral securing such obligations, structurally subordinated to all liabilities (including trade payables) of the non-Guarantor Subsidiaries and senior in right of payment to all existing and future obligations of the Guarantors that are, by their terms, subordinated in right of payment to the Guarantee.
The Guarantors guarantee to each holder of the Notes and to the respective trustees (i) the due and punctual payment of the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on each Note, when and as the same shall become due and payable, whether at maturity, by acceleration or otherwise, the due and punctual payment of interest on the overdue principal and interest on the Notes, to the extent lawful, and the due and punctual payment of all other obligations and due and punctual performance of all obligations of the Issuer to the holders or the respective trustee all in accordance with the terms of the Notes and the indentures governing the Notes and (ii) in the case of any extension of time of payment or renewal of any Notes or any of such other obligations, that the same will be promptly paid in full when due or performed in accordance with the terms of the extension or renewal, at stated maturity, by acceleration or otherwise.
If the Issuer becomes a debtor in a case under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code or encounters other financial difficulty, under federal or state fraudulent transfer law, a court may void, subordinate or otherwise decline to enforce the Notes. A court might do so if it is found that when the Issuer issued the Notes, or in some states when payments became due under the Notes, the Issuer received less than reasonably equivalent value or fair consideration and either: (i) were insolvent or rendered insolvent by reason of such incurrence; (ii) were left with inadequate capital to conduct its business; or (iii) believed or reasonably should have believed that the Issuer would incur debts beyond its ability to pay.
The court might also void an issuance of the Notes without regard to the above factors, if the court found that the Issuer issued the Notes with actual intent to hinder, delay or defraud its creditors. A court would likely find that the Issuer did not receive reasonably equivalent value or fair consideration for the Notes, if the Issuer did not substantially benefit directly or indirectly from the issuance of the Notes. If a court were to void the issuance of the Notes, holders would no longer have any claim against the Issuer. Sufficient funds to repay the Notes may not be available from other sources. In addition, the court might direct holders to repay any amounts that they already received from the Issuer.
The following tables present summarized financial information for WESCO International, WESCO Distribution and Anixter Inc. on a combined basis after elimination of (i) intercompany transactions and balances among such entities and (ii) equity in earnings from and investments in any subsidiary that is a non-guarantor. The summarized financial information has been prepared in accordance with Rule 13-01 of Regulation S-X.
(1) Includes $35.2 million of net sales and cost of goods sold to non-guarantor subsidiaries.