Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the historical financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains, in addition to historical information, forward-looking statements that include risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those expressed or contemplated in those forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those set forth under the headings “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business
Walker & Dunlop, Inc. is a holding company, and we conduct the majority of our operations through Walker & Dunlop, LLC, our operating company.
We are one of the leading commercial real estate services and finance companies in the United States, with a primary focus on multifamily lending, debt brokerage, and property sales. We originate, sell, and service a range of multifamily and other commercial real estate financing products to owners and developers of commercial real estate across the country, provide multifamily property sales brokerage and appraisal services in various regions throughout the United States, and engage in commercial real estate investment management activities.
We originate and sell multifamily loans through the programs of Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, Ginnie Mae, and HUD, with which we have licenses and long-established relationships. We retain servicing rights and asset management responsibilities on nearly all loans that we originate for the Agencies’ programs. We are approved as a Fannie Mae DUS lender nationally, a Freddie Mac lender nationally for Conventional, Seniors Housing, Targeted Affordable Housing and Small Balance Loans, a HUD MAP lender nationally, a HUD LEAN lender nationally, and a Ginnie Mae issuer. We broker and service loans for several life insurance companies, commercial banks, and other institutional investors, in which cases we do not fund the loan but rather act as a loan broker.
We fund loans for the Agencies’ programs, generally through warehouse facility financings, and sell them to investors in accordance with the related loan sale commitment, which we obtain at rate lock. Proceeds from the sale of the loan are used to pay off the warehouse facility. The sale of the loan is typically completed within 60 days after the loan is closed, and we retain the right to service substantially all of these loans. In cases where we do not fund the loan, we act as a loan broker and service some of the loans. Our mortgage bankers who focus on loan brokerage are engaged by borrowers to work with a variety of institutional lenders to find the most appropriate loan. These loans are then funded directly by the institutional lender, and for those brokered loans we service, we collect ongoing servicing fees while those loans
remain in our servicing portfolio. The servicing fees we typically earn on brokered loan transactions are substantially lower than the servicing fees we earn for servicing Agency loans.
We recognize revenue when we make simultaneous commitments to originate a loan to a borrower and sell that loan to an investor. The revenues earned reflect the fair value attributable to loan origination fees, premiums on the sale of loans, net of any co-broker fees, and the fair value of the expected net cash flows associated with servicing the loans, net of any guaranty obligations retained. We also recognize revenue when we receive the origination fee from a brokered loan transaction. Other sources of revenue include (i) net warehouse interest income we earn while the loan is held for sale, (ii) net warehouse interest income from loans held for investment while they are outstanding, (iii) sales commissions for brokering the sale of multifamily properties, and (iv) asset management fees from our investment management activities.
We retain servicing rights on substantially all the loans we originate and sell, and generate revenues from the fees we receive for servicing the loans, from the interest income on escrow deposits held on behalf of borrowers, and from other ancillary fees. Servicing fees set at the time an investor agrees to purchase the loan are generally paid monthly for the duration of the loan and are based on the unpaid principal balance of the loan. Our Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac servicing arrangements generally provide for prepayment to us in the event of a voluntary prepayment. For loans serviced outside of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, we typically do not have similar prepayment protections.
We are currently not exposed to unhedged interest rate risk during the loan commitment, closing, and delivery process. The sale or placement of each loan to an investor is negotiated concurrently with establishing the coupon rate for the loan. We also seek to mitigate the risk of a loan not closing. We have agreements in place with the Agencies that specify the cost of a failed loan delivery, in the event we fail to deliver the loan to the investor. To protect us against such fees, we require a deposit from the borrower at rate lock that is typically more than the potential fee. The deposit is returned to the borrower only once the loan is closed. Any potential loss from a catastrophic change in the property condition while the loan is held for sale using warehouse facility financing is mitigated through property insurance equal to replacement cost. We are also protected contractually from an investor’s failure to purchase the loan. We have experienced a de minimis number of failed deliveries in our history and have incurred immaterial losses on such failed deliveries.
We have risk-sharing obligations on substantially all loans we originate under the Fannie Mae DUS program. When a Fannie Mae DUS loan is subject to full risk-sharing, we absorb losses on the first 5% of the unpaid principal balance of a loan at the time of loss settlement, and above 5% we share a percentage of the loss with Fannie Mae, with our maximum loss capped at 20% of the original unpaid principal balance of the loan (subject to doubling or tripling if the loan does not meet specific underwriting criteria or if the loan defaults within 12 months of its sale to Fannie Mae), except for rare instances when we negotiate a cap at 30% for loans with unique attributes. We have had only one loan loss with a 30% cap in our history. Our full risk-sharing is currently limited to loans up to $200 million, which equates to a maximum loss per loan of $40 million (such exposure would occur in the event that the underlying collateral is determined to be completely without value at the time of loss). For loans in excess of $200 million, we receive modified risk-sharing. We also may request modified risk-sharing at the time of origination on loans below $200 million, which reduces our potential risk-sharing losses from the levels described above if we do not believe that we are being fully compensated for the risks of the transactions. The full risk-sharing limit in prior years was less than $200 million. Accordingly, loans originated in those prior years were subject to risk-sharing at much lower levels. Our servicing fees for risk-sharing loans include compensation for the risk-sharing obligations and are larger than the servicing fees we receive from Fannie Mae for loans with no risk-sharing obligations.
Our Interim Program offers floating-rate, interest-only loans for terms of generally up to three years to experienced borrowers seeking to acquire or reposition multifamily properties that do not currently qualify for permanent financing. We underwrite, asset-manage, and service all loans executed through the Interim Program. The ultimate goal of the Interim Program is to provide permanent Agency financing on these transitional properties. The Interim Program has two distinct executions: the Interim Program JV and the Interim Loan Program.
The Interim Program JV assumes full risk of loss while the loans it originates are outstanding. We hold a 15% ownership interest in the Interim Program JV and are responsible for sourcing, underwriting, servicing, and asset-managing the loans originated by the joint venture. The joint venture funds its operations using a combination of equity contributions from its owners and third-party credit facilities.
We originate and hold the Interim Loan Program loans for investment, which are included on our balance sheet. During the time that these loans are outstanding, we assume the full risk of loss. As of December 31, 2020, we had 18 loans held for investment under the Interim Loan Program with an aggregate outstanding unpaid principal balance of $366.3 million. One loan with a balance of $14.7 million is currently in default.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, $86.2 million of the $276.0 million of interim loan originations were executed through the joint venture, with the remainder originated through our Interim Loan Program. During the year ended December 31, 2019, $436.1 million of the $757.2 million of interim loan originations were executed through the joint venture. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we asset-managed $484.8 million and $670.5 million, respectively, of interim loans on behalf of the Interim Program JV.
During the third quarter of 2018, we transferred a $70.1 million portfolio of participating interests in loans held for investment to a third party and accounted for the transfer as a secured borrowing. The balance of the portfolio is presented as loans held for investment with an offsetting amount for the secured borrowing included as account payable as of December 31, 2020. We do not have credit risk related to the transferred loans.
Through WDIS, we offer property sales brokerage services to owners and developers of multifamily properties that are seeking to sell these properties. Through these property sales brokerage services, we seek to maximize proceeds and certainty of closure for our clients using our knowledge of the commercial real estate and capital markets and relying on our experienced transaction professionals. Our property sales services are offered in various regions throughout the United States. We have added several property sales brokerage teams over the past few years and continue to seek to add other property sales brokers, with the goal of expanding these services to cover all major regions throughout the United States.
During the second quarter of 2018, the Company acquired WDIP, a registered investment adviser, and general partner of private commercial real estate investment funds focused on the management of debt, preferred equity, and mezzanine equity investments in private middle-market commercial real estate funds and separately managed accounts. The acquisition of WDIP, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, is part of our strategy to grow and diversify the company by growing our investment management platform. WDIP’s current assets under management (“AUM”) of $1.3 billion primarily consist of assets held in three managed funds: Fund III, Fund IV and Fund V, and separate accounts managed for life insurance companies. AUM for Fund III and Fund IV consist of both unfunded commitments and funded investments, AUM for Fund V consists of unfunded commitments, and AUM for the separate accounts consist entirely of funded investments. Unfunded commitments are highest during the fund raising and investment phases. AUM disclosed in this Annual Report on Form 10-K may differ from regulatory assets under management disclosed on WDIP’s Form ADV.
WDIP typically receives management fees based on limited partner capital commitments, unfunded investment commitments, and funded investments. Additionally, with respect to Fund III, Fund IV and Fund V, WDIP receives a percentage of the profits above the fund expenses and preferred return specified in the fund offering agreements.
As of December 31, 2020, our servicing portfolio was $107.2 billion, up 15% from December 31, 2019, making it the 8th largest commercial/multifamily primary and master servicing portfolio in the nation according to the Mortgage Bankers’ Association’s (“MBA”) 2020 year-end survey (the “Survey”). Our servicing portfolio includes $48.8 billion of loans serviced for Fannie Mae and $37.1 billion for Freddie Mac, making us the 1st and 4th largest primary cashier servicer of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac loans in the nation, respectively, according to the Survey. Also included in our servicing portfolio is $9.6 billion of HUD loans, the 3rd largest HUD primary and master servicing portfolio in the nation according to the Survey.
The average number of our mortgage bankers increased from 150 during 2019 to 161 during 2020 due to organic growth, recruiting and acquisition, contributing to an increase of 32% in our loan origination volume, from a total of $26.6 billion during 2019 to a total of $35.0 billion during 2020. Fannie Mae recently announced that we ranked as its largest DUS lender in 2020, by loan deliveries, and Freddie Mac recently announced that we ranked as its 4th largest Freddie Mac lender in 2020, by loan deliveries. Additionally, we were the 5th largest multifamily lender for HUD in 2020 based on MAP initial endorsements.
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying consolidated financial statements include all of the accounts of the Company and its wholly owned subsidiaries, and all intercompany transactions have been eliminated.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP, which requires management to make estimates based on certain judgments and assumptions that are inherently uncertain and affect reported amounts. The estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience and other factors management believes to be reasonable. Actual results may differ from those estimates and assumptions and the use of different judgments and assumptions may have a material impact on our results. We believe the following critical accounting estimates represent the areas where more significant judgments and estimates are used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Additional information about our critical accounting estimates and other significant accounting policies are discussed in NOTE 2 of the consolidated financial statements.
Mortgage Servicing Rights (“MSRs”). MSRs are recorded at fair value at loan sale or upon purchase. The fair value of MSRs acquired through a stand-alone servicing portfolio purchase (“PMSR”) is equal to the purchase price paid. The fair value at loan sale (“OMSR”) is based on estimates of expected net cash flows associated with the servicing rights and takes into consideration an estimate of loan prepayment. Initially, the fair value amount is included as a component of the derivative asset fair value at the loan commitment date. The estimated net
cash flows from servicing, which includes assumptions for escrow earnings, prepayment, and servicing costs, are discounted at a rate that reflects the credit and liquidity risk of the OMSR over the estimated life of the underlying loan. The discount rates used throughout the periods presented for all OMSRs were between 10-15% and varied based on the loan type. The life of the underlying loan is estimated giving consideration to the prepayment provisions in the loan and assumptions about loan behaviors around those provisions. Our model for OMSRs assumes no prepayment while the prepayment provisions have not expired and full prepayment of the loan at or near the point where the prepayment provisions have expired. We record an individual OMSR asset (or liability) for each loan at loan sale. For PMSRs, we record and amortize a portfolio-level MSR asset based on the estimated remaining life of the portfolio using the prepayment characteristics of the portfolio.
The assumptions used to estimate the fair value of capitalized OMSRs are developed internally and are periodically compared to assumptions used by other market participants. Due to the relatively few transactions in the multifamily MSR market, we have experienced little volatility in the assumptions we used during the periods presented, including the most-significant assumption - the discount rate. We do not expect to see significant volatility in the assumptions for the foreseeable future. We actively monitor the assumptions used and make adjustments to those assumptions when market conditions change or other factors indicate such adjustments are warranted. For example, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we adjusted the escrow earnings rate assumption twice based on changes we saw from other market participants. We engage a third party to assist in determining an estimated fair value of our existing and outstanding MSRs on at least a semi-annual basis. Changes in our discount rate assumptions may materially impact the fair value of the MSRs (NOTE 3 of the consolidated financial statements details the portfolio-level impact of a change in the discount rate).
For PMSRs, a constant rate of prepayments and defaults is included in the determination of the portfolio’s estimated life (and thus included as a component of the portfolio’s amortization). Accordingly, prepayments and defaults of individual loans do not change the level of amortization expense recorded for the portfolio unless the pattern of actual prepayments and defaults varies significantly from the estimated pattern. When such a significant difference in the pattern of estimated and actual prepayments and defaults occurs, we prospectively adjust the estimated life of the portfolio (and thus future amortization) to approximate the actual pattern observed. We made adjustments to the estimated life of two of our PMSRs during 2020 as the actual experience of prepayments differed materially from the estimated prepayments.
Allowance for Risk-Sharing Obligations. This reserve liability (referred to as “allowance”) for risk-sharing obligations relates to our at-risk servicing portfolio and is presented as a separate liability on our balance sheets. We record an estimate of the loss reserve for the current expected credit losses (“CECL”) for all loans in our Fannie Mae at-risk servicing portfolio using the weighted-average remaining maturity method (“WARM”). WARM uses an average annual loss rate that contains loss content over multiple vintages and loan terms and is used as a foundation for estimating the CECL reserve. The average annual loss rate is applied to the estimated unpaid principal balance over the contractual term, adjusted for estimated prepayments and amortization to arrive at the CECL reserve for the entire current portfolio as described further below. We currently use one year for our reasonable and supportable forecast period (“forecast period”) as we believe forecasts beyond one year are inherently less reliable. During the forecast period we apply an adjusted loss factor associated with a similar historical period. We revert to the historical loss rate over a one-year period.
One of the key components of a WARM calculation is the runoff rate, which is the expected rate at which loans in the current portfolio will amortize and prepay in the future. We group loans by similar origination dates (vintage) and contractual maturity terms for purposes of calculating the runoff rate. We originate loans under the DUS program with various terms generally ranging from several years to 15 years; each of these various loan terms has a different runoff rate. The runoff rates applied to each vintage and contractual maturity term is determined using historical data; however, changes in prepayment and amortization behavior may significantly impact the estimate.
The weighted-average annual loss rate is calculated using a 10-year look-back period, utilizing the average portfolio balance and settled losses for each year. A 10-year period is used as we believe that this period of time includes sufficiently different economic conditions to generate a reasonable estimate of expected results in the future, given the relatively long-term nature of the current portfolio.
Changes in our expectations and forecasts may materially impact the estimate. At the adoption of the CECL standard on January 1, 2020, projections for the multifamily market and macroeconomic environment were for continued strong performance, and in response, the loss rate applied was one basis point as this represented the historical loss rate consistent with the conditions expected to prevail over the forecast period. Beginning in March 2020, conditions changed significantly due to the COVID-19 Crisis causing global economic contraction, higher unemployment rates, and a recession to ensue. In response to the change in economic conditions, we revised the forecast-period loss rate as of December 31, 2020 upward to six basis points to reflect the significant economic uncertainty that continues to linger due to the COVID-19 Crisis.
We evaluate our risk-sharing loans on a quarterly basis to determine whether there are loans that are probable of default. Specifically, we assess a loan’s qualitative and quantitative risk factors, such as payment status, property financial performance, local real estate market
conditions, loan-to-value ratio, debt-service-coverage ratio, and property condition. When a loan is determined to be probable of default based on these factors, we remove the loan from the WARM calculation and individually assess the loan for potential credit loss. This assessment requires certain judgments and assumptions to be made regarding the property values and other factors, that may differ significantly from actual results. Loss settlement with Fannie Mae has historically concluded within 18 to 36 months after foreclosure. Historically, the initial specific reserves have not varied significantly from the final settlement. Given the unprecedented nature of the impacts of the Crisis on the domestic economy and commercial real estate in particular, we are uncertain whether such trends will continue in the future.
We activity monitor the judgments and assumptions used in our Allowance for Risk-Sharing Obligation estimate and make adjustments to those assumptions when market conditions change, or when other factors indicate such adjustments are warranted. We believe the level of Allowance for Risk-Sharing Obligation is appropriate based on our expectations of future market conditions; however, changes in one or more of the judgments or assumptions used above could have a significant impact on the estimate.
Overview of Current Business Environment
At the onset of the COVID-19 Crisis, we saw dramatic increases in unemployment. The Federal Reserve and the U.S. Congress (“Congress”) responded with unprecedented levels of economic and monetary stimulus, most notably, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act. The CARES Act included considerable capital investments and government programs meant to support households, businesses, and the U.S. economy during the recession created by the COVID-19 Crisis.
Specifically, as it relates to our business, nearly $600 billion of aid was allocated to programs, including supplemental unemployment payments, that provided funds necessary to enable many renters to continue meeting monthly obligations. At the end of 2020, Congress enacted the Consolidated Appropriations Act (“CAA”), which included extensions to many of the provisions originally enacted by the CARES Act. The CAA included an extension of the enhanced unemployment benefits and $25 billion in emergency assistance to renters. The CARES Act and the CAA have provided substantial relief and stimulus to the economy, and our business continues to perform well, but there is no guarantee that this will continue as the level of unemployment remains high, and the economy remains in a recession. As a result of the continued high level of unemployment, Congress is currently working on passing a third stimulus package in 2021.
In March 2020, the Federal Reserve brought the Federal Funds Rate to a target of 0% to 0.25% in an emergency cut in response to the pending COVID-19 outbreak. The Federal Reserve indicated in its January 2021 meeting that it intends to keep rates at these low levels for the foreseeable future in order to support an economic recovery. This action by the Federal Reserve, along with the Federal Reserve’s commitment to buy Treasury securities and Agency mortgage-backed securities in amounts necessary to support smooth functioning of markets, has enabled Agency securities to continue trading uninterrupted with little to no change in the credit spreads that drive pricing of Agency mortgage-backed securities and has contributed to very low long-term mortgage interest rates, which form the basis for most of our lending. The low rate environment contributed to the increase in our Agency lending volumes during 2020.
Finally, the Agencies have separately responded to the COVID-19 Crisis by halting the eviction of tenants living in assets they have financed. This has directly influenced borrowers’ ability to manage tenants that are either unable to pay, or elect not to pay, their monthly obligations. In response, numerous multifamily owner-operators are working closely with affected renters to provide economic assistance during this time of need, up to and including rent forbearance for those experiencing a financial hardship. The Agencies responded further to the COVID-19 Crisis by offering loan forbearance to borrowers for up to 180 days, provided a borrower is able to show a property is experiencing a financial hardship as a direct result of the COVID-19 Crisis. Under the loan forbearance plan, borrowers will repay the forborne payments over a 12- to 24-month period without penalties. The creation of these two programs may have a direct impact on our borrowers’ ability to make monthly debt service payments, and in turn, may impact the Company’s obligation to advance funds to bondholders under our servicing agreements with Fannie Mae and HUD. We do not have advance obligations with respect to our Freddie Mac or life insurance servicing agreements. To date, very few of our multifamily borrowers have requested loan forbearance, requiring low levels of advances. Our outstanding advances were immaterial under our Fannie Mae and HUD servicing agreements at December 31, 2020. Declining rent collections and a borrower’s inability to make all required payments once the forbearance period is over could lead to an increase in delinquencies and losses beyond what we have experienced since the great financial crisis of 2007-2010, although we are not experiencing this to date. The prolonged nature of the Crisis could result in the number of forbearance requests increasing given the current high levels of domestic unemployment.
The most immediate impact of the Crisis was felt by our multifamily property sales operations, which saw significant declines beginning in March 2020 because of the COVID-19 Crisis after a strong start to the year. Multifamily property sales volumes rebounded strongly in the second half of 2020 from the lows of the second quarter of 2020, as capital began returning to the market. Long-term, we believe the market fundamentals remain positive for multifamily property sales. Over the last several years, and in the months leading up to the COVID-19 Crisis, household formation and a dearth of supply of entry-level single-family homes led to strong demand for rental housing in most geographic areas. Consequently, the fundamentals of the multifamily market were strong entering the COVID-19 Crisis, and when coupled with the
financial protections put in place by Congress and the Agencies, it is our expectation that market demand for multifamily property sales will continue to recover as multifamily properties will remain an attractive investment option.
Our non-multifamily focused mortgage brokerage operations have also been impacted by the COVID-19 Crisis. The Crisis had an immediate negative impact on the supply of capital to commercial real estate, most noticeably for hospitality, office, and retail assets. Our debt brokerage platform delivered record financing volumes prior to the onset of the Crisis in the U.S. As a result of the Crisis, we saw a decline in brokered financing transactions in the second quarter as transactions were put on hold or cancelled altogether. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we saw capital sources come back into the market, helping to drive a year-over-year increase in our annual debt brokerage volume compared to 2019. We expect non-multifamily debt financing volumes to continue to recover as banks and life insurance companies return to their pre-Crisis origination volumes.
Our Agency multifamily debt financing operations remain very active. The Agencies are countercyclical sources of capital to the multifamily industry and have continued to lend during the COVID-19 Crisis, just as they did during the great financial crisis of 2007-2010. We are a market-leading originator with the Agencies, and the Agencies remain the most significant providers of capital to the multifamily market. Consequently, we continue to see significant activity in our multifamily lending operations, and we continue to see lending opportunities consistent with pre-Crisis levels. We believe our market leadership positions us to be a significant lender with the Agencies for the foreseeable future.
The FHFA establishes loan origination caps for both Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac each year. In September 2020, FHFA established Fannie Mae’s and Freddie Mac’s 2021 loan origination caps at $70 billion each for all multifamily business. The new caps apply to all multifamily business with no exclusions. In 2020, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac had multifamily origination volumes of $76.1 billion and $83.1 billion, respectively, up 8.4% and 6.1% from 2019, respectively. In 2020, we saw strong lending activity from our GSE operations and increased our market share with the GSEs to 12.3% from 10.2% in 2019.
Our debt financing operations with HUD grew during 2020, with HUD loans accounting for 6% of our debt financing volumes the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 3% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in HUD debt financing volumes was partially a result of the government shutdown during the first half of 2019 and partially a result of HUD originations being countercyclical sources of capital, similar to the GSEs.
We expect strength in our Agency operations to continue given the pull back by other capital sources. An additional positive factor influencing multifamily financing volumes is the historically low interest rate environment, which is incentivizing borrowers to refinance their properties in spite of the current challenges. We continue to seek to add resources and scale to our Agency lending platform.
Our originations with the Agencies are our most profitable executions as they provide significant non-cash gains from MSRs that turn into significant cash revenue streams from future servicing fees. A decline in our Agency originations would negatively impact our financial results as our non-cash revenues would decrease disproportionately with debt financing volume and future servicing fee revenue would be constrained or decline.
We entered into the Interim Program JV to both increase the overall capital available to transitional multifamily properties and to dramatically expand our capacity to originate Interim Program loans. The demand for transitional lending has brought increased competition from lenders, specifically banks, mortgage real estate investment trusts, and life insurance companies. As it did with other types of lending, the COVID-19 Crisis has resulted in a pullback of capital sources for interim lending opportunities. In response to the Crisis, we paused originations on new Interim Program loans for several months and recommenced in the third quarter of 2020. We continue to maintain a cautious outlook on new originations but have seen an increase in our loan origination pipeline and expect to originate additional interim loans in the near term. Except for one loan that defaulted in early 2019, the loans in our portfolio and in the Interim Program JV continue to perform as agreed, but we could see higher levels of default or requests for forbearance as the impacts of the Crisis linger.
Factors That May Impact Our Operating Results
We believe that our results are affected by a number of factors, including the items discussed below.
● Performance of Multifamily and Other Commercial Real Estate Related Markets. Our business is dependent on the general demand for, and value of, commercial real estate and related services, which are sensitive to long-term mortgage interest rates and other macroeconomic conditions and the continued existence of the GSEs. Demand for multifamily and other commercial real estate generally increases during stronger economic environments, resulting in increased property values, transaction volumes, and loan origination volumes. During weaker economic environments, multifamily and other commercial real estate may experience higher property vacancies, lower demand and reduced values. These conditions can result in lower property
transaction volumes and loan originations, as well as an increased level of servicer advances and losses from our Fannie Mae DUS risk-sharing obligations and our interim lending program.
● The Level of Losses from Fannie Mae Risk-Sharing Obligations. Under the Fannie Mae DUS program, we share risk of loss on most loans we sell to Fannie Mae. In the majority of cases, we absorb the first 5% of any losses on the loan’s unpaid principal balance at the time of loss settlement, and above 5% we share a percentage of the loss with Fannie Mae, with our maximum loss capped at 20% of the loan’s unpaid principal balance on the origination date, except for rare instances when we negotiate a cap at 30% for loans with unique attributes. We have had only one such default with a 30% cap. As a result, a rise in defaults could have a material adverse effect on us.
● The Price of Loans in the Secondary Market. Our profitability is determined in part by the price we are paid for the loans we originate. A component of our origination related revenues is the premium we recognize on the sale of a loan. Stronger investor demand typically results in larger premiums while weaker demand results in little to no premium.
● Market for Servicing Commercial Real Estate Loans. Servicing fee rates for new loans are set at the time we enter into a loan sale commitment based on origination fees, competition, prepayment rates, and any risk-sharing obligations we undertake. Changes in servicing fee rates impact the value of our MSRs and future servicing revenues, which could impact our profit margins and operating results immediately and over time.
● The Percentage of Adjustable Rate Loans Originated and the Overall Loan Origination Mix. The adjustable rate mortgage loans (“ARMs”) we originate typically have less stringent prepayment protection features than fixed rate mortgage loans (“FRMs”), resulting in a shorter expected life for ARMs than FRMs. The shorter expected life for ARMs results in smaller MSRs recorded than for FRMs. Absent an increase in originations, an increase in the proportion of our loans originated that are ARMs could adversely impact the gains from mortgage banking activities we record. Additionally, the loan product mix we originate can significantly impact our overall earnings. For example, an increase in loan origination volume for our two highest-margin products, Fannie Mae and HUD loans, without a change in total loan origination volume would increase our overall profitability, while a decrease in the loan origination volume of these two products without a change in total loan origination volume would decrease our overall profitability, all else equal.
Revenues
Loan Origination and Debt Brokerage Fees, net. Revenue related to the loan origination fee is recognized when we record a derivative asset upon the simultaneous commitments to originate a loan with a borrower and sell to an investor or when a loan that we broker closes with the institutional lender. The commitment asset related to the loan origination fee is recognized at fair value, which reflects the fair value of the contractual loan origination related fees and any sale premiums, net of co-broker fees. Also included in revenues from loan origination activities are changes to the fair value of loan commitments, forward sale commitments, and loans held for sale that occur during their respective holding periods. Upon sale of the loans, no gains or losses are recognized as such loans are recorded at fair value during their holding periods.
Brokered loans tend to have lower origination fees because they often require less time to execute, there is more competition for brokerage assignments, and because the borrower will also have to pay an origination fee to the institutional lender.
Premiums received on the sale of a loan result when a loan is sold to an investor for more than its face value. There are various reasons investors may pay a premium when purchasing a loan. For example, the fixed rate on the loan may be higher than the rate of return required by an investor or the characteristics of a particular loan may be desirable to an investor. We do not receive premiums on brokered loans.
Fair Value of Expected Net Cash Flows from Servicing, net. Revenue related to expected net cash flows from servicing is recognized at the loan commitment date, similar to the loan origination fees, as described above. The derivative asset is recognized at fair value, which reflects the estimated fair value of the expected net cash flows associated with the servicing of the loan, reduced by the estimated fair value of any guaranty obligations to be assumed. OMSRs and guaranty obligations are recognized as assets and liabilities, respectively, upon the sale of the loans.
OMSRs are recorded at fair value upon loan sale. The fair value is based on estimates of expected net cash flows associated with the servicing rights. The estimated net cash flows are discounted at a rate that reflects the credit and liquidity risk of the MSR over the estimated life of the loan.
The “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” section above and NOTE 2 of the consolidated financial statements provides additional details of the accounting for these revenues.
Servicing Fees. We service nearly all loans we originate and some loans we broker. We earn servicing fees for performing certain loan servicing functions such as processing loan, tax, and insurance payments and managing escrow balances. Servicing generally also includes asset management functions, such as monitoring the physical condition of the property, analyzing the financial condition and liquidity of the borrower, and performing loss mitigation activities as directed by the Agencies.
Our servicing fees on loans we originate provide a stable revenue stream. They are based on contractual terms, are earned over the life of the loan, and are generally not subject to significant prepayment risk. Our Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac servicing agreements provide for prepayment fees in the event of a voluntary prepayment. Accordingly, we currently do not hedge our servicing portfolio for prepayment risk. Any prepayment fees received are included in Other revenues.
HUD has the right to terminate our current servicing engagements for cause. In addition to termination for cause, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac may terminate our servicing engagements without cause by paying a termination fee. Our institutional investors typically may terminate our servicing engagements for brokered loans at any time with or without cause, without paying a termination fee.
Net Warehouse Interest Income, Loans Held for Sale. We earn net interest income on loans funded through borrowings from our warehouse facilities from the time the loan is closed until the loan is sold pursuant to the loan purchase agreement. Each borrowing on a warehouse line relates to a specific loan for which we have already secured a loan sale commitment with an investor. Related interest expense from the warehouse loan funding is netted in our financial statements against interest income. Net warehouse interest income related to loans held for sale varies based on the period of time between the loan closing and the sale of the loan to the investor, the size of the average balance of the loans held for sale, and the net interest spread between the loan coupon rate and the cost of warehouse financing. Loans may remain in the warehouse facility for up to 60 days, but the average time in the warehouse facility is approximately 30 days. As a short-term cash management tool, we may also use excess corporate cash to fund Agency loans on our balance sheet rather than borrowing against a warehouse line. Loans that we broker for institutional investors and other investors are funded directly by them; therefore, there is no warehouse interest income or expense associated with brokered loan transactions. Additionally, the amortization of deferred debt issuance costs related to our Agency warehouse lines is included in net warehouse interest income, loans held for sale.
Net Warehouse Interest Income, Loans Held for Investment. Similar to loans held for sale, we earn net interest income on loans held for investment during the period they are outstanding. We earn interest income on the loan, which is funded partially by an investment of our cash and through one of our interim warehouse credit facilities. The loans originated for investment are typically interest-only, variable-rate loans with terms up to three years. The warehouse credit facilities are variable rate. The interest rate reset date is typically the same for the loans and the credit facility. Related interest expense from the warehouse loan funding is netted in our financial statements against interest income. Net warehouse interest income related to loans held for investment varies based on the period of time the loans are outstanding, the size of the average balance of the loans held for investment, and the net interest spread between the loan coupon rate and the cost of warehouse financing. The net spread has historically not varied much. Additionally, the amortization of deferred fees and costs and the amortization of deferred debt issuance costs related to our interim warehouse lines are included in net warehouse interest income, loans held for investment. Net warehouse interest income from loans held for investment will decrease in the coming years if most, or all, of the loans originated through the Interim Program are held by the Interim Program JV.
Escrow Earnings and Other Interest Income. We earn fee income on property-level escrow deposits in our servicing portfolio, generally based on a fixed or variable placement fee negotiated with the financial institutions that hold the escrow deposits. Escrow earnings reflect interest income net of interest paid to the borrower, if required, which generally equals a money market rate. Also included with escrow earnings and other interest income are interest earnings from our cash and cash equivalents and interest income earned on our pledged securities.
Other Revenues. Other revenues are comprised of fees for processing loan assumptions, prepayment fee income, application fees, property sales broker fees, income from equity-method investments, asset management fees, and other miscellaneous revenues related to our operations.
Costs and Expenses
Personnel. Personnel expense includes the cost of employee compensation and benefits, which include fixed and discretionary amounts tied to company and individual performance, commissions, severance expense, signing and retention bonuses, and share-based compensation.
Amortization and Depreciation. Amortization and depreciation is principally comprised of amortization of our MSRs, net of amortization of our guaranty obligations. The MSRs are amortized using the interest method over the period that servicing income is expected to be received. We amortize the guaranty obligations evenly over their expected lives. When the loan underlying an OMSR prepays, we write off the remaining unamortized balance, net of any related guaranty obligation, and record the write off to Amortization and depreciation. Similarly, when the loan underlying an OMSR defaults, we write the OMSR off to Amortization and depreciation. We depreciate property, plant, and equipment ratably over their estimated useful lives.
Amortization and depreciation also includes the amortization of intangible assets, principally related to the amortization of the mortgage pipeline and other intangible assets recognized in connection with acquisitions. We recognize amortization related to the mortgage pipeline intangible asset when a loan included in the mortgage pipeline intangible asset is rate locked or is no longer probable of rate locking. Also included in amortization and depreciation for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 is the amortization of intangible assets associated with our acquisition of WDIP. These intangible assets consisted primarily of asset management contracts, which had an estimated life at acquisition of five years. For the years presented in the Consolidated Statements of Income, the amortization of intangible assets relates primarily to intangible assets associated with our acquisition of WDIP in 2018.
Provision (Benefit) for Credit Losses. The provision (benefit) for credit losses consists of two components: the provision associated with our risk-sharing loans and the provision associated with our loans held for investment. The provision (benefit) for credit losses associated with risk-sharing loans is estimated on a collective basis when a loan is sold to Fannie Mae and is based on our current expected credit losses on the current portfolio from loan sale to maturity. The provision (benefit) for credit losses associated with our loans held for investment is estimated similar to our risk-sharing loans at origination and is based on our current expected credit losses. For both our risk-sharing loans and loans held for investment, when a loan is probable of default, the loan is taken out of the collective evaluation and individually evaluated for credit losses. Our estimates of property fair value are based on appraisals, broker opinions of value, or net operating income and market capitalization rates, whichever we believe is the best estimate of the net disposition value.
The “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” section above and NOTE 2 of the consolidated financial statements provides additional details of the accounting for this expense.
Interest Expense on Corporate Debt. Interest expense on corporate debt includes interest expense incurred and amortization of debt discount and deferred debt issuance costs related to our term loan facility.
Other Operating Expenses. Other operating expenses include sub-servicing costs, facilities costs, travel and entertainment costs, marketing costs, professional fees, license fees, dues and subscriptions, corporate insurance premiums, and other administrative expenses.
Income Tax Expense. The Company is a C-corporation subject to both federal and state corporate tax. Our estimated combined statutory federal and state tax rate was 25.2%, 25.0%, and 25.1% for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. Except for the effects of 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“Tax Reform”), our combined statutory tax rate has historically not varied significantly as the only material difference in the calculation of the combined statutory tax rate from year to year is the apportionment of our taxable income amongst the various states where we are subject to taxation since we do not have foreign operations. For example, from the period since we went public in 2010 through 2017, our combined statutory tax rate varied by only 0.7%, with a low of 38.2% and a high of 38.9%. Absent additional significant legislative changes to statutory tax rates (particularly the federal tax rate), we expect minimal deviation from the 2020 combined statutory tax rate for future years. However, we do expect some variability in the effective tax rate going forward due to excess tax benefits recognized and limitations on the deductibility of certain book expenses as a result of Tax Reform, primarily related to executive compensation.
Excess tax benefits recognized in 2020 and 2019 reduced income tax expense by $7.3 million and $4.6 million, respectively. The increase in the excess tax benefits from 2019 to 2020 largely reflects the increase in the number of shares vested and the stock price at which the shares vested.
Results of Operations
Following is a discussion of the comparison of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The financial results are not necessarily indicative of future results. Our annual results have fluctuated in the past and are expected to fluctuate in the future, reflecting the interest-rate environment, the volume of transactions, business acquisitions, regulatory actions, and general economic conditions. Discussions of our results of operations and comparisons between 2019 and 2018 can be found in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
SUPPLEMENTAL OPERATING DATA
SUPPLEMENTAL OPERATING DATA (Continued)
The following tables present WDIP’s AUM as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(1) Brokered transactions for life insurance companies, commercial banks, and other capital sources.
(2) For the year ended December 31, 2020, includes $86.2 million from the Interim Program JV, $189.8 million from the Interim Loan Program, and $104.4 million from WDIP separate accounts. For the year ended December 31, 2019, includes $436.1 million from the Interim Program JV, $321.1 million from the Interim Loan Program, and $178.7 million from WDIP separate accounts.
(3) This is a non-GAAP financial measure. For more information on adjusted EBITDA, refer to the section below titled “Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
(4) Excludes the income and debt financing volume from Principal Lending and Investing.
(5) The fair value of the expected net cash flows associated with the servicing of the loan, net of any guaranty obligations retained. Excludes the income and debt financing volume from Principal Lending and Investing.
(6) The fair value of the expected net cash flows associated with the servicing of the loan, net of any guaranty obligations retained, as a percentage of Agency volume.
(7) Brokered loans serviced primarily for life insurance companies.
(8) Consists of interim loans not managed for the Interim Program JV.
(9) As of December 31, 2020, includes $484.8 million of Interim Program JV managed loans, $73.3 million of loans serviced directly for the Interim Program JV partner, and WDIP assets under management of $1.3 billion. As of December 31, 2019, includes $670.5 million of Interim Program JV managed loans, $70.5 million of loans serviced directly for the Interim Program JV partner, and WDIP assets under management of $1.2 billion.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table presents a period-to-period comparison of our financial results for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
FINANCIAL RESULTS -2020 COMPARED TO 2019
Overview
The increase in revenues was mainly driven by increases in (i) origination fees (as defined in note 1 to the table below) due to a substantial increase in debt financing volume, (ii) MSR Income (as defined in note 2 to the table below) due primarily to the substantial increase in debt financing volume and a significant increase in the MSR rate (as defined below), (iii) servicing fees due to an increase in the average servicing portfolio, (iv) net warehouse interest income from loans held for sale due to a higher average balance and a substantial increase in the net spreads, and (v) property sales broker fees driven by growth in our property sales volumes. Partially offsetting the increases in the revenue sources discussed above were decreases in (i) net warehouse interest income from loans held for investment due to a smaller average balance and lower net spread and (ii) escrow earnings and other interest income due to significant declines in the earnings rate.
The increase in expenses was principally driven by increases in (i) personnel expenses as a result of increases in commissions due to the increase in origination fees, bonus expense due to the Company’s record financial results, and salaries and benefits from an increase in average headcount, (ii) amortization and depreciation expense due to an increase in the average MSR balance, and (iii) provision for credit losses due to the adoption of CECL. During the prior year, our allowances for credit losses were calculated based on an incurred loss methodology, while CECL requires allowances to be calculated based on an expected lifetime credit loss methodology. Partially offsetting these increases was a decrease in interest expense on our corporate debt due to lower short-term interest rates on our long-term debt.
Revenues
The following table provides additional information that helps explain changes in origination fees and mortgage servicing rights over the past two years:
(1) Loan origination and debt brokerage fees, net.
(2) The fair value of the expected net cash flows associated with the servicing of the loan, net of any guaranty obligations retained.
(3) Origination fees as a percentage of debt financing volume, excluding the income and debt financing volume from principal lending and investing.
(4) MSR Income as a percentage of debt financing volume, excluding the income and debt financing volume from principal lending and investing.
(5) MSR Income as a percentage of Agency debt financing volume.
Loan origination and debt brokerage fees, net and fair value of the expected net cash flows associated with the servicing of the loan, net of any guaranty obligations retained. The increases in origination fees and MSR Income were related to (i) a 32% increase in debt financing volume year over year and (ii) a more favorable transaction mix, leading to an increase in the origination fee and MSR rates. During 2020, 68% of our total mortgage banking volume related to Agency loans compared to 57% during 2019, leading to increases in the origination fee and MSR rates. Additionally, the weighted-average servicing fee on Fannie Mae debt financing volume increased 31% year over year, contributing to the increases in MSR Income, the MSR Rate, and the Agency MSR Rate.
See the “Overview of Current Business Environment” section above for a detailed discussion of the factors driving the changes in debt financing volumes.
Servicing Fees. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in the average servicing portfolio from 2019 to 2020 as shown below due primarily to significantly higher new loan originations in 2020 than in 2019 and only a slight increase in payoffs year over year. Partially offsetting the increase in servicing fees was a decrease in the servicing portfolio’s weighted average servicing fee as shown below. The lower weighted-average servicing fee was related to a trend in lower fees we saw in the second half of 2019. This trend continued into the first half of 2020; however, we saw an upward trend in the servicing portfolio’s weighted-average servicing fee in the second half of 2020 as seen in the supplemental operating data table above. The increase in the second half of 2020 was due to the substantial increase in our Fannie Mae servicing portfolio in the second half of the year.
Net Warehouse Interest Income, Loans Held for Sale (“LHFS”). The increase was the result of significant increases in the average balance outstanding and in the net spread between the rate on the originated loans and the interest costs associated with the warehouse facility as shown below. The increase in the average balance was related to the overall increase in our Agency debt financing volume year over year. The increase in the net spread was the result of a slower decrease in the rate we earn from our loans held for sale compared to the interest we pay on our borrowings.
Net Warehouse Interest Income, Loans Held for Investment (“LHFI”). The decrease was due to a decline in the average balance of loans held for investment outstanding from 2019 to 2020 and the net spread between the rate on the originated loans and the interest costs associated with the warehouse facility. The decrease in the average balance was due to substantially lower loan originations in 2020 than 2019. In 2019, we had a larger balance of loans fully funded with corporate cash resulting in a higher net spread, including a large loan that was fully paid off in the first quarter of 2020.
Escrow Earnings and Other Interest Income. The decrease was primarily due to substantial decreases in short-term interest rates from 2019 to 2020 upon which our escrow earnings are based, slightly offset by an increase in the average balance of escrow accounts. The increase in the average balance was due to an increase in the average servicing portfolio. The decrease in the average earnings rate was due to substantial decreases in short-term interest rates, upon which our earnings rates are based, over the past year as discussed above in the “Overview of Current Business Environment” section.
Property Sales Broker Fees. The increase in 2020 was the result of an increase in property sales volume due to growth in the average number of property sales brokers over the past year and an overall healthy property sales market in the second half of 2020 as more fully discussed above in the “Overview of Current Business Environment” section.
Other Revenues. The decrease was primarily related to a $4.8 million decrease in prepayment fees as the prepayments of GSE loans declined year over year.
Expenses
Personnel. The increase was primarily the result of an (i) increase in commission costs of $60.8 million due to the increases in origination fees and property sales broker fees detailed above, (ii) increase in subjective bonus expense by $31.3 million due to a 15% increase in average headcount year over year and as a result of our record financial performance, and (iii) increase in salaries and benefits due to the increase in average headcount to support our growth.
Amortization and Depreciation. The increase was attributable to loan origination activity and the resulting growth in the average MSR balance outstanding from 2019 to 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we added $144.0 million of MSRs, net of amortization and write offs due to prepayment.
Provision for Credit Losses. The increase was primarily attributable to the adoption of CECL in 2020 and the increase in expected losses in the at-risk servicing portfolio as a result of the COVID-19 crisis and the growth in the portfolio. As of December 31, 2020, the CECL reserve was $67.0 million compared to $34.7 million as of the date of the adoption of CECL on January 1, 2020, leading to a substantial increase in the provision for credit losses year over year. The significant increase in our provision for credit losses expense and related CECL reserve during 2020 was principally related to the forecasted economic impacts of the COVID-19 Crisis. As a result of the COVID-19 Crisis, the loss rate for the forecast period increased from one basis point as of January 1, 2020 to six basis points as of December 31, 2020.
Interest Expense on Corporate Debt. The decrease was driven primarily by the aforementioned decrease in short-term interest rates upon which our corporate debt is based in 2020 compared to 2019. Additionally, in December 2019, we re-priced our corporate debt, reducing the spread by 25 basis points. The effects of this re-pricing were fully reflected in our results in 2020.
Income Tax Expense. The increase in income tax expense is related to the 43% increase in income from operations and an increase in our effective tax rate from 24.8% in 2019 to 25.5% in 2020. The increase in the effective tax rate related primarily to an increase in executive compensation not deductible for tax purposes from $11.4 million in 2019 to $21.1 million in 2020.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our financial statements presented in accordance with GAAP, we use adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure. The presentation of adjusted EBITDA is not intended to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or superior to, the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP. When analyzing our operating performance, readers should use adjusted EBITDA in addition to, and not as an alternative for, net income. Adjusted EBITDA represents net income before income taxes, interest expense on our term loan facility, and amortization and depreciation, adjusted for provision for credit losses net of write-offs, stock-based incentive compensation charges, and the fair value of expected net cash flows from servicing, net. Because not all companies use identical calculations, our presentation of adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. Furthermore, adjusted EBITDA is not intended to be a measure of free cash flow for our management’s discretionary use, as it does not reflect certain cash requirements such as tax and debt service payments. The amounts shown for adjusted EBITDA may also differ from the amounts calculated under similarly titled definitions in our debt instruments, which are further adjusted to reflect certain other cash and non-cash charges that are used to determine compliance with financial covenants.
We use adjusted EBITDA to evaluate the operating performance of our business, for comparison with forecasts and strategic plans, and for benchmarking performance externally against competitors. We believe that this non-GAAP measure, when read in conjunction with our GAAP financials, provides useful information to investors by offering:
● the ability to make more meaningful period-to-period comparisons of our ongoing operating results;
● the ability to better identify trends in our underlying business and perform related trend analyses; and
● a better understanding of how management plans and measures our underlying business.
We believe that adjusted EBITDA has limitations in that it does not reflect all of the amounts associated with our results of operations as determined in accordance with GAAP and that adjusted EBITDA should only be used to evaluate our results of operations in conjunction with net income.
Adjusted EBITDA is reconciled to net income as follows:
ADJUSTED FINANCIAL METRIC RECONCILIATION TO GAAP
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table presents a period-to-period comparison of the components of our adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
ADJUSTED EBITDA - 2020 COMPARED TO 2019
The increase in origination fees was primarily related to an increase in debt financing volumes year over year. Servicing fees increased due to an increase in the average servicing portfolio period over period as a result of the substantial debt financing volume and relatively few payoffs. The increase in net warehouse interest income was related to increased net interest income from LHFS due to increases in the average balance outstanding and the net spread earned on that balance, partially offset by a decrease in net warehouse interest income from LHFI due to a lower average balance outstanding and a lower net spread earned on that balance. Escrow earnings and other interest income decreased primarily as a result of a decline in the average earnings rate. Other revenues increased primarily due to growth in property sales broker fees, partially offset by a decline in prepayment fees.
The increase in personnel expense was primarily due to increased commissions expense resulting from the increases in origination fees and property sales broker fees, subjective bonus related to the rise in headcount and our record financial performance year over year and salaries and benefits expense due to a rise in headcount.
Financial Condition
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our cash flows from operations are generated from loan sales, servicing fees, escrow earnings, net warehouse interest income, property sales broker fees, investment management fees, and other income, net of loan origination and operating costs. Our cash flows from operations are impacted by the fees generated by our loan originations and property sales, the timing of loan closings, assets under management, escrow account balances, the average balance of loans held for investment, and the period of time loans are held for sale in the warehouse loan facility prior to delivery to the investor.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
We usually lease facilities and equipment for our operations. Our cash flows from investing activities also include the funding and repayment of loans held for investment, contributions to and distributions from joint ventures, and the purchase of available-for-sale (“AFS”) securities pledged to Fannie Mae. We opportunistically invest cash for acquisitions and MSR portfolio purchases.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
We use our warehouse loan facilities and, when necessary, our corporate cash to fund loan closings. We believe that our current warehouse loan facilities are adequate to meet our increasing loan origination needs. Historically, we have used a combination of long-term debt and cash flows from operations to fund acquisitions, repurchase shares, pay cash dividends, and fund a portion of loans held for investment. We also use warehouse loan facilities and corporate cash to fund COVID-19 forbearance advances.
Years Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Years Ended December 31, 2019
The following table presents a period-to-period comparison of the significant components of cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
SIGNIFICANT COMPONENTS OF CASH FLOWS - 2020 COMPARED TO 2019
The increase in the Total cash balance from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 is largely the result of net cash provided by operating activities, excluding loan origination activity. Net income accounted for a significant portion of the increase, partially offset by significant non-cash elements of that net income. We also benefitted from a significant inflow of cash from payoffs of loans held for investment, net of originations and net repayments of interim warehouse notes payable.
Changes in cash flows from operating activities were driven primarily by loans originated and sold. Such loans are held for short periods of time, generally less than 60 days and impact cash flows presented as of a point in time. The increase in cash flows used in operating activities is primarily attributable to the $1.9 billion increase in the funding of loan originations, net of loan sales to third parties from 2019 to 2020. Excluding cash used for the origination and sale of loans, cash flows provided by operations was $200.3 million during 2020 compared to $166.6 million during 2019. Significant elements of this change include (i) increased net income of $72.7 million, (ii) increased non-cash expenses such as amortization and depreciation, stock compensation, deferred tax expense, and provision for credit losses of $76.1 million, and (iii) an increase in other liabilities of $68.8 million, partially offset by a $177.2 million increase in gains attributable to the fair value of future servicing rights, net of guaranty obligation, a non-cash source of revenue.
The change from cash used in investing activities in 2019 to cash provided by investing activities in 2020 is primarily attributable to increases in the net payoff of loans held for investment and a decrease in investments in joint ventures, partially offset by an increase in cash paid for acquisitions. The increase in net payoffs on loans held for investment was due to an increase in payoff activity and significantly lower origination activity in 2020 as we paused the originations of loans held for investment for several months due to the COVID-19 Crisis. Cash used for investments in joint ventures decreased primarily due to decreases in investments in our Interim Program JV due to a reduction in the number of loans originated resulting from the COVID-19 Crisis and repayments of several loans held by the joint venture, partially offset by additional investments in our Appraisal JV. Cash paid for acquisitions increased by $39.6 million as we increased the size and number of companies acquired in 2020 compared to 2019.
The change in cash provided by financing activities was primarily attributable to the change in net warehouse borrowings year over year and an increase in the proceeds from issuance of common stock, partially offset by increases in net repayments of interim warehouse notes payable, repurchases of common stock, cash dividends, and purchase of noncontrolling interests.
The change in net borrowings of warehouse notes payable during 2020 was due to a substantial increase in the unpaid principal balance of LHFS funded by Agency Warehouse Facilities (as defined below) compared to 2019, with the unpaid principal balance of LHFS funded by Agency Warehouse Facilities increasing $1.9 billion year over year (as seen above in cash used for loan origination activity). Additionally, as of December 31, 2019, we funded $109.0 million of the LHFS with our own cash, resulting in lower repayments of warehouse notes payable in 2020 than in 2019.
The change from net borrowings of interim warehouse notes payable in 2019 to net repayments in 2020 was principally due to interim loan origination and repayment activity year over year in our Interim Loan Program. During 2019, we originated several loans that were fully funded with corporate cash and had multiple payoffs of loans. During 2020, we had significantly lower originations and increased payoff activity, leading to a change from net borrowings to net repayments year over year. The cash used in repurchase of common stock increased primarily as a result of an increase in the number of shares repurchased during 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in cash dividends paid was primarily the result of our increasing the dividends paid per share by 20% year over year. The increase in cash used for purchase of noncontrolling interests was a result of our purchase of noncontrolling interests from the members of WDIS during 2020, a unique transaction.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Uses of Liquidity, Cash and Cash Equivalents
Our significant recurring cash flow requirements consist of liquidity to (i) fund loans held for sale; (ii) fund loans held for investment under the Interim Loan Program; (iii) pay cash dividends; (iv) fund our portion of the equity necessary for the operations of the Interim Program JV, our appraisal JV, and other equity-method investments; (v) meet working capital needs to support our day-to-day operations, including debt service payments, servicing advances and payments for salaries, commissions, and income taxes; and (vi) meet working capital to satisfy collateral requirements for our Fannie Mae DUS risk-sharing obligations and to meet the operational liquidity requirements of Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, HUD, Ginnie Mae, and our warehouse facility lenders.
Fannie Mae has established benchmark standards for capital adequacy and reserves the right to terminate our servicing authority for all or some of the portfolio if, at any time, it determines that our financial condition is not adequate to support our obligations under the DUS agreement. We are required to maintain acceptable net worth as defined in the standards, and we satisfied the requirements as of December 31, 2020. The net worth requirement is derived primarily from unpaid balances on Fannie Mae loans and the level of risk-sharing. As of December 31, 2020, the net worth requirement was $228.0 million, and our net worth was $991.1 million, as measured at our wholly owned operating subsidiary, Walker & Dunlop, LLC. As of December 31, 2020, we were required to maintain at least $45.2 million of liquid assets to meet our operational liquidity requirements for Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, HUD, Ginnie Mae and our warehouse facility lenders. As of December 31, 2020, we had operational liquidity of $370.0 million, as measured at our wholly owned operating subsidiary, Walker & Dunlop, LLC.
We paid a cash dividend of $0.30 per share each quarter of 2019 and increased our quarterly dividend by 20% to $0.36 per share each quarter of 2020. In February 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors declared a dividend of $0.50 per share for the first quarter of 2021, and increase of 39%. The dividend will be paid March 11, 2021 to all holders of record of our restricted and unrestricted common stock as of February 22, 2021. We expect to continue to make regular quarterly dividend payments for the foreseeable future.
Over the past three years, we have returned $201.7 million to investors in the form of the repurchase of 1.8 million shares of our common stock under share repurchase programs for a cost of $87.5 million and cash dividend payments of $114.2 million. Additionally, we have invested $139.3 million in acquisitions. On occasion, we may use cash to fully fund loans held for investment or loans held for sale instead of using our warehouse line. As of December 31, 2020, we used corporate cash to fund loans held for investment with an unpaid principal balance of $232.1 million. We continually seek opportunities to complete additional acquisitions if we believe the economics are favorable.
In February 2020, our Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase program that permitted the repurchase of up to $50.0 million of shares of our common stock over a 12-month period beginning on February 11, 2020. In 2020, we repurchased 459 thousand shares for an aggregate cost of $26.1 million. In February 2021, our Board approved a new stock repurchase program that permits the repurchase of up to $75 million of shares of our common stock over a 12-month period beginning February 12, 2021.
We have contractual obligations to make future cash payments on lease agreements on our various offices of $23.9 million as of December 31, 2020. NOTE 14 in the consolidated financial statements contains additional details related to future lease payments. We have contractual obligations to repay short-term and long-term debt. The total principal balance for such debt is $2.8 billion as of December 31, 2020. Most of
this balance will be repaid with the proceeds from the sale of loans held for sale and the repayments of loans held for investment. NOTE 6 in the consolidated financial statements contains additional details related to these future debt payments. The interest associated with these debt payments is $11.7 million in 2021, $7.6 million in 2022, $6.2 million in 2023, $6.1 million in 2024, and $6.0 million in 2025. The interest for long-term debt is based on a variable rate. Such interest is calculated based on the effective interest rate as of December 31, 2020.
Historically, our cash flows from operations and warehouse facilities have been sufficient to enable us to meet our short-term liquidity needs and other funding requirements. We believe that cash flows from operations will continue to be sufficient for us to meet our current obligations for the foreseeable future, including any additional servicing advance obligations that may be required under our Fannie Mae and HUD loan servicing agreements due to the impacts of the COVID-19 Crisis.
Restricted Cash and Pledged Securities
Restricted cash consists primarily of good faith deposits held on behalf of borrowers between the time we enter into a loan commitment with the borrower and the investor purchases the loan. We are generally required to share the risk of any losses associated with loans sold under the Fannie Mae DUS program, our only off-balance sheet arrangement. We are required to secure this obligation by assigning collateral to Fannie Mae. We meet this obligation by assigning pledged securities to Fannie Mae. The amount of collateral required by Fannie Mae is a formulaic calculation at the loan level and considers the balance of the loan, the risk level of the loan, the age of the loan, and the level of risk-sharing. Fannie Mae requires collateral for Tier 2 loans of 75 basis points, which is funded over a 48-month period that begins upon delivery of the loan to Fannie Mae. Collateral held in the form of money market funds holding U.S. Treasuries is discounted 5%, and Agency MBS are discounted 4% for purposes of calculating compliance with the collateral requirements. As of December 31, 2020, we held substantially all of our restricted liquidity in Agency MBS in the aggregate amount of $119.9 million. Additionally, the majority of the loans for which we have risk-sharing are Tier 2 loans. We fund any growth in our Fannie Mae required operational liquidity and collateral requirements from our working capital.
We are in compliance with the December 31, 2020 collateral requirements as outlined above. As of December 31, 2020, reserve requirements for the December 31, 2020 DUS loan portfolio will require us to fund $65.0 million in additional restricted liquidity over the next 48 months, assuming no further principal paydowns, prepayments, or defaults within our at-risk portfolio. Fannie Mae has assessed the DUS Capital Standards in the past and may make changes to these standards in the future. We generate sufficient cash flows from our operations to meet these capital standards and do not expect any future changes to have a material impact on our future operations; however, any future changes to collateral requirements may adversely impact our available cash.
Under the provisions of the DUS agreement, we must also maintain a certain level of liquid assets referred to as the operational and unrestricted portions of the required reserves each year. We satisfied these requirements as of December 31, 2020.
Sources of Liquidity: Warehouse Facilities
The following table provides information related to our warehouse facilities as of December 31, 2020.
(1) Agency Warehouse Facilities, including the Fannie Mae repurchase agreement are used to fund loans held for sale, while Interim Warehouse Facilities are used to fund loans held for investment.
(2) Interest rate presented does not include the effect of interest rate floors.
Agency Warehouse Facilities
As of December 31, 2020, we had five warehouse lines of credit in the aggregate amount of $3.6 billion with certain national banks and a $1.5 billion uncommitted facility with Fannie Mae (collectively, the “Agency Warehouse Facilities”) that we use to fund substantially all of our loan originations. Five of these facilities are revolving commitments we expect to renew annually (consistent with industry practice), and the Fannie Mae facility is provided on an uncommitted basis without a specific maturity date. Our ability to originate mortgage loans depends upon our ability to secure and maintain these types of short-term financing on acceptable terms.
During the first quarter of 2020, an Agency warehouse line with a $350.0 million aggregate committed and uncommitted borrowing capacity expired according to its terms. We believe that the five remaining committed and uncommitted credit facilities from national banks, the uncommitted credit facility from Fannie Mae, and our corporate cash provide us with sufficient borrowing capacity to conduct our Agency lending operations.
Agency Warehouse Facility #1:
We have a warehousing credit and security agreement with a national bank for a $425.0 million committed warehouse line that is scheduled to mature on October 25, 2021. The agreement provides us with the ability to fund Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, HUD, and FHA loans. Advances are made at 100% of the loan balance and borrowings under this line bear interest at the 30-day London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) plus 140 basis points. The agreement contains certain affirmative and negative covenants that are binding on the Company’s operating subsidiary, Walker & Dunlop, LLC (which are in some cases subject to exceptions), including, but not limited to, restrictions on its ability to assume, guarantee, or become contingently liable for the obligation of another person, to undertake certain fundamental changes such as reorganizations, mergers, amendments to the Company’s certificate of formation or operating agreement, liquidations, dissolutions or dispositions or acquisitions of assets or businesses, to cease to be directly or indirectly wholly owned by the Company, to pay any subordinated debt in advance of its stated maturity or to take any action that would cause Walker & Dunlop, LLC to lose all or any part of its status as an eligible lender, seller, servicer or issuer or any license or approval required for it to engage in the business of originating, acquiring, or servicing mortgage loans.
In addition, the agreement requires compliance with certain financial covenants, which are measured for the Company and its subsidiaries on a consolidated basis, as follows:
● tangible net worth of the Company of not less than (i) $200.0 million plus (ii) 75% of the net proceeds of any equity issuances by the Company or any of its subsidiaries after the closing date;
● compliance with the applicable net worth and liquidity requirements of Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, Ginnie Mae, FHA, and HUD;
● liquid assets of the Company of not less than $15.0 million;
● maintenance of aggregate unpaid principal amount of all mortgage loans comprising the Company’s consolidated servicing portfolio of not less than $20.0 billion or all Fannie Mae DUS mortgage loans comprising the Company’s consolidated servicing portfolio of not less than $10.0 billion, exclusive in both cases of mortgage loans which are 60 or more days past due or are otherwise in default or have been transferred to Fannie Mae for resolution;
● aggregate unpaid principal amount of Fannie Mae DUS mortgage loans within the Company’s consolidated servicing portfolio which are 60 or more days past due or otherwise in default not to exceed 3.5% of the aggregate unpaid principal balance of all Fannie Mae DUS mortgage loans within the Company’s consolidated servicing portfolio; and
● maximum indebtedness (excluding warehouse lines) to tangible net worth of 2.25 to 1.00 (the “leverage ratio”).
The agreement contains customary events of default, which are in some cases subject to certain exceptions, thresholds, notice requirements, and grace periods. During the second quarter of 2020, we executed a modification agreement to the warehouse agreement that created a $100.0 million sublimit within the overall committed capacity to fund COVID-19 forbearance advances under the Fannie Mae DUS program. Borrowings under the agreement are collateralized by Fannie Mae’s commitment to repay the advances and are funded at 90% of the principal and interest advanced and bear interest at 30-day LIBOR plus 175 basis points with an interest-rate floor of 25 basis points. We had no borrowings related to the COVID-19 forbearances as of December 31, 2020. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we executed the fifth amendment to the warehouse and security agreement that extended the maturity date to October 25, 2021 and increased the committed borrowing capacity to $425.0 million. Additionally, the amendment increased the borrowing rate to 30-day LIBOR plus 140 basis points from 30-day LIBOR plus 115 basis points and did not include an extension of the $200.0 million uncommitted borrowing capacity as we allowed the uncommitted capacity to expire. No other material modifications were made to the agreement in 2020.
Agency Warehouse Facility #2:
We have a warehousing credit and security agreement with a national bank for a $700.0 million committed warehouse line that is scheduled to mature on September 7, 2021. The committed warehouse facility provides the Company with the ability to fund Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, HUD, and FHA loans. Advances are made at 100% of the loan balance, and borrowings under this line bear interest at 30-day LIBOR plus 140 basis points. In addition to the committed borrowing capacity, the agreement provides $300.0 million of uncommitted borrowing capacity that bears interest at the same rate as the committed facility. During the third quarter of 2020, we executed the sixth amendment to the warehouse agreement that extended the maturity date thereunder until September 7, 2021, increased the committed borrowing capacity to $700.0 million. Additionally, the amendment increased the borrowing rate to 30-day LIBOR plus 140 basis points from 30-day LIBOR plus 115 basis points. No other material modifications were made to the agreement during 2020.
The negative and financial covenants of the amended and restated warehouse agreement conform to those of the warehouse agreement for Agency Warehouse Facility #1, described above, with the exception of the leverage ratio covenant, which is not included in the warehouse agreement for Agency Warehouse Facility #2.
Agency Warehouse Facility #3:
We have a $600.0 million committed warehouse credit and security agreement with a national bank that is scheduled to mature on April 30, 2021. The committed warehouse facility provides us with the ability to fund Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, HUD and FHA loans. Advances are made at 100% of the loan balance, and the borrowings under the warehouse agreement bear interest at a rate of 30-day LIBOR plus 115 basis points. During the second quarter of 2020, we executed the 11th amendment to the warehouse agreement related to this facility that extended the maturity date to April 30, 2021 for the committed borrowing capacity and added $265.0 million in uncommitted borrowing capacity that bears interest at the same rate and has the same maturity date as the committed facility. The amendment also added a 30-day LIBOR floor of 50 basis points. During the third quarter of 2020, we executed the 12th amendment to the warehouse agreement that increased the committed borrowing capacity to $600.0 million. No other material modifications were made to the agreement during 2020.
The negative and financial covenants of the warehouse agreement conform to those of the warehouse agreement for Agency Warehouse Facility #1, described above.
Agency Warehouse Facility #4:
We have a $350.0 million committed warehouse credit and security agreement with a national bank that is scheduled to mature on October 7, 2021. The warehouse facility provides us with the ability to fund Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, HUD, and FHA loans and has a sublimit of $75.0 million to fund defaulted HUD and FHA loans. Advances are made at 100% of the loan balance, and the borrowings under the warehouse agreement bear interest at a rate of 30-day LIBOR plus 140 basis points. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we executed the third amendment to the warehouse agreement that extends the maturity date of the warehouse agreement to October 7, 2021, increased the borrowing capacity of the defaulted FHA sublimit to $75.0 million, increased the borrowing rate to 30-day LIBOR plus 140 basis points from 30-day LIBOR plus 115 basis points, and added a 30-day LIBOR floor of 25 basis points. No other material modifications were made to the agreement during 2020.
The negative and financial covenants of the warehouse agreement conform to those of the warehouse agreement for Agency Warehouse Facility #1, described above, with the exception of the leverage ratio covenant, which is not included in the warehouse agreement for Agency Warehouse Facility #4.
Agency Warehouse Facility #5:
We have a master repurchase agreement with a national bank for a $1.0 billion uncommitted advance credit facility that is scheduled to mature on August 23, 2021. The facility provides us with the ability to fund Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, HUD, and FHA loans. Advances are made at 100% of the loan balance, and the borrowings under the repurchase agreement bear interest at a rate of 30-day LIBOR plus 145 basis points. During the third quarter of 2020, we executed the first amendment to the agreement that increased the uncommitted borrowing capacity to $1.0 billion and increased the borrowing rate to 30-day LIBOR plus 145 basis points from 30-day LIBOR plus 115 basis points and added a financial covenant related to debt service coverage ratio, as defined, that is similar to the Company’s other warehouse lines. No other material modifications have been made to the agreement during 2020.
The negative and financial covenants of the repurchase agreement conform to those of the warehouse agreement for Agency Warehouse Facility #1, described above, with the exception of a four-quarter rolling EBITDA, as defined, to total debt service ratio of 2.75 to 1.00 that is applicable to Agency Warehouse Facility #5.
Uncommitted Agency Warehouse Facility:
We have a $1.5 billion uncommitted facility with Fannie Mae under its ASAP funding program. After approval of certain loan documents, Fannie Mae will fund loans after closing and the advances are used to repay the primary warehouse line. Fannie Mae will advance 99% of the loan balance. There is no expiration date for this facility. The uncommitted facility has no specific negative or financial covenants.
Interim Warehouse Facilities
To assist in funding loans held for investment under the Interim Loan Program, we have four warehouse facilities with certain national banks in the aggregate amount of $404.8 million as of December 31, 2020 (“Interim Warehouse Facilities”). Consistent with industry practice, three of these facilities are revolving commitments we expect to renew annually or bi-annually, and one is a commitment that matures according to the maturity date of the underlying loan it finances. Our ability to originate loans held for investment depends upon our ability to secure and maintain these types of short-term financings on acceptable terms.
Interim Warehouse Facility #1:
We have a $135.0 million committed warehouse line agreement that is scheduled to mature on April 30, 2021. The facility provides us with the ability to fund first mortgage loans on multifamily real estate properties for periods of up to three years, using available cash in combination with advances under the facility. Borrowings under the facility are full recourse to the Company and bear interest at 30-day LIBOR plus 190 basis points. Repayments under the credit agreement are interest-only, with principal repayments made upon the earlier of the refinancing of an underlying mortgage or the maturity of an advance under the credit agreement. During the second quarter of 2020, we executed the 11th amendment to the credit and security agreement related to this facility that extended the maturity date to April 30, 2021 and added a 30-day LIBOR floor of 50 basis points. No other material modifications were made to the agreement during 2020.
The facility agreement requires the Company’s compliance with the same financial covenants as Agency Warehouse Facility #1, described above, and also includes the following additional financial covenant: minimum rolling four-quarter EBITDA, as defined, to total debt service ratio of 2.00 to 1.00 that is applicable to Interim Warehouse Facility #1.
Interim Warehouse Facility #2:
We have a $100.0 million committed warehouse line agreement that is scheduled to mature on December 13, 2021. The agreement provides us with the ability to fund first mortgage loans on multifamily real estate properties for periods of up to three years, using available cash in combination with advances under the facility. Borrowings under the facility are full recourse to the Company. All borrowings originally bear interest at 30-day LIBOR plus 165 basis points. The lender retains a first priority security interest in all mortgages funded by such advances on a cross-collateralized basis. Repayments under the credit agreement are interest-only, with principal repayments made upon the earlier of the refinancing of an underlying mortgage or the maturity of an advance under the credit agreement. No material modifications were made to the agreement during 2020.
The credit agreement requires the borrower and the Company to abide by the same financial covenants as Agency Warehouse Facility #1, described above, with the exception of the leverage ratio covenant, which is not included in the warehouse agreement for Interim Warehouse Facility #2. Additionally, Interim Warehouse Facility #2 has the following additional financial covenants:
● rolling four-quarter EBITDA, as defined, of not less than $35.0 million; and
● debt service coverage ratio, as defined, of not less than 2.75 to 1.00.
Interim Warehouse Facility #3:
We have a $75.0 million repurchase agreement with a national bank that is scheduled to mature on December 20, 2021. The agreement provides us with the ability to fund first mortgage loans on multifamily real estate properties for periods of up to three years, using available cash in combination with advances under the facility. Borrowings under the facility are full recourse to the Company. The borrowings under the agreement bear interest at a rate of 30-day LIBOR plus 175 to 325 basis points (“the spread”). The spread varies according to the type of asset the borrowing finances. Repayments under the credit agreement are interest-only, with principal repayments made upon the earlier of the refinancing of an underlying mortgage or the maturity of an advance under the credit agreement. We allowed the repurchase agreement to mature on May 18, 2020. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we executed the fifth amendment to the repurchase agreement which renewed the facility with the previous $75 million committed and $75 million uncommitted borrowing capacity with a maturity date of December 20, 2021. Additionally, the amendment updated the spread to 30-day LIBOR plus 175 to 325 basis points from 30-day LIBOR plus 190 to 250 basis points depending on the type of asset. No other material modifications were made to the agreement during 2020.
The Repurchase Agreement requires the borrower and the Company to abide by the following financial covenants:
● tangible net worth of the Company of not less than (i) $200.0 million plus (ii) 75% of the net proceeds of any equity issuances by the Company or any of its subsidiaries after the closing date;
● liquid assets of the Company of not less than $15.0 million;
● leverage ratio, as defined, of not more than 3.0 to 1.0; and
● debt service coverage ratio, as defined, of not less than 2.75 to 1.00.
Interim Warehouse Facility #4:
During the first quarter of 2020, we executed a loan and security agreement to establish Interim Warehouse Facility #4. The $19.8 million committed warehouse loan and security agreement with a national bank funds one specific loan. The agreement provides for a maturity date to coincide with the maturity date for the underlying loan. Borrowings under the facility are full recourse and bear interest at 30-day LIBOR plus 300 basis points, with a floor of 450 basis points. Repayments under the credit agreement are interest-only, with principal repayments made upon the earlier of the refinancing of an underlying mortgage or the maturity of an advance under the credit agreement. The committed warehouse loan and security agreement has only two financial covenants, both of which are similar to the other Interim Warehouse Facilities. We may request additional capacity under the agreement to fund specific loans. No material modifications were made to the agreement during 2020.
The facility agreement has only two financial covenants:
● tangible net worth of the Company of not less than (i) $200.0 million plus (ii) 75% of the net proceeds of any equity issuances by the Company or any of its subsidiaries after the closing date; and
● liquid assets of the Company of not less than $15.0 million;
During the second quarter of 2020, we allowed an interim warehouse facility with no outstanding borrowings to expire according to its terms. We believe that the four remaining committed and uncommitted interim credit facilities from national banks and our corporate cash provide us with sufficient borrowing capacity to conduct our Interim Loan Program lending operations.
The warehouse agreements above contain cross-default provisions, such that if a default occurs under any of our warehouse agreements, generally the lenders under our other warehouse agreements could also declare a default. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all of our warehouse line covenants.
We believe that the combination of our capital and warehouse facilities is adequate to meet our loan origination needs.
Debt Obligations
On November 7, 2018, we entered into a senior secured credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) that amended and restated our prior credit agreement and provided for a $300.0 million term loan (the “Term Loan”). The Term Loan was issued at a 0.5% discount, has a stated maturity date of November 7, 2025, and bears interest at 30-day LIBOR plus 200 basis points. At any time, we may also elect to request one or more incremental term loan commitments not to exceed $150.0 million, provided that the total indebtedness would not cause the leverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) to exceed 2.00 to 1.00.
We are obligated to repay the aggregate outstanding principal amount of the term loan in consecutive quarterly installments equal to $0.7 million on the last business day of each of March, June, September, and December. The term loan also requires certain other prepayments in certain circumstances pursuant to the terms of the Term Loan Agreement. The final principal installment of the term loan is required to be paid in full on November 7, 2025 (or, if earlier, the date of acceleration of the term loan pursuant to the terms of the Term Loan Agreement) and will be in an amount equal to the aggregate outstanding principal of the term loan on such date (together with all accrued interest thereon). During the second quarter of 2020, we executed the second amendment to the Credit Agreement to amend the definition of Permitted Subsidiary Collateral to include principal and interest forbearance advances funded by the sublimit created under Agency Warehouse Facility #1. No other material modifications were made to the agreement in 2020.
Our obligations under the Credit Agreement are guaranteed by Walker & Dunlop Multifamily, Inc., Walker & Dunlop, LLC, Walker & Dunlop Capital, LLC, and W&D BE, Inc., each of which is a direct or indirect wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (together with the Company, the “Loan Parties”), pursuant to the Amended and Restated Guarantee and Collateral Agreement entered into on November 7, 2018 among the Loan Parties and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as administrative agent (the “Guarantee and Collateral Agreement”). Subject to certain exceptions and qualifications contained in the Credit Agreement, the Company is required to cause any newly created or acquired subsidiary, unless such subsidiary has been designated as an Excluded Subsidiary (as defined in the Credit Agreement) by the Company in accordance with the terms of the Credit Agreement, to guarantee the obligations of the Company under the Credit Agreement and become a party to the Guarantee and Collateral Agreement. The Company may designate a newly created or acquired subsidiary as an Excluded Subsidiary, so long as certain conditions and requirements provided for in the Credit Agreement are met.
The Credit Agreement contains certain affirmative and negative covenants that are binding on the Loan Parties, including, but not limited to, restrictions (subject to specified exceptions and qualifications) on the ability of the Loan Parties to incur indebtedness, to create liens on their property, to make investments, to merge, consolidate or enter into any similar combination, or enter into any asset disposition of all or substantially all assets, or liquidate, wind-up or dissolve, to make asset dispositions, to declare or pay dividends or make related distributions, to enter into certain transactions with affiliates, to enter into any negative pledges or other restrictive agreements, to engage in any business other than the business of the Loan Parties as of the date of the Credit Agreement and business activities reasonably related or ancillary thereto, to amend certain material contracts, or to enter into any sale leaseback arrangements. The Credit Agreement contains only one financial covenant, which requires the Company not to permit its asset coverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) to be less than 1.50 to 1.00.
The Credit Agreement contains customary events of default (which are, in some cases, subject to certain exceptions, thresholds, notice requirements and grace periods), including, but not limited to, non-payment of principal or interest or other amounts, misrepresentations, failure to perform or observe covenants, cross-defaults with certain other indebtedness or material agreements, certain change in control events, voluntary or involuntary bankruptcy proceedings, failure of the Credit Agreements or other loan documents to be valid and binding, certain ERISA events and judgments.
As of December 31, 2020, the outstanding principal balance of the note payable was $294.8 million.
The note payable and the warehouse facilities are senior obligations of the Company. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance
with all covenants related to the Term Loan Agreement.
Credit Quality and Allowance for Risk-Sharing Obligations
The following table sets forth certain information useful in evaluating our credit performance.
(1) As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, this balance consists of $73.3 million and $70.5 million, respectively, of loans serviced directly for the Interim Program JV partner and $484.8 million and $670.5 million, respectively, of Interim Program JV managed loans. We indirectly share in a portion of the risk of loss associated with Interim Program JV managed loans through our 15% equity ownership in the Interim Program JV. We have no exposure to risk of loss for the loans serviced directly for the Interim Program JV partner. The balance of this line is included as a component of assets under management in the Supplemental Operating Data table above.
(2) At-risk servicing portfolio is defined as the balance of Fannie Mae DUS loans subject to the risk-sharing formula described below, as well as a small number of Freddie Mac loans on which we share in the risk of loss. Use of the at-risk portfolio provides for comparability of the full risk-sharing and modified risk-sharing loans because the provision and allowance for risk-sharing obligations are based on the at-risk balances of the associated loans. Accordingly, we have presented the key statistics as a percentage of the at risk portfolio.
For example, a $15 million loan with 50% risk-sharing has the same potential risk exposure as a $7.5 million loan with full DUS risk sharing. Accordingly, if the $15 million loan with 50% risk-sharing were to default, we would view the overall loss as a percentage of the at-risk balance, or $7.5 million, to ensure comparability between all risk-sharing obligations. To date, substantially all of the risk-sharing obligations that we have settled have been from full risk-sharing loans.
(3) Represents the maximum loss we would incur under our risk-sharing obligations if all of the loans we service, for which we retain some risk of loss, were to default and all of the collateral underlying these loans was determined to be without value at the time of settlement. The maximum exposure is not representative of the actual loss we would incur.
Fannie Mae DUS risk-sharing obligations are based on a tiered formula and represent substantially all of our risk-sharing activities. The risk-sharing tiers and the amount of the risk-sharing obligations we absorb under full risk-sharing are provided below. Except as described in the following paragraph, the maximum amount of risk-sharing obligations we absorb at the time of default is generally 20% of the origination unpaid principal balance (“UPB”) of the loan.
Fannie Mae can double or triple our risk-sharing obligation if the loan does not meet specific underwriting criteria or if a loan defaults within 12 months of its sale to Fannie Mae. We may request modified risk-sharing at the time of origination, which reduces our potential risk-sharing obligation from the levels described above.
We use several techniques to manage our risk exposure under the Fannie Mae DUS risk-sharing program. These techniques include maintaining a strong underwriting and approval process, evaluating and modifying our underwriting criteria given the underlying multifamily housing market fundamentals, limiting our geographic market and borrower exposures, and electing the modified risk-sharing option under the Fannie Mae DUS program.
The “Business” section of “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” contains a discussion of the risk-sharing caps we have with Fannie Mae.
We regularly monitor the credit quality of all loans for which we have a risk-sharing obligation. Loans with indicators of underperforming credit are placed on a watch list, assigned a numerical risk rating based on our assessment of the relative credit weakness, and subjected to additional evaluation or loss mitigation. Indicators of underperforming credit include poor financial performance, poor physical condition, poor management, and delinquency. A specific reserve is recorded when it is probable that a risk-sharing loan will foreclose or has foreclosed, and a reserve for estimated credit losses and a guaranty obligation are recorded for all other risk-sharing loans.
The calculated CECL reserve for our at-risk Fannie Mae servicing portfolio as of December 31, 2020, which excludes specific reserves, was $67.0 million compared to $34.7 million as of the date of adoption of the CECL accounting standard on January 1, 2020. The significant increase in the CECL reserve is principally related to the forecasted impacts of the COVID-19 Crisis.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our allowance for risk-sharing obligations was $75.3 million and $11.5 million, respectively, or 17 basis points and three basis points of the at risk balance, respectively. The allowance for risk-sharing obligations as of December 31, 2020 was substantially comprised of the aforementioned CECL reserve. At December 31, 2019, the allowance was based primarily on the specific reserves related to two defaulted loans, and a general reserve calculated using the accounting standards in place prior to the adoption of CECL.
As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, two loans with an aggregate UPB of $48.5 million in our at-risk portfolio were in default. The specific reserves on these loans were $8.3 million and $6.9 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, our provisions for risk-sharing obligations were $33.7 million and $6.4 million, respectively.
For the ten-year period from January 1, 2010 through December 31, 2020, we recognized net write-offs of risk-sharing obligations of $24.1 million, or an average of less than two basis points annually of the average at risk Fannie Mae portfolio balance.
We have never been required to repurchase a loan.
New/Recent Accounting Pronouncements
NOTE 2 in the consolidated financial statements in Item 15 of Part IV in this Annual Report on Form 10-K contains a description of the accounting pronouncements that the Financial Accounting Standards Board has issued and that have the potential to impact us but have not yet been adopted by us. There were no other accounting pronouncements issued during 2020 that have the potential to impact our consolidated financial statements.