ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Forward Looking Statements
When used in this form 10-K and in future filings by the Company with the Commission, The words or phrases such as "anticipate," "believe," "could," "would," “should,” "estimate," "expect," "intend," "may," "plan," "predict," "project," "will" or similar expressions are intended to identify “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on any such forward looking statements, each of which speak only as of the date made. Such statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from historical earnings and those presently anticipated or projected. The Company has no obligation to publicly release the result of any revisions which may be made to any forward-looking statements to reflect anticipated or unanticipated events or circumstances occurring after the date of such statements.
These forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause actual results to be materially different. These factors include, but are not limited to, changes that may occur to general economic and business conditions; changes in current pricing levels that we can charge for our services or which we pay to our suppliers and business partners; changes in political, social and economic conditions in the jurisdictions in which we operate; changes to regulations that pertain to our operations; changes in technology that render our technology relatively inferior, obsolete or more expensive compared to others; foreign currency fluctuations; changes in the business prospects of our business partners and customers; increased competition, including from our business partners; delays in the delivery of broadband capacity to the homes and offices of persons who use our services; general disruptions to Internet service; and the loss of customer faith in the Internet as a means of commerce.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes which are included in this report under Item 8.
We do not undertake to update our forward-looking statements or risk factors to reflect future events or circumstances.
Contents
Overview
General
On May 16, 2011, we transferred, through a spin-off to our then wholly owned subsidiary, Worlds Online Inc. (currently named MariMed Inc.), the majority of our operations and related operational assets. We retained our patent portfolio which we intend to continue to increase and to more aggressively enforce against alleged infringers. We also entered into a License Agreement with MariMed Inc. to sublicense patented technologies, which agreement has since expired.
At present, the Company’s anticipated sources of revenue will be from any revenue that may be generated from enforcing its patents.
Revenues
We generated no revenue during the year because we transferred the operations of the Company to MariMed Inc. and our other anticipated revenue generation streams did not produce any income during the quarter.
Expenses
We classify our expenses into two broad groups:
• cost of revenues; and
• selling, general and administration.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have had to limit our operations since mid- 2001 due to a lack of liquidity. However, we were able to issue equity and convertible debt in the last few years and raise small amounts of capital from time to time that, prior to the spinoff, was used to enable us to begin upgrading our technology, develop new products and actively solicit additional business, and more recently to protect, increase and enforce our patent portfolio. Although we have been able to generate funds through our sale of shares of MariMed Inc., we continue to pursue additional sources of capital though we have no current arrangements with respect to, or sources of, additional financing at this time and there can be no assurance that any such financing will become available. If we cannot raise additional capital, form an alliance of some nature with another entity, raise more funds through the sale of shares of MariMed Inc., or start to generate sufficient revenues, we may be unable to purchase additional patents or otherwise expand operations through acquisition or otherwise.
Contents
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
Revenue was $0 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. All the operations were transferred over to MariMed Inc. in the spin off. The Company’s sources of revenue are anticipated to be from enforcing our patents in litigation or otherwise. We still need to raise a sufficient amount of capital to provide the resources required that would enable us to expand our business.
Selling general and administrative (S, G & A) expenses increased by $400,817 from $630,655 to $1,031,472 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is due to an increase in legal costs related to the patent infringement litigation cases.
Salaries and related expenses decreased by $6,546 to $207,662 from $214,208 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Salaries and related are in line with last year and are based on the terms of the CEO’s employment agreement.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an option expense of $267,647, representing the amortization of the value of the options issued in 2020 and 2018 that have not yet vested.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded an option expense of $309,783 equal to the increase in estimated fair value of the unvested options at December 31, 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 the Company had interest expense of $76,091. For the year ended December 31, 2019 the Company had interest expense of $82,858. The Company is accruing interest on old notes payable that are well past the statute of limitations and for which the Company never expects to pay back.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 the Company had interest income of $14,233.
For the year ended December 31, 2019 the Company had interest income of $3,033.
As a result of the foregoing, we had a net loss of $1,568,639 for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a net loss of $1,234,471 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Contents
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents were $474,587. We did not raise any additional cash during the year ended December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2019, our cash and cash equivalents were $1,570,844.
No capital expenditures were made in 2020 or 2019.
Our primary cash requirements have been used to fund the cost of operations, lawsuits, and patent enforcement.
Director Resignation
Effective February 21, 2019, Mr. Edward Gildea voluntarily resigned as a director for personal reasons.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recently issued accounting standards
The Company has reviewed all recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements and does not believe the future adoption of any such pronouncements may be expected to cause a material impact on its financial condition or the results of its operations.
Contents
ITEM 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS.
Contents
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Board of Directors and
Stockholders of Worlds, Inc.
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying balance sheets of Worlds, Inc. (the Company) as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the related statements of operations, stockholders’ deficit, and cash flows for each of the years in the two-year period ended December 31, 2020, and the related notes (collectively referred to as the financial statements). In our opinion, the financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the years in the two-year period ended December 31, 2020, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Basis for Opinion
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s financial statements based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB) and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over financial reporting. As part of our audits, we are required to obtain an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion.
Our audits included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Going Concern
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continues as a going concern. As discussed in Note 1 to the financial statements, in past years, the Company has suffered net losses from operations and has a net capital deficiency, which raises substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern. Management’s plans regarding those matters are discussed in Note 1. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Critical Audit Matters
The critical audit matters communicated below are matters arising from the current period audit of the financial statements that were communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and that: (1) relate to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and (2) involved our especially challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on the financial statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matters below, providing separate opinions on the critical audit matters or on the accounts or disclosures to which they relate.
Note Receivable Related Party
The Company loaned a material amount of money to a related party that they have asserted was within the normal course of business for a future business transaction. The note is convertible into common stock of another related party company. Management’s position on the legality of this payment and the realizability of the asset are inherently riskier and more complex than they would be had this been an arm’s length transaction. We evaluated the evidence provided by management for the business purpose of this loan and the current valuation of the stock that this asset is convertible into. There is a large reliance on managements representations about this transaction. Notes receivable related party is discussed in Notes 7 & 11 to the financial statements.
Going Concern
As discussed in Note 1 to the financial statements, the Company had a going concern due to a working capital deficiency and stockholders’ deficiency. Auditing management’s evaluation of a going concern can be a significant judgment given the fact that the Company uses management estimates on future revenues and expenses, which are not able to be substantiated. To evaluate the appropriateness of the going concern, we examined and evaluated the financial information that was the initial cause along with management’s plans to mitigate the going concern and management’s disclosure on going concern.
M&K CPAS, PLLC
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 2018.
Houston, TX
March 16, 2021
Contents
Contents
Contents
Contents
Contents
Worlds, Inc.
Notes to the Financial Statements
NOTE 1 - GOING CONCERN
As reflected in the accompanying financial statements, the Company has a working capital deficiency of $2,669,888 and a stockholder’s deficiency of $2,669,888 and used $1,082,023 of cash in operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. This raises substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on the Company’s ability to raise additional capital and implement its business plan. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
Management believes that the actions presently being taken to obtain additional funding and implement its strategic plans provide the opportunity for the Company to continue as a going concern.
Contents
NOTE 2 - DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS AND SUMMARY OF ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Description of Business
On May 16, 2011, the Company transferred, through a spin-off to its then wholly owned subsidiary, Worlds Online Inc. (currently called MariMed Inc.), the majority of its operations and related operational assets. The Company retained its patent portfolio which it intends to continue to increase and to more aggressively enforce against alleged infringers.
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("US GAAP"). The Company has incurred significant losses since its inception and has had minimal revenues from operations. The Company will require substantial additional funds for development and enforcement of its patent portfolio. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to obtain the substantial additional capital resources to pursue its business plan or that any assumptions relating to its business plan will prove to be accurate. The Company has not been able to generate sufficient revenue or obtain sufficient financing which has had a material adverse effect on the Company, including requiring the Company to reduce operations. As the Company has focused its attention on increasing its patent portfolio and enforcing it, the Company has been operating at a reduced capacity, with only one employee and using consultants to perform any additional work that may be required.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents includes highly liquid money market instruments, which have original maturities of three months or less at the time of purchase.
Revenue Recognition
Effective January 1, 2018, the Company adopted ASC 606. There was no impact in adopting ASC 606 as the Company has no revenue at this time. In the second quarter of 2011, the Company spun off its online businesses to MariMed Inc. The Company’s sources of revenue after the spinoff was expected to be from sublicenses of the patented technology by Worlds Online and any revenue that may be generated from enforcing its patents. The Company recognizes revenue by applying the following steps: (1) identify the contract with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when each performance obligation is satisfied.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs are charged to operations as incurred.
Contents
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are stated at cost. Depreciation is provided on a straight line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets ranging from three to five years. When assets are retired or disposed of, the cost and accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts, and any resulting gains or losses are included in income. Maintenance and repairs are charged to expense in the period incurred.
Impairment of Long Lived Assets
The Company evaluates the recoverability of its fixed assets and other assets in accordance with section 360-10-15 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification for disclosures about Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets. Disclosure requires recognition of impairment of long-lived assets in the event the net book value of such assets exceeds its expected cash flows. If so, it is considered to be impaired and is written down to fair value, which is determined based on either discounted future cash flows or appraised values. The Company adopted the statement on inception. No impairments of these types of assets were recognized during 2019 and 2018.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation using the fair value method following the guidance set forth in section 718-10 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification for disclosure about Stock-Based Compensation. This section requires a public entity to measure the cost of employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of the award (with limited exceptions). That cost will be recognized over the period during which an employee is required to provide service in exchange for the award (usually the vesting period). No compensation cost is recognized for equity instruments for which employees do not render the requisite service.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under Section 740-10-30 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined based upon differences between the financial reporting and tax basis of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent management concludes it is more likely than not that the assets will not be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in the consolidated statements of operations in the period that includes the enactment date.
ASC 740 prescribes a comprehensive model for how companies should recognize, measure, present, and disclose in their financial statements uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken on a tax return. Under ASC 740, tax positions must initially be recognized in the financial statements when it is more likely than not the position will be sustained upon examination by the tax authorities. Such tax positions must initially and subsequently be measured as the largest amount of tax benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the tax authority assuming full knowledge of the position and relevant facts.
Contents
Notes Payable
The Company has $773,279 in short term notes outstanding at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. These are old notes payable for which the statute of limitations has passed and therefore the Company does not expect it will ever have to repay those notes.
Comprehensive Income (Loss)
The Company reports comprehensive income and its components following guidance set forth by section 220-10 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification which establishes standards for the reporting and display of comprehensive income and its components in the financial statements. There were no items of comprehensive income (loss) applicable to the Company during the period covered in the financial statements.
Loss Per Share
Net loss per common share is computed pursuant to section 260-10-45 of the FASB ASC. Basic net loss per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. As of December 31, 2020, there were 11,720,000 options and 4,380,000 warrants outstanding and as of December 31, 2019, there were 11,140,000 options and 4,380,000 warrants outstanding whose effect is anti-dilutive and not included in diluted net loss per share for December 31, 2020 or for December 31, 2019. The options and warrants may dilute future earnings per share.
Commitments and Contingencies
The Company follows subtopic 450-20 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification to report accounting for contingencies. Certain conditions may exist as of the date the financial statements are issued, which may result in a loss to the Company but which will only be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur. The Company assesses such contingent liabilities, and such assessment inherently involves an exercise of judgment. In assessing loss contingencies related to legal proceedings that are pending against the Company or unasserted claims that may result in such proceedings, the Company evaluates the perceived merits of any legal proceedings or unasserted claims as well as the perceived merits of the amount of relief sought or expected to be sought therein.
If the assessment of a contingency indicates that it is probable that a material loss has been incurred and the amount of the liability can be estimated, then the estimated liability would be accrued in the Company’s financial statements. If the assessment indicates that a potentially material loss contingency is not probable but is reasonably possible, or is probable but cannot be estimated, then the nature of the contingent liability, and an estimate of the range of possible losses, if determinable and material, would be disclosed.
Loss contingencies considered remote are generally not disclosed unless they involve guarantees, in which case the guarantees would be disclosed. Management does not believe, based upon information available at this time, that these matters will have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows. However, there is no assurance that such matters will not materially and adversely affect the Company’s business, financial position, and results of operations or cash flows.
During 2000 the Company was involved in a lawsuit relating to unpaid consulting services. In April, 2001 a judgment against the Company was rendered for approximately $205,000. As of December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019 the Company recorded a reserve of $205,000 for this lawsuit, which is included in accrued expenses in the accompanying balance sheets.
Contents
Risk and Uncertainties
The Company is subject to risks common to companies in the technology industries, including, but not limited to, litigation, development of new technological innovations and dependence on key personnel.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Uncertain Tax Positions
The Company did not take any uncertain tax positions and had no adjustments to unrecognized income tax liabilities or benefits pursuant to the provisions of Section 740-10-25 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company measures assets and liabilities at fair value based on an expected exit price as defined by the authoritative guidance on fair value measurements, which represents the amount that would be received on the sale of an asset or paid to transfer a liability, as the case may be, in an orderly transaction between market participants. As such, fair value may be based on assumptions that market participants would use in pricing an asset or liability. The authoritative guidance on fair value measurements establishes a consistent framework for measuring fair value on either a recurring or nonrecurring basis whereby inputs, used in valuation techniques, are assigned a hierarchical level.
The following are the hierarchical levels of inputs to measure fair value:
• Level 1 - Observable inputs that reflect quoted market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
• Level 2 - Inputs reflect quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in markets that are not active; quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets; inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the assets or liabilities; or inputs that are derived principally from or corroborated by observable market data by correlation or other means.
• Level 3 - Unobservable inputs reflecting the Company’s assumptions incorporated in valuation techniques used to determine fair value. These assumptions are required to be consistent with market participant assumptions that are reasonably available.
The carrying amounts of the Company’s financial assets and liabilities, such as cash, other receivables, accounts payable & accrued expenses, due to related party, notes payable and notes payables, approximate their fair values because of the short maturity of these instruments. The Company's convertible notes payable are measured at amortized cost.
Warrant and option expense was measured by using level 3 valuation.
Contents
Embedded Conversion Features
The Company evaluates embedded conversion features within convertible debt under ASC 815 “Derivatives and Hedging” to determine whether the embedded conversion feature(s) should be bifurcated from the host instrument and accounted for as a derivative at fair value with changes in fair value recorded in earnings. If the conversion feature does not require derivative treatment under ASC 815, the instrument is evaluated under ASC 470-20 “Debt with Conversion and Other Options” for consideration of any beneficial conversion feature.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company does not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. The Company evaluates all of its financial instruments, including stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported as charges or credits to income.
For option-based simple derivative financial instruments, the Company uses the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to value the derivative instruments at inception and subsequent valuation dates. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The Company has reviewed all recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, and does not believe the future adoption of any such pronouncements may be expected to cause a material impact on its financial condition or the results of its operations.
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation for employees and directors in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 718, Compensation (“ASC 718”) as issued by the FASB. ASC 718 requires all share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, to be recognized in the statement of operations based on their fair values. Under the provisions of ASC 718, stock-based compensation costs are measured at the grant date, based on the fair value of the award, and are recognized as an expense over the employee’s requisite service period (generally the vesting period of the equity grant). The fair value of the Company’s common stock options are estimated using the Black Scholes option-pricing model with the following assumptions: expected volatility, dividend rate, risk free interest rate and the expected life. The Company expenses stock-based compensation by using the straight-line method. In accordance with ASC 718 and, excess tax benefits realized from the exercise of stock-based awards are classified as cash flows from operating activities. All excess tax benefits and tax deficiencies (including tax benefits of dividends on share-based payment awards) are recognized as income tax expense or benefit in the condensed consolidated statements of operations. The Company accounts for stock-based compensation awards issued to non-employees for services, as prescribed by ASC 718-10, at either the fair value of the services rendered or the instruments issued in exchange for such services, whichever is more readily determinable, using the measurement date guidelines enumerated in Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2018-07.
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02, “Leases” Topic 842, which amends the guidance in former ASC Topic 840, Leases. The new standard increases transparency and comparability most significantly by requiring the recognition by lessees of right-of-use assets and lease liabilities on the balance sheet for all leases longer than 12 months. Under the standard, disclosures are required to meet the objective of enabling users of financial statements to assess the amount, timing, and uncertainty of cash flows arising from leases. For lessees, leases will be classified as finance or operating, with classification affecting the pattern and classification of expense recognition in the income statement. The Company adopted the new lease guidance effective January 1, 2019. The Company is not a party to any leases and therefore is not showing any asset or liability related to leases in the current period or prior periods.
Reclassifications
Certain amounts in the financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2019 have been reclassified to conform to the presentation for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Contents
NOTE 3 - NOTES PAYABLE
The Company imputed interest of $76,091 on the notes during the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company repaid the $600,000 in notes payable and $150,000 in notes payable related party with accrued interest totaling $189,118 during the first quarter of 2019.
Contents
NOTE 4 - EQUITY
All common stock numbers and exercise prices in this Note are reflected on a post reverse split (5 to 1) basis. As a result of the reverse split on February 9, 2018, the Company had to issue an additional 167 shares due to rounding.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an option expense of $267,647 representing the amortization of the value of the options issued in 2020 and 2018 that have not yet vested.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded an option expense of $309,783 representing the amortization of the value of the options issued in 2018 that have not yet vested.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company issued 700,000 options. 300,000 options were issued to Chris Ryan, the Chief Financial Officer of the Company, and 400,000 options were issued to Directors of the Company. The Company recorded an option expense of $267,647 in 2020. $256,574 of this amount relates to the 2018 grant to Mr. Kidrin, the CEO. $11,073 relates to the grant in 2020 to Mr. Ryan, the CFO. The directors’ options were granted on December 31, 2020 and no expense was recorded for these options. The option expense represents the amortization of the value of the options issued in 2020 and 2018 that have not yet vested. The fair market value for Mr. Ryan’s options was calculated using the Black Scholes method assuming a risk free interest of .36%, 0% dividend yield, volatility of 204%, and an exercise price of $0.266 per share with a market price of $0.266 per share at issuance date and an expected life of 5 years. The options vest one year from the date of grant.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded an option expense of $309,783, equal to the increase in estimated fair value of the unvested options at December 31, 2019.
Contents
NOTE 5 - INCOME TAXES
At December 31, 2020, the Company had federal and state net operating loss carry forwards of approximately $45,000,000 that expire in various years through the year 2040.
Due to net operating loss carry forwards and operating losses, there is no provision for current federal or state income taxes for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amount used for federal and state income tax purposes.
The Company’s deferred tax asset at December 31, 2020 consists of net operating loss carry forwards calculated using federal and state effective tax rates equating to approximately $17,131,179 less a valuation allowance in the amount of approximately $17,131,179. Because of the Company’s lack of earnings history, the deferred tax asset has been fully offset by a valuation allowance. The valuation allowance increased by approximately $338,288 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and increased by approximately $240,419 for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The Company’s total deferred tax asset as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 are as follows:
The reconciliation of income taxes computed at the federal and state statutory income tax rate to total income taxes for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is as follows:
On December 22, 2017, the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the Tax Act) was enacted into law and the new legislation contains several key tax provisions that affected us, including a one-time mandatory transition tax on accumulated foreign earnings and a reduction of the corporate income tax rate to 21% effective January 1, 2018, among others. We are required to recognize the effect of the tax law changes in the period of enactment, such as determining the transition tax, remeasuring our U.S. deferred tax assets and liabilities as well as reassessing the net realizability of our deferred tax asset and liabilities. In December 2017, the SEC staff issued Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 118, Income Tax Accounting Implications of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (SAB 118), which allows us to record provisional amounts during a measurement period not to extend beyond one year of the enactment date.
Contents
NOTE 6 - COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
The Company is committed to an employment agreement with its President and CEO, Thom Kidrin. The agreement, dated as of August 28, 2018, is for five years with a one-year renewal option held by Mr. Kidrin. The agreement provides for a base salary of $200,000, which increases 10% on September 1 of each year; a monthly car allowance of $500; an annual bonus equal to 2.5% of Pre-Tax Income (as defined in the agreement); an additional bonus as follows: $75,000, if Pre-Tax Income for the year is between 150% and 200% of the prior fiscal year’s Pre-Tax Income or (B) $100,000, if Pre-Tax Income for the year is between 201% and 250% of the prior fiscal year’s Pre-Tax Income or (C) $200,000, if Pre-Tax Income for the year is 251% or greater than the prior fiscal year’s Pre-Tax Income, but in no event shall this additional bonus exceed five (5%) percent of Pre-Tax Income for such year; payment of up to $10,000 in life insurance premiums; options to purchase 5 million shares of Worlds Inc. common stock at an exercise price of $0.25 per share, 2 million of which vested on August 28, 2018, 1.5 million shall vest on August 28, 2019 and the remaining 1.5 million shall vest on August 28, 2020 ; a death benefit of at least $2 million dollars; and a payment equal to 2.99 times his base amount (as defined in the agreement) in the event of a Change of Control (as defined in the agreement). The agreement also provides that Mr. Kidrin can be terminated for cause (as defined in the agreement) and that he is subject to restrictive covenants for 12 months after termination.
NOTE 7 - RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
The Company paid to the CFO, Chris Ryan, $6,500 over the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company paid $150,000 in notes payables with accrued interest to related parties during the first quarter of 2019. The Company paid $176,785 in accrued salary to the CEO, Thom Kidrin, and paid $35,000 to the CFO, Chris Ryan, over the year ended December 31, 2019.
See note 11 for a discussion on the convertible note receivable from the related party.
The balance in the accrued expense attributable to related parties is $82,214 and $66,518 at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
NOTE 8 - PATENTS
Worlds Inc. currently has nine patents, 6,219,045 - 7,181,690 - 7,493,558 - 7,945,856, - 8,082,501, - 8,145,998 - 8,161,383, - 8,407,592 and 8,640,028. On March 30, 2012, the Company filed a patent infringement lawsuit against Activision Bizzard Inc., Blizzard Entertainment Inc. and Activision Publishing Inc. in the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts. On September 20, 2019, the Company filed a lawsuit against Linden Research, Inc. in the US District court for the District of Delaware. On September 25, 2020, the Company filed a lawsuit against Microsoft Corporation in the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Texas. Davidson, Berquist, Jackon & Gowdey LLP is lead counsel for the Company. See Legal Proceedings section for more information on the patent infringement lawsuits.
There can be no assurance that the Company will be successful in its ability to prosecute its IP portfolio or that we will be able to acquire additional patents.
NOTE 9 - SALE OF MARKETABLE SECURITIES
When Worlds Inc. spun off Worlds Online Inc. in January 2011, the Company retained 5,936,115 shares of common stock in Worlds Online Inc. (now named MariMed Inc.).
As of December 31, 2020, the Company still owns approximately 2.9 million shares of MariMed Inc. common stock.
Those shares were retained on the books of the Company with a book value of $0. No shares were sold in the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Contents
NOTE 10 - ACCRUED EXPENSES
Accrued expenses is comprised of $82,214 owed to related parties. $205,000 is related to a judgment against the Company relating to unpaid consulting services dating back to April of 2001. $1,305,009 is related to old accruals for which the statute of limitations has passed and therefore the Company does not expect it will ever have to repay those amounts. The balance of $13,342 is related to accruals for recurring operating expenses.
NOTE 11 - CONVERTIBLE NOTE RECEIVABLE - RELATED PARTY
The Company made an investment in the form of a convertible note in the amount of $200,000 to Canadian American Standard Hemp (CASH). The convertible note has a 7% annual interest rate and matures in 2 years. Interest and principle is payable at maturity. The note can be converted at any time, either all or part of the amount due can be converted into the borrowers equity. During the year ended December 31, 2020, CASH merged with Real Brands, Inc. The convertible note and accrued interest of $17,267 can be converted into 26,696,153 shares of Real Brands common stock at a conversion price of $0.008139. If converted into common stock, the Company would own approximately 1% of Real Brands Inc. Messrs. Kidrin, Toboroff and Christos are Directors of Real Brands and Mr. Kidrin is the CEO and Mr. Ryan is the CFO of Real Brands.
NOTE 12 - SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
The Company reviewed for subsequent events and there are none to report.
Contents
ITEM 9. CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
The Company was informed by its independent registered public accounting firm, L&L CPAs, P.A. (“L&L”), of its intent to resign for reason that it would not be able to comply with Section 10A of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and Section 203 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 which prohibit a registered public accounting firm from providing audit services to an issuer if the audit partner having primary responsibility for the audit, or the audit partner responsible for reviewing the audit, has performed audit services for that issuer in each of the five previous fiscal years of that issuer. Consequently, on December 12, 2018, L&L resigned as the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm.
On December 12, 2018, the Company’s Board of Directors engaged M&K CPAs, PLLC (“M&K”) as the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm for the fiscal years ending December 31, 2020 and 2019.
ITEM 9A. CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES.
We carried out an evaluation, under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including our principal executive officer and principal financial officer of the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures as defined in Rules 13a - 15(e) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (“Exchange Act”) as of the end of the period covered by this annual report on Form 10-K. Based upon that evaluation, our principal executive officer and principal financial officer concluded that, as of the end of the period covered in this report, our disclosure controls and procedures were not effective to ensure that information required to be disclosed in reports filed under the Exchange Act is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the required time periods and is accumulated and communicated to our management, including our principal executive officer, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
Our principal executive officer and principal financial officer does not expect that our disclosure controls or internal controls will prevent all error and all fraud. Although our disclosure controls and procedures were designed to provide reasonable assurance of achieving their objectives and our principal executive officer and principal financial officer has determined that our disclosure controls and procedures are effective at doing so, a control system, no matter how well conceived and operated, can provide only reasonable, not absolute assurance that the objectives of the system are met. Further, the design of a control system must reflect the fact that there are resource constraints, and the benefits of controls must be considered relative to their costs. Because of the inherent limitations in all control systems, no evaluation of controls can provide absolute assurance that all control issues and instances of fraud, if any, within the Company have been detected. These inherent limitations include the realities that judgments in decision-making can be faulty, and that breakdowns can occur because of simple error or mistake. Additionally, controls can be circumvented if there exists in an individual a desire to do so. There can be no assurance that any design will succeed in achieving its stated goals under all potential future conditions.
Furthermore, smaller reporting companies may face additional limitations. Smaller reporting companies often employ fewer individuals and find it difficult to properly segregate duties. Often, one or two individuals control every aspect of the Company’s operation and are in a position to override any system of internal control. Additionally, smaller reporting companies may utilize general accounting software packages that lack a rigorous set of software controls.
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting.
Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting as defined in Rule 13a- 15(f) under the Securities Exchange Act, as amended. Management, with the participation of the Chief Executive Officer, evaluated the effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020. In making this assessment, management used the criteria set forth by the committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013 Framework). A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control over financial reporting, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of the company’s annual or interim financial statements will not be prevented or detected on a timely basis. We have identified the following material weaknesses:
1. As of December 31, 2020, we did not maintain effective controls over the control environment. The Board of Directors does not currently have any director that qualifies as an audit committee financial expert as defined in Item 407(d)(5)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
2. As of December 31, 2020, we did not maintain effective controls over financial statement disclosure. Specifically, controls were not designed and in place to ensure that all disclosures required were originally addressed in our financial statements. Accordingly, management has determined that this control deficiency constitutes a material weakness.
3. As of December 31, 2020, we did not establish a formal written policy for the approval, identification and authorization of related party transactions.
Because of these material weaknesses, management has concluded that the Company did not maintain effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2020 based on the criteria established in “Internal Control-Integrated Framework” issued by the COSO.
Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting
There have been no changes in the Company’s internal control over financial reporting during the year ended December 31, 2020, that materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
ITEM 9B. OTHER INFORMATION.
None.
PART III
ITEM 10. DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE.
The following table sets forth the name, age and position of our directors and executive officers. Our directors are elected annually and serve until the next annual meeting of stockholders. Except for Mr. Kidrin, all of our directors are independent.
Thomas Kidrin became a director on October 1997 and has been president, secretary and treasurer from December 1997 through July 2007 then added the title chief executive officer since August 2007. Mr. Kidrin was also president and a director of Worlds Acquisition Corp. from April 1997 to December 1997. He has been the chairman and president of Datastream Corporation, a designer and developer of interactive products and services, since 1993. From December 1991 to June 1996, Mr. Kidrin was a founder, director, and President of UC Television Network Corp., a company engaged in the design and manufacture of interactive entertainment/advertising networks in the college market under the brand name College Television Network, the largest private network on college campuses in the United States sold to MTV in 1996 now operating under MTVU. Mr. Kidrin is a director of MariMed Inc. and was its CEO from its inception in 2011 until July 20, 2017. Mr. Kidrin has attended Drake University and the New School of Social Research.
Christopher J. Ryan has been Vice President-Finance since May 2000 and principal accounting and finance officer since August 2000. From August 1991 through April 2000, Mr. Ryan held a variety of financial management positions at Reuters America, an information services company. From 2001 through 2003, Mr. Ryan was the founder and President of CJR Advisory Services, a personal corporation through which he provided financial consulting services to various entities. From 2004 to 2010, Mr. Ryan was the CFO of Peminic, Inc. From 2008 to 2012 Mr. Ryan served as the CFO of Conversive Inc. Mr. Ryan was the CFO of MariMed Inc. from its inception in 2011 until July 20, 2017. Mr. Ryan is an inactive certified public accountant. He is a graduate of Montclair State University in New Jersey and received an M.B.A. degree from Fordham University.
Bernard Stolar became a director on September 11, 2007 and is noted for his expertise in both identifying and developing market-driving content and forging successful business partnerships, brings to the board over twenty years of senior-level experience within the interactive entertainment industry in all phases of company operations, including sales and marketing, product development, licensing, distribution, strategic planning and management. Mr. Stolar has served in high profile leadership roles at publicly and privately held interactive entertainment companies. Currently, Mr. Stolar is Dean of Games and Game Evangelist for Google, Inc. From February 2006 until its purchase by Google, Inc. in February 2007, Mr. Stolar was the Chairman of the Board of Adscape Media. Prior to this, he was president and chief operating office of BAM! Entertainment, where he transformed the company from a hand-held content company to a developer and marketer of interactive entertainment for next generation video game consoles. In 2000, Mr. Stolar joined Mattel, Inc. as president of Mattel Interactive, where he was responsible for directing and reorganizing the $1 billion Mattel Interactive division. From 1996 to 1999, Mr. Stolar served as president and chief operating officer of Sega of America, Inc. where he helped increase sales from $200 million to over $1 billion in three years, and orchestrated the launch of the Sega Dreamcast(TM), the fastest selling video game console in US history at that time. Mr. Stolar also served as executive vice president of Sony Computer Entertainment of America, where he was a key leader of the Sony Playstation® launch team, directing all third-party publishing in the U.S. Prior to that, Mr. Stolar served as president of Atari America's game division. Mr. Stolar is a director of MariMed Inc.
Robert Fireman became a director on September 11, 2007 and is a seasoned executive in the building of technology and consumer driven companies. He brings to Worlds vast experience in the development of real time, loyalty based, stored value products and services. Mr. Fireman was a founder and former Director and General Manager of SmartSource Direct, Inc., a subsidiary of News America Marketing (News Corp). Mr. Fireman was responsible for the development, marketing and distribution of card-based loyalty, financial, and database products & services in retail, grocery and drug store chains encompassing over 50,000 stores throughout the U.S. Mr. Fireman is a director of MariMed Inc. and has been its CEO since July 20, 2017. Mr. Fireman has been a practicing attorney for over 25 years and is the managing attorney of Fireman & Associates LLP.
Leonard Toboroff became a Director on August 28, 2018. He is a Director of Asset Alliance Corp., an alternative investment company since April 2011 and of NOVT Corporation, a developer of advanced medical treatments for coronary and vascular disease since April of 2006. He was a founder and director of Steel Partners Acquisition Corp. from June 2007 to June 2009. He was Executive Director of Corinthian Capital Group, LLC a private equity fund from October 2005 to June 2008. He was Director and Vice Chairman of Varsity Brands, Inc. (formally Riddell Sports Inc.) a provider of goods and services to the school spirit industry, from April 1998 until it was sold in September 2003. He was Vice Chairman of the Board of Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc. a provider of products and services to the oil and gas industry from May 1988 and served as Executive Vice President from May 1989 until February 2002. He has served as Chairman or Vice Chairman of American Bakeries Co., Ameriscribe Corporation and Saratoga Spring Water Co. and as a Director of ENGEX Corp, a closed-end mutual fund. He received his undergraduate degree from Syracuse University and his law degree from the University of Michigan Law School. He is a member of the U.S. Supreme Court Historical Society.
Peter N. Christos became a director on August 28, 2018. He is the founder (June 2005) and Executive Chairman of Abacos Ventures, LLC. Since June 2015, he has been Chairman of Real Brands, Inc. an owner, developer and acquirer of consumer brands, and in 2018 became a founding Independent Director of Canadian American Standard Hemp, Inc. As a former Wall Street executive with 30+ years of experience, and an entrepreneur, he has been a co-founder in both private and public companies including but not limited to: Co-founder, Executive Chairman of DealerCats, Inc.; a co-founder, Chairman and CEO of AND Interactive Communications Corp., a private software company acquired in 1994 by TCI Technology Ventures, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of TCI, now Comcast Corp. on NASDAQ; a co-founder of AquaCare Systems, Inc., a start-up that completed several acquisitions prior and post its IPO on NASDAQ; TransAmerican Waste Industries, Inc., from start-up to IPO on NASDAQ and then acquired via merger in 1998 by USA Waste Industries, Inc. now Waste Management, Inc. on the NYSE; Sparta Pharmaceuticals, Inc., from start-up to IPO on NASDAQ and was acquired in 1999 by SuperGen, Inc. on NASDAQ; and CTN Media Group, Inc., aka College Television Network, from start-up to IPO on NASDAQ and acquired in 2002 by MTV Networks, division of Viacom, Inc. on the NYSE. He has been a Managing Director of Investment Banking firms in NYC including but not limited to the founding Chairman/CEO of Adelphia Capital, LLC, a former (NASD/FINRA) member firm, and Adelphia Holdings, LLC, and Adelphia Partners, LLC, and for nearly 10 years managed investment banking, and all direct investments for Adelphia related entities. He was an EVP, Partner and co-head of the NYC office of the investment banking firm of Bannon & Co., which was subsequently sold to French bank Société Générale, which merged with Cowen & Company. Prior to, he was a Managing Director of the Corporate Finance Department and the Managing Director of the New Venture Group of D. H. Blair Investment Banking Corp. and its predecessor NYSE member firm. Prior to, he worked as a Managing Director in the Corporate Finance Department of Muller & Company, Inc. a NYSE member firm.
Effective February 21, 2019, Mr. Edward Gildea voluntarily resigned as a director for personal reasons.
The board of directors acted by written consent one time during the year ended 2020. The board does not have any standing committees and when necessary, the entire board acts to perform such functions.
Family Relationships
None.
Legal Proceedings
The Company is seeking damages for patent infringement of the Company’s patents in three active proceedings. The first proceeding, filed by the Company against Activision Blizzard, Inc., Blizzard Entertainment, Inc., and Activision Publishing, Inc. in the U.S. District Court for the District of Massachusetts in 2012, was temporarily stayed in 2015. In April 2020, U.S. District Judge Denise Casper lifted the stay and entered a schedule to complete the case. The Company also filed a complaint for patent infringement against Linden Research, Inc., d/b/a Linden Lab in the U.S. District Court for the District of Delaware in 2019, and a complaint for patent infringement against Microsoft Corporation in the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Texas in September, 2020.
1.
Company’s Lawsuit Against Activision Entities
The Company's lawsuit against the Activision entities, filed in 2012, was stayed in 2015 pending the outcome of six Inter Partes Review (“IPR”) petitions filed by Bungie, Inc. to the U.S. Patent & Trademark Office's Patent Trial and Appeal Board (“PTAB”). Those IPR proceedings were concluded in Company's favor on January 14, 2020, with the majority of the challenged claims surviving Bungie's challenges. Returning to its District Court litigation, the Company asked that Judge Casper lift the stay and allow the Company to proceed in its lawsuit for patent infringement of the Company’s patents against the Activision entities.
On April 17, 2020, Judge Casper issued an Order lifting the stay, and setting a pre-trial schedule, with a final pretrial conference and trial to occur at a date to be determined after September 24, 2021. The pre-trial schedule was further revised by Court Order entered on January 7, 2021. The Court's current schedule is as follows:
Fact discovery resumed on April 21, 2020. A hearing on Activision's 35 U.S.C. 101 motion was held on July 22, 2020 at 3:00 p.m., and Worlds is awaiting the Court’s decision on this motion.
Close of Fact Discovery February 18, 2021. Worlds' Narrowing of Asserted Claims (No more than 3 claims per patent; 15 claims maximum) February 25, 2021. Activision's Narrowing of Prior Art (No more than 7 prior art references per patent; 20 references total) March 11, 2021.
Status conference March 15, 2021 at 2:00 p.m. Opening expert reports March 25, 2021. Rebuttal expert reports April 29, 2021. Close of Expert Discovery May 20, 2021.
Dispositive motions (can address estoppel issue if still disputed)/Daubert motions due June 17, 2021. Opposition to Dispositive motions/Daubert motions due July 15, 2021. Reply briefs in support of Dispositive motions/Daubert motions due July 29, 2021. Hearing on dispositive motions/Daubert hearing TBD. Final Election deadlines and Final Pretrial Conference TBD.
2.
Company’s Lawsuit Against Linden Research, Inc. d/b/a Linden Lab
On September 20, 2019, the Company filed a lawsuit against Linden Research, Inc., d/b/a Linden Lab (“Linden”) in the U.S. District Court for the District of Delaware for patent infringement of the Company’s U.S. Patent No. 7,181,690. This case was assigned to U.S. District Judge Maryellen Noreika. On December 2, 2019, Linden answered the Complaint, denying that it has committed patent infringement. On January 8, 2020, the Court entered a Scheduling Order, setting deadlines for Fact Discovery and Contentions, Claim Construction, Expert Discovery, Summary Judgment, and Trial Phase. A claim construction hearing (“Markman” hearing) occurred on November 13, 2020. The scheduled trial date is January 31, 2022. Further scheduled dates include:
Final Infringement Contentions due March 6, 2021. Final Invalidity Contentions due March 30, 2021. Completion of Fact Discovery April 16, 2021.
Opening expert reports on which a party bears the burden of proof due May 14, 2021. Rebuttal expert reports and opening expert reports concerning secondary considerations of nonobviousness due June 14, 2021. Reply expert reports and rebuttal expert reports concerning secondary considerations of nonobviousness due July 12, 2021. Completion of expert discovery August 6, 2021.
Case Dispositive Motions due August 27, 2021.
Submission of Joint Proposed Pretrial Order, including Motions in limine due January 10, 2022. Pretrial Conference January 24, 2022 at 4:30 p.m. Trial January 31, 2022
3.
Company’s Lawsuit Against Microsoft Corporation
On September 25, 2020, the Company filed a lawsuit against Microsoft Corporation (“Microsoft”) in the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Texas for patent infringement of the Company’s U.S. Patent No. 8,082,501. This case was assigned to U.S. District Judge Alan D. Albright. On December 4, 2020, Microsoft filed Motion to Dismiss and Motion to Stay. On January 15, 2021, the Court entered a Scheduling Order, setting the Jury Selection and Jury Trial for March 14, 2022, and setting the following additional deadlines:
Defendant serves preliminary invalidity contentions on February 15, 2021. Parties exchange claim terms for construction on March 5, 2021. Parties exchange proposed claim constructions on March 19, 2021. Parties disclose extrinsic evidence on April 2, 2021. Deadline to meet and confer to narrow terms in dispute and exchange revised list of terms/constructions on April 2, 2021. Plaintiff files Opening claim construction brief, including any arguments that any claim terms are indefinite on April 9, 2021. Defendant files Responsive claim construction brief on April 30, 2021. Plaintiff files Reply claim construction brief on May 14, 2021. Defendant files Sur-Reply claim construction brief on May 28, 2021. Parties submit Joint Claim Construction Statement on May 31, 2021. Parties submit optional technical tutorials to the Court and technical adviser (if appointed) on June 4, 2021. Markman Hearing set for June 11, 2021 at 9:30 a.m. for one hour.
Fact Discovery opens; deadline to serve Initial Disclosures per Rule 26(a): June 12, 2021. Deadline to add parties: July 23, 2021. Deadline to serve Final Infringement and Invalidity Contentions: August 6, 2021. Deadline for the first of two meet and confers to discuss significantly narrowing the number of claims asserted and prior art references at issue: September 13, 2021. Deadline to amend pleadings: October 2, 2021. Close of Fact Discovery: October 11, 2021.
Opening Expert Reports due October 11, 2021. Rebuttal Expert Reports due November 15, 2021. Close of Expert Discovery: December 6, 2021. Deadline for the second of two meet and confer to discuss narrowing the number of claims asserted and prior art references at issue to triable limits: December 13, 2021.
Dispositive motion deadline and Daubert motion deadline: December 20, 2021.
Serve Pretrial Disclosures: January 3, 2022. Serve objections to pretrial disclosures/rebuttal disclosures: January 24, 2022. File Joint Pretrial Order and Pretrial Submissions: January 31, 2022. File Notice of Request for Daily Transcript or Real Time Reporting and Deadline to meet and confer regarding remaining objections and disputes on motions in limine: February 7, 2022. File joint notice identifying remaining objections to pretrial disclosures and disputes on motions in limine: February 18, 2022. Final Pretrial Conference: February 21, 2022. Jury Selection/Trial: March 14, 2022.
Audit Committee
We do not have a separately designated standing audit committee. Pursuant to Section 3(a)(58)(B) of the Exchange Act, the entire Board of Directors acts as an audit committee for the purpose of overseeing the accounting and financial reporting processes, and audits of our financial statements. The Commission recently adopted new regulations relating to audit committee composition and functions, including disclosure requirements relating to the presence of an "audit committee financial expert" serving on its audit committee. We are not in a position at this time to attract, retain and compensate additional directors in order to acquire a director who qualifies as an "audit committee financial expert" or to so designate one of our current directors, but we intend to either retain an additional director who will qualify as such an expert or designate one of our current directors as such an expert, as soon as reasonably practicable. Our current directors, by virtue of their past employment experience, have considerable knowledge of financial statements, finance, and accounting, and have significant employment experience involving financial oversight responsibilities. Accordingly, we believe that our current directors capably fulfill the duties and responsibilities of an audit committee in the absence of such a designated expert at this time.
Code of Ethics
We have adopted a code of ethic (the "Code of Ethics") that applies to our principal chief executive officer, principal financial officer, principal accounting officer or controller, or persons performing similar functions. A copy of the Code of Ethics was filed as Exhibit 14.1 to a previous annual report. The Code of Ethics is being designed with the intent to deter wrongdoing, and to promote the following:
• Honest and ethical conduct, including the ethical handling of actual or apparent conflicts of interest between personal and professional relationships
• Full, fair, accurate, timely and understandable disclosure in reports and documents that we file with, or submit to, the Commission and in other public communications we make
• Compliance with applicable governmental laws, rules and regulations
• The prompt internal reporting of violations of the code to an appropriate person or persons identified in the code
• Accountability for adherence to the code
Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance
Under Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act, all executive officers, directors, and each person who is the beneficial owner of more than 10% of the common stock of a company that files reports pursuant to Section 12 of the Exchange Act, are required to report the ownership of such common stock, options, and stock appreciation rights (other than certain cash-only rights) and any changes in that ownership with the Commission. Specific due dates for these reports have been established, and we are required to report, in this Form 10-K, any failure to comply therewith during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. We believe that all of these filing requirements were satisfied by its executive officers, directors and by the beneficial owners of more than 10% of our common stock except that each director did not file one Form 4. In making this statement, we have relied solely on copies of any reporting forms received by us, and upon any written representations received from reporting persons that no Form 5 (Annual Statement of Changes in Beneficial Ownership) was required to be filed under applicable rules of the Commission.
ITEM 11. EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
The following table sets forth the compensation paid by us during the fiscal periods ending December 31, 2020, and 2019, to our chief executive officer, chief financial officer and to our other most highly compensated executive officers whose compensation exceeded $100,000 for those fiscal periods.
(1) The above compensation does not include other personal benefits, the total value of which do not exceed $10,000.
(2) Pursuant to the regulations promulgated by the SEC, the table omits columns reserved for types of compensation not applicable to us.
(3) Mr. Kidrin has an employment agreement effective August 30, 2018 with a base annual salary of $200,000 with annual 10% increases every September 1. In prior years a large portion of his compensation was deferred due to lack of funds. During 2019 a significant portion of his deferred salary was paid to Mr. Kidrin.
(4) Mr. Ryan has deferred a portion of his compensation in 2020. Mr. Ryan’s compensation in 2019 includes a portion of deferred compensation from previous years.
Stock Option Grants
The following table sets forth information as of December 31, 2020 concerning unexercised options, unvested stock and equity incentive plan awards on a post reverse split 5 for 1 basis for the executive officers named in the Summary Compensation Table.
OUTSTANDING EQUITY AWARDS AT YEAR-ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020
Compensation of Directors
On September 5, 2007, the Board of Directors adopted a compensation program for the directors whereby each director will receive compensation in the form of stock options for serving on the board. Five-year non-qualified stock options to purchase 100,000 shares of the Corporation’s common stock are to be granted annually on January 1 to each director then in office at an exercise price equal to the last reported trading price of our common stock on that day, with such option to vest in 12 months, provided the director serves for at least six months, following the date of grant. In addition, every director upon first joining our board receives 150,000 stock options that vest immediately and are exercisable for five years at a price equal to the last reported trading price of our common stock on that day.
The following table sets forth information concerning the compensation paid to each of our non-employee directors during 2020 for their services rendered as directors.
DIRECTOR COMPENSATION
(1) This column represents the dollar amount recognized for financial statement reporting purposes with respect to the 2020 fiscal year for the fair value of stock options granted to the named director in fiscal year 2020, in accordance with SFAS 123R. Pursuant to SEC rules, the amounts shown exclude the impact of estimated forfeitures related to service-based vesting conditions. These amounts reflect our accounting expense for these awards, and do not correspond to the actual value that will be recognized from these awards by the named director.
Employment Agreements
The Company is committed to an employment agreement with its President and CEO, Thom Kidrin. The agreement, dated as of August 28, 2018, is for five years with a one-year renewal option held by Mr. Kidrin. Mr. Kidrin exercised his one-year renewal option. The agreement provides for a base salary of $200,000, which increases 10% on September 1 of each year; a monthly car allowance of $500; an annual bonus equal to 2.5% of Pre-Tax Income (as defined in the agreement); an additional bonus as follows: $75,000, if Pre-Tax Income for the year is between 150% and 200% of the prior fiscal year’s Pre-Tax Income or (B) $100,000, if Pre-Tax Income for the year is between 201% and 250% of the prior fiscal year’s Pre-Tax Income or (C) $200,000, if Pre-Tax Income for the year is 251% or greater than the prior fiscal year’s Pre-Tax Income, but in no event shall this additional bonus exceed five (5%) percent of Pre-Tax Income for such year; payment of up to $10,000 in life insurance premiums; options to purchase 5 million shares of Worlds Inc. common stock at an exercise price of $0.25 per share, 2 million shares vested on August 28, 2018, 1.5 million shares vest on August 28, 2019 and 1.5 million shares vest on August 28, 2020; a death benefit of at least $2 million dollars; and a payment equal to 2.99 times his base amount (as defined in the agreement) in the event of a Change of Control (as defined in the agreement). The agreement also provides that Mr. Kidrin can be terminated for cause (as defined in the agreement) and that he is subject to restrictive covenants for 12 months after termination.
Stock Option Plan
On September 4, 2007, our board of directors adopted the 2007 Stock Option Plan which was presented to our shareholders for their approval at an annual meeting. The plan provides for the issuance of up to 25 million options of which not more than 22 million can be incentive stock options.
Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation
One of our directors currently hold the same position with our former subsidiary, Worlds Online Inc. (currently named MariMed Inc.), although it is the intent that our current non-employee directors will only serve during a transition period not to exceed 12 months that transition has extended longer than initially anticipated. In addition, our CEO was the CEO of MariMed from inception in 2011 until July 20, 2017 when he was replace by another of our directors and our CFO was the CFO of MariMed from inception in 2011 until July 20, 2017. We do not have a compensation committee and all of our directors perform the function of a compensation committee, except that Mr. Kidrin, our president and CEO, does not participate in any deliberations with respect to his compensation and physically removes himself from the presence of the other directors while they deliberate over his compensation and bonuses. Accordingly, Mr. Kidrin, who is both our president and CEO and was a director of MariMed Inc. until June 2019, and until July 20, 2017 was also its CEO and Mr. Fireman who is one of our directors and is a director of MariMed Inc. and its CEO since July 20, 2017 may be deemed to fall within the parameters of a compensation committee interlock. To address this situation, as described above, Mr. Kidrin recuses himself from all deliberations of the board with respect to his compensation.
SECURITIES AUTHORIZED FOR ISSUANCE UNDER EQUITY COMPENSATION PLANS ON A POST REVERSE SPLIT (5:1) BASIS
ITEM 12. SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS.
The following table sets forth as of March 3, 2021, certain information with respect to the beneficial ownership of Common Stock by (i) each Director, nominee and executive officer of us; (ii) each person who owns beneficially more than 5% of the common stock; and (iii) all Directors, nominees and executive officers as a group. The percentage of shares beneficially owned is based on there having been 56,814,833 shares of common stock outstanding as of such date.
OFFICERS, DIRECTORS AND BENEFICIAL OWNERS, AS OF MARCH 3, 2021
* less than 1%
(1) Unless stated otherwise, the business address for each person named is Worlds Inc., 11 Royal Road, Brookline, MA 02445.
(2) Calculated pursuant to Rule 13d-3(d) (1) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Under Rule 13d-3(d), shares not outstanding which are subject to options, warrants, rights or conversion privileges exercisable within 60 days are deemed outstanding for the purpose of calculating the number and percentage owned by a person, but not deemed outstanding for the purpose of calculating the percentage owned by each other person listed. We believe that each individual or entity named has sole investment and voting power with respect to the shares of common stock indicated as beneficially owned by them (subject to community property laws where applicable) and except where otherwise noted.
(3) Includes 10 million currently exercisable stock options
(4) Includes 220,000 currently exercisable stock options and 300,000 stock options which are not currently exercisable.
(5) Consists of 100,000 stock options which are currently exercisable and 100,000 stock options which are currently not exercisable.
(6) Consists of 250,000 stock options which are currently exercisable and 100,000 stock options which are not currently exercisable.
(7) Does not include 100,000 options issuable as director compensation in 2019.
(8) Includes 11,020,000 currently exercisable stock options and 700,000 stock options that are currently not exercisable, but excludes 400,000 shares underlying stock options which are owed but unissued.
ITEM 13. CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE.
We are not currently subject to the requirements of any stock exchange or inter-dealer quotation system with respect to having a majority of “independent directors” although we believe that we meet that standard inasmuch as Messrs. Stolar, Fireman Toboroff and Christos are “independent” and only Mr. Kidrin, by virtue of being our president and CEO, is not independent. Although we are not currently subject to such rule, the independence of our directors meets the definition of such term as contained in NASDAQ Rule 5605(a)(2).
We currently own less than 1% of the outstanding common stock of our former wholly-owned subsidiary, MariMed Inc., and its current CEO and Director is also a Director of the Company, although it is the intent that this non-employee director will only serve during a transition period.
ITEM 14. PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES.
Fees Billed For Audit and Non-Audit Services
The following table represents the aggregate fees billed for professional audit services rendered by the independent auditors, M&K CPAS PLLC (“M&K”), for our audit of the annual financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. M&K was retained on December 12, 2018 after the Company was informed by L&L of its intent to resign for reason that it would not be able to comply with Section 10A of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and Section 203 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 which prohibit a registered public accounting firm from providing audit services to an issuer if the audit partner having primary responsibility for the audit, or the audit partner responsible for reviewing the audit, has performed audit services for that issuer in each of the five previous fiscal years of that issuer. L&L (then operating under its previous name) was retained as our auditor in 2007. Audit fees and other fees of auditors are listed as follows:
(1) Audit Fees. These are fees for professional services for the audit of our annual financial statements, and for the review of the financial statements included in our filings on Form 10-Q, and for services that are normally provided in connection with statutory and regulatory filings or engagements.
(2) The amounts shown for the audit firms in 2020 and 2019 relate to (i) the audit of our annual financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and (ii) the review of the financial statements included in our filings on Form 10-Q for the first, second and third quarters of 2020 and 2019.
(3) Audit-Related Fees. These are fees for the assurance and related services reasonably related to the performance of the audit or the review of our financial statements.
(4) Tax Fees. These are fees for professional services with respect to tax compliance, tax advice, and tax planning.
(5) All Other Fees. These are fees for permissible work that does not fall within any of the other fee categories, i.e., Audit Fees, Audit-Related Fees, or Tax Fees.
Pre-Approval Policy For Audit and Non-Audit Services
We do not have a standing audit committee, and the full Board performs all functions of an audit committee, including the pre-approval of all audit and non-audit services before we engage an accountant. All of the services rendered to us by M&K CPAS PLLC and L&L CPAS, P.A. were pre-approved by our Board of Directors.
We are presently working with our legal counsel to establish formal pre-approval policies and procedures for future engagements of our accountants. The new policies and procedures will be detailed as to the particular service, will require that the Board or an audit committee thereof be informed of each service, and will prohibit the delegation of pre-approval responsibilities to management. It is currently anticipated that our new policy will provide (i) for an annual pre-approval, by the Board or audit committee, of all audit, audit-related and non-audit services proposed to be rendered by the independent auditor for the fiscal year, as specifically described in the auditor's engagement letter, and (ii) that additional engagements of the auditor, which were not approved in the annual pre-approval process, and engagements that are anticipated to exceed previously approved thresholds, will be presented on a case-by-case basis, by the President, for pre-approval by the Board or audit committee, before management engages the auditors for any such purposes. The new policy and procedures may authorize the Board or audit committee to delegate, to one or more of its members, the authority to pre-approve certain permitted services, provided that the estimated fee for any such service does not exceed a specified dollar amount (to be determined). All pre-approvals shall be contingent on a finding, by the Board, audit committee, or delegate, as the case may be, that the provision of the proposed services is compatible with the maintenance of the auditor's independence in the conduct of its auditing functions. In no event shall any non-audit related service be approved that would result in the independent auditor no longer being considered independent under the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
ITEM 15. EXHIBITS.
(a) Filed previously with the Proxy Statement Form DEF 14A on May, 19, 2010, as amended as described in Proxy Statements on Form DEF 14A filed on June 7, 2013 and May 17, 2016, and incorporated herein by reference.
(b) Filed previously with the Proxy Statement Form DEF 14A on May, 19, 2010, and incorporated herein by reference.
(c) Filed previously as an exhibit to Registrant's Current Report on Form 8-K filed on September 7, 2007, and incorporated herein by reference.
(d) Filed previously as an exhibit to Registrant's Current Report on Form 8-K filed on September 4, 2018, and incorporated herein by reference.
(e) Filed previously as an exhibit to Registrant's Annual Report on Form 10-KSB filed on April 3, 2008, and incorporated herein by reference.
** Filed herewith
SIGNATURES
In accordance with Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the Registrant caused this Report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
Dated: March 16, 2021 WORLDS INC.
(Registrant)
By:/s/ Thomas Kidrin
Name: Thomas Kidrin
Title: President and Chief Executive Officer
In accordance with the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this Report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the Registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signatures
Title
Date
/s/ Thomas Kidrin
Thomas Kidrin
President, Chief Executive Officer and Director
March 16, 2021
/s/ Christopher J. Ryan
Christopher J. Ryan
Vice President - Finance and Principal Accounting and Financial Officer
March 16, 2021
/s/ Bernard Stolar
Bernard Stolar
Director
March 16, 2021
Robert Fireman
Director
/s/ Leonard Toboroff
Leonard Toboroff
Director
March 16, 2021
/s/ Peter N. Christos
Peter N. Christos
Director
March 16, 2021
EXHIBIT TO INDEX
(a) Filed previously with the Proxy Statement Form DEF 14A on May, 19, 2010, as amended as described in Proxy Statements on Form DEF 14A filed on June 7, 2013 and May 17, 2016, and incorporated herein by reference.
(b) Filed previously with the Proxy Statement Form DEF 14A on May, 19, 2010, and incorporated herein by reference.
(c) Filed previously as an exhibit to Registrant's Current Report on Form 8-K filed on September 7, 2007, and incorporated herein by reference.
(d) Filed previously as an exhibit to Registrant's Current Report on Form 8-K filed on September 4, 2018, and incorporated herein by reference.
(e) Filed previously as an exhibit to Registrant's Annual Report on Form 10-KSB filed on April 3, 2008, and incorporated herein by reference.
** Filed herewith