Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is designed to provide the reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and certain other factors that may affect future results. This MD&A includes the following sections: Overview, Highlights, Results of Operations, Performance Measures and Non-GAAP Reconciliations, Liquidity and Capital Resources, Critical Accounting Policies, and Recently Issued Accounting Standards. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in Item 15 of this report.
In order to show the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates on our results of operations, we have included constant currency disclosures, where necessary, in the Overview and Results of Operations sections which follow. Constant currency disclosures represent the translation of our current fiscal year revenues and expenses from the functional currencies of our subsidiaries to U.S. Dollars using the exchange rates in effect for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year. We use results on a constant currency basis as one of the measures to understand our operating results and evaluate our performance in comparison to prior periods. Results on a constant currency basis are not in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“non-GAAP”) and should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, results prepared in accordance with GAAP.
‎
Overview
The Company
WD-40 Company (“the Company”), based in San Diego, California, is a global marketing organization dedicated to creating positive lasting memories by developing and selling products that solve problems in workshops, factories and homes around the world. We market a wide range of maintenance products and homecare and cleaning products under the following well-known brands: WD-40, 3-IN-ONE, GT85, X-14, 2000 Flushes, Carpet Fresh, no vac, Spot Shot, 1001, Lava and Solvol. Currently included in the WD-40 brand are the WD-40 Multi-Use Product and the WD-40 Specialist and WD-40 BIKE product lines.
Our products are sold in various locations around the world. Maintenance products are sold worldwide in markets throughout North, Central and South America, Asia, Australia, Europe, the Middle East and Africa. Homecare and cleaning products are sold primarily in North America, the United Kingdom (“U.K.”) and Australia. We sell our products primarily through warehouse club stores, hardware stores, automotive parts outlets, industrial distributors and suppliers, mass retail and home center stores, value retailers, grocery stores, online retailers, farm supply, sport retailers, and independent bike dealers.
Highlights
The following summarizes the financial and operational highlights for our business during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021:
Consolidated net sales increased $79.6 million, or 19%, for fiscal year 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates had a favorable impact of $19.7 million on consolidated net sales for fiscal year 2021. Thus, on a constant currency basis, net sales would have increased by $59.9 million, or 15%, for fiscal year 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year. This favorable impact from changes in foreign currency exchange rates mainly came from our EMEA segment, which accounted for 43% of our consolidated sales for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021.
Gross profit as a percentage of net sales decreased to 54.0% for fiscal year 2021 compared to 54.6% for the prior fiscal year.
Consolidated net income increased $9.5 million, or 16%, for fiscal year 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates had a favorable impact of $3.7 million on consolidated net income for fiscal year 2021. Thus, on a constant currency basis, net income would have increased by $5.8 million, or 10%, for fiscal year 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year.
Although consolidated results for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 were significantly improved from the last fiscal year due to a variety of factors, the Company’s operations and business continue to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. See the Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business section which follows for details
Diluted earnings per common share for fiscal year 2021 were $5.09 versus $4.40 in the prior fiscal year.
Our strategic initiatives and the areas where we will continue to focus our time, talent and resources in future periods include: (i) building a business for the future; (ii) attracting, developing and engaging outstanding tribe members; (iii) striving for operational excellence; (iv) growing WD-40 Multi-Use Product; (v) growing WD-40 Specialist product line; and (vi) expanding and supporting portfolio opportunities that help us grow.
‎
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
In the prior fiscal year 2020, our financial results and operations were negatively impacted for many of our markets by the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly in the third and fourth quarters, during the early stages of the pandemic which began in early calendar year 2020. We have since been able to reduce the adverse impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business due to the strength of our brands, our increased focus on e-commerce, the global expansion in the distribution of our products, a continued focus on our strategic initiatives, our strong culture and the dedication of our employees. As a result of these activities and the shift in consumer spending patterns towards products such as ours during the pandemic, we have experienced increased sales period over period in most of our markets during fiscal year 2021. Sales during this period increased 19%, or 15% on a constant currency basis, when compared to the prior fiscal year primarily due to a higher level of renovation and maintenance activities by end-users during the pandemic, recoveries in many markets due to improvements in public health and safety related to the pandemic, and increased distribution and sales within the e-commerce channel.
We are continuing to actively manage and monitor supply chain and transportation disruptions and constraints that have arisen periodically within all three of our business segments, but particularly in the Americas, during the COVID-19 pandemic. Some of the challenges that we have experienced include general aerosol production capacity constraints and competition for such capacity by other companies who utilize the same third-party manufacturers for their aerosol production, as well as significant competition for freight resources and increased raw material and other input costs that have resulted due to these constraints. In addition, supply chains at many companies globally are being strained due to shortages of certain materials and this is impacting the ability of our third-party manufacturers to procure certain of the raw materials needed to manufacture our products. These challenges have periodically resulted in us not being able to meet the high level of demand for our products by customers and end-users in certain markets, most significantly those markets in our Americas segment where demand for aerosols has significantly outpaced the available production capacity in the region. We have been actively working on various initiatives in partnership with our third-party manufacturers in order to increase the capacity and flexibility of our supply chain to meet strong end-user demand. Although we are not able to estimate the degree of the impact or the costs associated with potential future disruptions within our supply chain and distribution networks, we believe that the changes we continue to implement as a result of the pandemic will have a positive lasting impact on our ability to better manage any future disruptions. However, some of the additional costs resulting from these recent constraints in our supply chain and distribution network are expected to unfavorably impact our cost of goods sold and lower our gross margin in the near-term.
Although several vaccines and treatments are authorized for use against COVID-19, these vaccines and treatments are being produced, distributed and accepted at varying rates globally. Therefore, uncertainty continues to exist regarding the severity and duration of this rapidly evolving pandemic and it remains difficult for us to estimate the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will impact our financial results and operations in future periods. Also, as social distancing requirements resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic continue to lessen in future periods, it is uncertain how this will impact the high levels of renovation and maintenance activities by end-users in recent periods, which contributed to our strong sales in fiscal year 2021. If such activities decrease in future periods, this could adversely impact our financial results.
We have continued to follow a variety of measures to promote the safety and security of our employees, support the communities in which we operate and ensure the availability and functioning of our critical infrastructure. These measures include allowing for or requiring remote working arrangements for employees in some regions and the imposition of travel restrictions. These policies and initiatives will continue to impact how we operate for as long as they are in effect and our safe, phased office reentry plans for employees will vary by region based on the evolving situation within those regions.
See our risk factors disclosed in Part I-Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” for information on risks associated with pandemics in general and COVID-19 specifically.
‎
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended August 31, 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended August 31, 2020
Operating Items
The following table summarizes operating data for our consolidated operations (in thousands, except percentages and per share amounts):
Net Sales by Segment
The following table summarizes net sales by segment (in thousands, except percentages):
‎
Americas
The following table summarizes net sales by product line for the Americas segment (in thousands, except percentages):
Sales in the Americas segment, which includes the U.S., Canada and Latin America, increased to $214.6 million, up $14.1 million, or 7%, for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates had a favorable impact on sales for the Americas segment from period to period. Sales for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 translated at the exchange rates in effect for the prior fiscal year would have been $213.6 million in the Americas segment. Thus, on a constant currency basis, sales would have increased by $13.1 million, slightly below 7%, for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year.
Sales of maintenance products in the Americas segment increased $15.6 million, or 9%, for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year. This sales increase was mainly driven by increased sales of maintenance products in Latin America, which were up $11.4 million, or 51%, from period to period. Sales in Latin America increased primarily due to the transition to the direct marketing model in Mexico. Early in the third quarter of fiscal year 2020, we shifted away from a distribution model for Mexico where we sold products through a large wholesale customer who then supplied various retail customers, to one where we sell direct to these retail customers. This resulted in increased sales in Latin America during fiscal year 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year. In addition, increased demand for our products as a result of a higher level of renovation and maintenance activities exhibited by our end-users during the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in increased sales of maintenance products in Latin America. Sales were also higher in Canada and the United States and were up $2.2 million, or 20%, and $2.0 million, or 1%, respectively, due to increases in renovation and maintenance activities exhibited by our end-users in both regions. Although the U.S. experienced significant challenges meeting customer and end user demand in certain markets in fiscal year 2021 due to supply chain constraints related to competition for aerosol production capacity and distribution resources, it experienced some improvement in its supply chain in the second half of fiscal year 2021. This resulted in increased sales of maintenance products year over year driven by sales of WD-40 Multi-Use Product, which were up $6.2 million, or 5%. However, as a result of these supply chain challenges, sales of our WD-40 Specialist and 3-In-One products decreased $2.7 million, or 17%, and $1.7 million, or 19%, respectively, in the United States from period to period.
Sales of homecare and cleaning products in the Americas segment decreased $1.4 million, or 7%, for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year. This sales decrease was driven primarily by a decrease in sales of Lava, X-14 and Spot Shot brand products in the U.S., which were down $1.0 million or 33%, $0.7 million or 41%, and $0.5 million or 7%, respectively, from period to period. These decreases were partially offset by increased sales of the 2000 Flushes brand products, which were up $1.1M or 15%, from period to period. We experienced a significant increase in sales of most of our homecare and cleaning products during the second half of fiscal year 2020 due to increased demand for such products as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. During the second half of fiscal year 2021, we have seen demand for certain of these homecare and cleaning products return to more normal levels due to improvements in public health and safety restrictions related to the pandemic in many regions within the Americas. In addition, sales levels for our homecare and cleaning products in the Americas were also negatively impacted during the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 by the challenges in our Americas supply chain and the discontinuation of certain products within these brands. While each of our homecare and cleaning products have continued to generate positive cash flows, we had experienced decreased or flat sales for many of these products in recent fiscal years prior to the start of the COVID-19 pandemic.
For the Americas segment, 77% of sales came from the U.S., and 23% of sales came from Canada and Latin America combined for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year when 82% of sales came from the U.S., and 18% of sales came from Canada and Latin America combined.
‎
EMEA
The following table summarizes net sales by product line for the EMEA segment (in thousands, except percentages):
(1)While our reporting currency is the U.S. Dollar, the functional currency of our U.K. subsidiary, the entity in which the EMEA results are generated, is Pound Sterling. Although the functional currency of this subsidiary is Pound Sterling, approximately 50% of its sales are generated in Euro and 15-20% are generated in U.S. Dollar. As a result, the Pound Sterling sales and earnings for the EMEA segment can be negatively or positively impacted from period to period upon translation from these currencies depending on whether the Euro and U.S. Dollar are weakening or strengthening against the Pound Sterling.
Sales in the EMEA segment, which includes Europe, the Middle East, Africa and India, increased to $208.3 million, up $52.0 million, or 33%, for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates had a favorable impact on sales for the EMEA segment from period to period. Sales for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 translated at the exchange rates in effect for the prior fiscal year would have been $193.1 million in the EMEA segment. Thus, on a constant currency basis, sales would have increased by $36.9 million, or 24%, for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year.
The countries in Europe where we sell through a direct sales force include the U.K., Italy, France, Iberia (which includes Spain and Portugal) and the Germanics sales region (which includes Germany, Austria, Denmark, Switzerland, Belgium and the Netherlands). Sales in the direct markets increased to $142.2 million, up $32.1 million, or 29%, for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year primarily due to increased sales of WD-40 Multi-Use Product, WD-40 Specialist and WD-40 Bike of $21.1 million or 28%, $5.3 million or 42% and $1.9 million or 70%, respectively, throughout all of the direct markets. Additionally, sales of 3-In-One increased $2.7 million or 31% during the period. These increases in sales were primarily due to increased demand for our products as a result of a higher level of renovation and maintenance activities exhibited by our end-users during the COVID-19 pandemic and the success of promotional programs that were conducted during the second half of fiscal year 2021 to meet the high level of demand. This increased demand and consumption of our products resulted in increased sales, particularly within the e-commerce channel. In addition, sales levels were much higher in fiscal year 2021 compared to the prior period due to comparatively severe lockdowns measures that occurred during the prior fiscal year, particularly during the third quarter, which limited many retailers’ ability to participate in promotional activities and sell high volumes of certain products. Sales from direct markets accounted for 68% of the EMEA segment’s sales for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to 70% of the EMEA segment’s sales for the prior fiscal year.
The regions in the EMEA segment where we sell through local distributors include the Middle East, Africa, India, Eastern and Northern Europe. Sales in the distributor markets increased $19.9 million, or 43%, for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year, primarily due to increased sales of the WD-40 Multi-Use Product in Eastern Europe, Northern Europe, the Middle East and India, which were up $5.9 million, $5.8 million, $4.1 million and $3.4 million, respectively. This increase in sales from period to period was primarily due to recoveries experienced during fiscal year 2021 in distributor markets that previously experienced more severe lockdowns during the second half of fiscal year 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. During fiscal year 2021, many of these regions experienced improved economic conditions as a result of reductions in COVID-19 related restrictions. This allowed our marketing distributors to participate in more of our promotional activities and to adjust to more normal levels of inventory for our product, which resulted in increased sales to meet the higher level of demand caused by increases in renovation and maintenance activities by end-users during the pandemic. The distributor markets accounted for 32% of the EMEA segment’s total sales for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021, compared to 30% for the prior fiscal year.
‎
Asia-Pacific
The following table summarizes net sales by product line for the Asia-Pacific segment (in thousands, except percentages):
Sales in the Asia-Pacific segment, which includes Australia, China and other countries in the Asia region, increased to $65.3 million, up $13.5 million, or 26%, for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates had a favorable impact on sales for the Asia-Pacific segment from period to period. Sales for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 translated at the exchange rates in effect for the prior fiscal year would have been $61.7 million in the Asia-Pacific segment. Thus, on a constant currency basis, sales would have increased by $9.9 million, or 19%, for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year.
Sales in Asia, which represented 67% of the total sales in the Asia-Pacific segment, increased $9.7 million, or 29%, for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year. Sales in the Asia distributor markets increased $5.6 million, or 28%, for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year. These increased sales were primarily due to the easing of COVID-19 lockdown measures in many of the Asia markets during fiscal year 2021 compared to late in fiscal year 2020. These reduced lockdown measures have positively impacted economic conditions and resulted in increased demand and higher sales in many regions period over period, particularly in the Philippines, South Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia and Hong Kong, during fiscal year 2021. Sales in China increased $4.1 million, or 31%, primarily due to improved market conditions as a result of the reduction of COVID-19 lockdown measures compared to the prior fiscal year when the COVID-19 outbreak resulted in significant governmental restrictions on movement and commerce. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates had a $1.3 million favorable impact on sales in China. On a constant currency basis, sales would have increased by $2.8 million, or 21%, from period to period.
Sales in Australia increased $3.8 million, or 21%, for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year due to higher sales of maintenance products, which were up $2.4 million, or 23%, from period to period primarily due to a higher level of renovation and maintenance activities undertaken by our end-users during the COVID-19 pandemic which resulted in increased sales. In addition, sales of homecare and cleaning products, which were up $1.4 million, or 19%, also increased as a result of higher demand resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates had a favorable impact on Australian sales. On a constant currency basis, sales would have increased by $1.5 million, or 8%, from period to period.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased to $263.7 million for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to $223.0 million for the prior fiscal year. As a percentage of net sales, gross profit decreased to 54.0% for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to 54.6% for the prior fiscal year.
Gross margin was unfavorably impacted by 0.9 percentage points due to increases in manufacturing costs and higher miscellaneous costs from period to period. The increased manufacturing costs were primarily driven by higher labor and overhead costs at our third-party manufacturers caused by global supply chain constraints as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. These pandemic-related challenges began to significantly impact gross margin, particularly in the Americas segment, starting in the second quarter of fiscal year 2021 and continued throughout the remainder of the fiscal year. No such challenges existed in the corresponding periods of the prior fiscal year. Gross margin was also negatively impacted by 0.4 percentage points from period to period due to higher warehousing and in-bound freight costs, primarily in the Americas and EMEA segments. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates from period to period in the EMEA segment negatively impacted by 0.3 percentage points. Gross margin was also negatively impacted by 0.1 percentage points from period to period due to increases to advertising, promotional, and other discounts that we give to our customers in all three segments. In general, the timing of advertising, promotional and other discounts may cause fluctuations in gross margin from period to period. The costs associated with certain promotional activities are recorded as a reduction to sales while others are recorded as advertising and sales promotion expenses. Advertising, promotional and other discounts that are given to our customers are recorded as a reduction to sales, whereas advertising and
sales promotional costs associated with promotional activities that we pay to third parties are recorded as advertising and sales promotion expenses.
These unfavorable impacts to gross margin were partially offset by 0.5 percentage points due to favorable changes in the costs of aerosol cans in the EMEA and Americas segments. Gross margin was also positively impacted by 0.4 percentage points from period to period due to favorable changes in the costs of petroleum-based specialty chemicals, primarily in the Americas and Asia-Pacific segments. There is often a delay of one quarter or more before changes in raw material costs impact the cost of products sold due to production and inventory life cycles. Although the average cost of crude oil and aerosol cans that flowed through our costs of goods sold was lower during fiscal year 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year, such costs increased towards the back half of our fiscal year and began to negatively impact our gross margin, particularly starting in the fourth quarter. The recent increases in the price of crude oil and aerosol cans that we are seeing in the market are expected to unfavorably impact our cost of goods sold for as long as these costs remain at these higher levels. We have implemented sales price increases in all three segments from period to period and this positively impacted gross margin by 0.2 percentage points from period to period.
Note that our gross profit and gross margin may not be comparable to those of other consumer product companies, since some of these companies include all costs related to distribution of their products in cost of products sold, whereas we exclude the portion associated with amounts paid to third parties for shipment to our customers from our distribution centers and contract manufacturers and include these costs in selling, general and administrative expenses. These costs totaled $16.5 million and $12.9 million for the fiscal years ended August 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 increased $23.5 million to $145.5 million from $122.0 million for the prior fiscal year. As a percentage of net sales, SG&A expenses slightly decreased to 29.8% for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 from 29.9% for the prior fiscal year. The increase in SG&A expenses from period to period was due to a variety of factors, but most significantly due to increased employee-related costs of $16.1 million due to increased incentive compensation accruals and higher stock-based compensation associated with performance share units from period to period resulting from significantly stronger financial results from period to period. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates from period to period increased SG&A expenses by $4.8 million. Increases in freight costs associated with higher sales levels as well as carrier price increases due to constraints and limited capacity in the global distribution networks from period to period also increased SG&A expenses by $2.9 million. In addition, professional services fees increased $2.8 million due to the ongoing implementation of our new information system, increased cloud-based software usage and license fees. Other miscellaneous expenses also increased $0.5 million from period to period. These increases to SG&A expenses were offset by a decrease in travel and meeting expenses of $3.6 million from period to period. Travel and meeting expenses decreased primarily due to continued initiatives to reduce the transmission of COVID-19, including the imposition of business travel restrictions for all employees and the cancellation of all large meetings, such as regional sales meetings and global leadership meetings, in support of social distancing requirements.
We continued our research and development investment, the majority of which is associated with our maintenance products, in support of our focus on innovation and renovation of our products. Research and development costs for the fiscal years ended August 31, 2021 and 2020 were $5.6 million and $6.0 million, respectively. Our research and development team engages in consumer research, product development, current product improvement and testing activities. This team leverages its development capabilities by partnering with a network of outside resources including our current and prospective suppliers. The level and types of expenses incurred within research and development can vary from period to period depending upon the types of activities being performed.
Advertising and Sales Promotion Expenses
Advertising and sales promotion expenses for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 increased $6.4 million to $28.0 million from $21.6 million for the prior fiscal year. As a percentage of net sales, these expenses were 5.7% and 5.3% for the fiscal years ended August 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates had an unfavorable impact of $1.3 million on advertising and sales promotion expenses from period to period. Advertising and sales promotion expenses for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 translated at the exchange rates in effect for the prior fiscal year would have been $26.7 million. The increase in advertising and sales promotion expenses was due to a higher level of promotional programs and marketing support in all three segments as a result of increased consumer demand and higher sales from period to period. This higher level of advertising and sales promotion expense was also due to significant increases in spending during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2021 compared to the corresponding period of our prior fiscal year to support our strategic initiatives and to invest in growth markets. These increases were partially offset by the decrease of physical marketing and sampling activities from period to period, such as the cancellations of trade shows, due to the continued indirect effects of the COVID-19 pandemic during fiscal year 2021.
‎
As a percentage of net sales, advertising and sales promotion expenses may fluctuate period to period based upon the type of marketing activities we employ and the period in which the costs are incurred. Total promotional costs recorded as a reduction to sales were $24.8 million and $18.9 million for the fiscal years ended August 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Therefore, our total investment in advertising and sales promotion activities totaled $52.8 million and $42.1 million for the fiscal years ended August 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Amortization of Definite-lived Intangible Assets Expense
Amortization of our definite-lived intangible assets decreased $0.8 million to $1.4 million for the fiscal years ended August 31, 2021, compared to $2.2 million for the prior fiscal year. This decrease from period to period was primarily due to decreased amortization associated with the 2000 Flushes trade name, which became fully amortized during the third quarter of fiscal year 2020.
Income from Operations by Segment
The following table summarizes income from operations by segment (in thousands, except percentages):
(1)Unallocated corporate expenses are general corporate overhead expenses not directly attributable to any one of the business segments. These expenses are reported separate from our identified segments and are included in Selling, General and Administrative expenses on our consolidated statements of operations.
Americas
Income from operations for the Americas segment increased to $51.6 million, up $0.5 million, or 1%, for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year, primarily due to a $14.1 million increase in sales, significantly offset by higher operating expenses and a lower gross margin. As a percentage of net sales, gross profit for the Americas segment decreased from 53.2% to 52.0% period over period primarily due to higher third-party manufacturing costs and increased warehousing, distribution and freight costs as a result of supply chain constraints due to the direct and indirect effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. These unfavorable impacts to gross margin were partially offset by the combined favorable impacts of lower costs of petroleum-based specialty chemicals and aerosol cans from period to period. Although the average cost of crude oil and aerosol cans that flowed through costs of goods sold was lower during fiscal year 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year in the Americas segment, such costs increased towards the back half of our fiscal year and began to negatively impact gross margin, particularly starting in the fourth quarter. The increased sales were accompanied by a $4.5 million increase in total operating expenses period over period, primarily due to higher accruals for incentive compensation and stock-based compensation, as well as higher outbound freight costs due to increased sales and higher freight costs in the market from period to period. In addition, increased advertising and sales promotion expenses impacted operating expenses from period to period. These increases in operating expenses were partially offset by lower travel and meeting expenses due to initiatives adopted by the Company during the third quarter of fiscal year 2020 that remained in place throughout fiscal year 2021 to reduce the transmission of COVID-19. In addition, operating expenses were favorably impacted by decreased amortization associated with the 2000 Flushes trade name, which became fully amortized during the third quarter of fiscal year 2020. Operating income as a percentage of net sales decreased from 25.5% to 24.0% period over period.
EMEA
Income from operations for the EMEA segment increased to $53.0 million, up $15.4 million, or 41%, for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year, primarily due a $52.0 million increase in sales, partially offset by higher operating expenses and a lower gross margin. As a percentage of net sales, gross profit for the EMEA segment decreased from 56.4% to 55.6% period over period primarily due to unfavorable changes in third-party manufacturing costs and unfavorable
changes in foreign currency exchange rates, as well as increases in warehousing, distribution and freight costs from period to period. These unfavorable impacts to gross margin were partially offset by the favorable impacts of decreased costs of aerosol cans, as well as sales price increases from period to period. Although the average cost of aerosol cans that flowed through our costs of goods sold was lower during fiscal year 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year in the EMEA segment, such costs increased towards the back half of our fiscal year and began to negatively impact gross margin, particularly starting in the fourth quarter. The increased sales were accompanied by a $12.2 million increase in total operating expenses period over period, primarily due to higher accruals for incentive compensation and stock-based compensation, as well as increased advertising and sales promotion expenses and increased outbound freight costs due to higher sales from period to period. These increases in operating expenses were partially offset by lower travel and meeting expenses due to initiatives adopted by the Company during the third quarter of fiscal year 2020 that remained in place throughout fiscal year 2021 to reduce the transmission of COVID-19. Operating income as a percentage of net sales increased from 24.1% to 25.5% period over period.
Asia-Pacific
Income from operations for the Asia-Pacific segment increased to $19.1 million, up $4.1 million, or 28%, for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year, primarily due to a $13.5 million increase in sales and a higher gross margin, which were partially offset by higher operating expenses. As a percentage of net sales, gross profit for the Asia-Pacific segment increased from 54.5% to 55.8% period over period primarily due to favorable changes in both sales mix and market mix and lower costs of petroleum-based specialty chemicals that flowed through our costs of goods sold during fiscal year 2021. Although the average cost of crude oil that flowed through our costs of goods sold was lower during fiscal year 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year in the Asia-Pacific segment, such costs have increased towards the back half of our fiscal year and began to negatively impact gross margin, particularly starting in the fourth quarter. These favorable impacts to gross margin during fiscal year 2021 were slightly offset by the unfavorable impact of increased costs of aerosol cans from period to period. The increased sales were accompanied by a $4.0 million increase in total operating expenses period over period, primarily due to higher accruals for incentive compensation and other employee costs, as well as a higher level of advertising and sales promotion expenses from period to period. Operating income as a percentage of net sales increased from 28.9% to 29.3% period over period.
Non-Operating Items
The following table summarizes non-operating income and expenses for our consolidated operations (in thousands):
Interest Income
Interest income was not significant for both the fiscal years ended August 31, 2021 and 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense remained relatively constant at $2.4 million for both the fiscal years ended August 31, 2021 and 2020.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net was not significant for the fiscal year ended 2021 compared to $0.6 million in other income for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year. This change from period to period was primarily due to net foreign currency gains during fiscal year 2020 as a result of fluctuations in the foreign currency exchange rates for both the U.S. Dollar and the Euro against the Pound Sterling.
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes was 18.8% of income before income taxes for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 compared to 19.6% for the prior fiscal year. The decrease in the effective income tax rate from period to period was primarily due to an increase in excess tax benefits from settlements of stock-based equity awards, as well as increased benefits from earnings from foreign operations.
Net Income
Net income was $70.2 million, or $5.09 per common share on a fully diluted basis, for fiscal year 2021 compared to $60.7 million, or $4.40 per common share on a fully diluted basis, for the prior fiscal year. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates year over year had a favorable impact of $3.7 million on net income for fiscal year 2021. Thus, on a constant currency basis, net income for fiscal year 2021 would have been $66.5 million.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended August 31, 2020 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended August 31, 2019
For discussion related to changes in financial condition and the results of operations for fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019, refer to Part II - Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020, which was filed with the SEC on October 21, 2020.
Performance Measures and Non-GAAP Reconciliations
In managing our business operations and assessing our financial performance, we supplement the information provided by our financial statements with certain non-GAAP performance measures. These performance measures are part of our current 55/30/25 business model, which includes gross margin, cost of doing business, and earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”), the latter two of which are non-GAAP performance measures. Cost of doing business is defined as total operating expenses less amortization of definite-lived intangible assets, impairment charges related to intangible assets and depreciation in operating departments, and EBITDA is defined as net income (loss) before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization. We target our gross margin to be at or above 55% of net sales, our cost of doing business to be at 30% of net sales, and our EBITDA to be above 25% of net sales. Results for these performance measures may vary from period to period depending on various factors, including economic conditions and our level of investment in activities for the future such as those related to quality assurance, regulatory compliance, and intellectual property protection in order to safeguard our WD-40 brand. The targets for these performance measures are long-term in nature, particularly those for cost of doing business and EBITDA, and we expect to make progress towards achieving them over time as our revenues increase.
The following table summarizes the results of these performance measures:
(1)Percentages may not aggregate to EBITDA percentage due to rounding and because amounts recorded in other income (expense), net on our consolidated statement of operations are not included as an adjustment to earnings in the EBITDA calculation.
We use the performance measures above to establish financial goals and to gain an understanding of our comparative performance from period to period. We believe that these measures provide our shareholders with additional insights into the Company’s results of operations and how we run our business. The non-GAAP financial measures are supplemental in nature and should not be considered in isolation or as alternatives to net income, income from operations or other financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP as indicators of the Company’s performance or operations. The use of any non-GAAP measure may produce results that vary from the GAAP measure and may not be comparable to a similarly defined non-GAAP measure used by other companies. Reconciliations of these non-GAAP financial measures to our financial statements as prepared in accordance with GAAP are as follows:
‎
Cost of Doing Business (in thousands, except percentages):
EBITDA (in thousands, except percentages):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our financial condition and liquidity remain strong. Net cash provided by operations was $84.7 million for fiscal year 2021 compared to $72.7 million for fiscal year 2020. Although there continues to be a certain level of uncertainty related to the impact of the current COVID-19 pandemic on our future results, we believe our efficient business model and the steps that we have taken leave us positioned to manage our business through this crisis as it continues to unfold. We continue to manage all aspects of our business including, but not limited to, monitoring the financial health of our customers, suppliers and other third-party relationships, implementing gross margin enhancement strategies and developing new opportunities for growth
Our principal sources of liquidity are our existing cash and cash equivalents, as well as cash generated from operations and cash currently available from our existing unsecured Credit Agreement with Bank of America. We use proceeds of the revolving credit facility primarily for our general working capital needs. The Company also holds borrowings under a Note Purchase and Private Shelf Agreement. See Note 8 - Debt for additional information on these agreements. Included in Note 8 - Debt is information on the Credit Agreement that we amended with Bank of America on September 30, 2020, and a third amendment to the Note Agreement. In the first quarter of fiscal year 2021 we refinanced existing draws under our Credit Agreement in the United States through the issuance of new notes under the Note Agreement in the amount of $52.0 million.
We have historically maintained a balance of outstanding draws on our line of credit in U.S. Dollars in the Americas segment, as well as in Euros and Pound Sterling in the EMEA segment. Euro and Pound Sterling denominated draws will fluctuate in U.S. Dollars from period to period due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates. During the first quarter of fiscal year 2021, we repaid $50.0 million of our U.S. borrowings outstanding under our line of credit using $52.0 million in proceeds that we received on September 30, 2020 from the issuance and sale of the Series B and C Notes which mature in November 2027 and 2030, respectively. Our remaining outstanding balance under our line of credit is denominated completely in Euros and Pound Sterling as of August 31, 2021. We regularly convert many of our draws on our line of credit to new draws with new maturity dates and interest rates. We have the ability to refinance any draws under the line of credit with successive short-term borrowings through the September 30, 2025 maturity date of the Credit Agreement. Outstanding draws for which we have both the ability and intent to refinance with successive short-term borrowings for a period of at least twelve months are classified as long-term. As of
August 31, 2021, we had a $46.5 million balance of outstanding draws on the revolving credit facility, all of which was classified as long-term. In addition, we paid $0.8 million in principal payments on our Series A Notes during fiscal year 2021, which had an outstanding balance of $17.2 million as of August 31, 2021. There were no other letters of credit outstanding or restrictions on the amount available on our line of credit or notes. Per the terms of both the Note Agreement and the Credit Agreement, our consolidated leverage ratio cannot be greater than three and a half to one and our consolidated interest coverage ratio cannot be less than three to one. See Note 8 - Debt for additional information on these financial covenants. At August 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all debt covenants. We continue to monitor our compliance with all debt covenants and, at the present time, we believe that the likelihood of being unable to satisfy these covenants is remote.
We believe that our future cash from domestic and international operations, together with our access to funds available under our unsecured revolving credit facility, will provide adequate resources to fund both short-term and long-term operating requirements, capital expenditures, dividend payments, acquisitions, new business development activities and share repurchases. On April 8, 2020, we suspended repurchases under our most recent share buy-back plan, which subsequently expired on August 31, 2020, in order to preserve cash while we continued to monitor the long-term impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Subsequent to the end of fiscal year 2021 on October 12, 2021, our Board of Directors approved a new share buy-back plan. Under the plan, which will become effective on November 1, 2021, we are authorized to acquire up to $75.0 million of our outstanding shares through August 31, 2023. At August 31, 2021, we had a total of $86.0 million in cash and cash equivalents. We do not foresee any ongoing issues with repaying our borrowings and we closely monitor the use of this credit facility.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows by category for the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities increased $12.0 million to $84.7 million for fiscal year 2021 from $72.7 million for fiscal year 2020. Cash flows from operating activities depend heavily on operating performance and changes in working capital. Our primary source of operating cash flows for fiscal year ended August 31, 2021 was net income of $70.2 million, which increased $9.5 million from period to period. In addition, differences in adjustments to reconcile net income to cash increased net cash provided by operating activities by $1.9 million primarily due to increases in stock-based compensation from period to period which were partially offset by various other adjustments. Although the changes in our working capital did not have a significant impact on net cash provided by operating activities in total, there were various increases and decreases of items within working capital from period to period. Changes in working capital that decreased cash were primarily attributable to increases to inventory and increases in trade and other accounts receivable as a result of significantly increased sales from period to period and increases in other assets, driven by the ongoing implementation of our new information system. These changes in working capital were almost completely offset by increases in accounts payable in the Americas and EMEA segments due to higher levels of production and the timing of payments to vendors from period to period as well as increases in accrued payroll and related expenses during fiscal year 2021 primarily due to significantly higher accruals for incentive compensation from period to period.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities decreased $4.4 million to $14.5 million for fiscal year 2021 compared to $18.9 million for fiscal year 2020, primarily due to decreased capital expenditures. Capital expenditures decreased by $4.2 million primarily due to the renovations and equipping of the Company’s office building in Milton Keynes, England that were completed in the first quarter of fiscal year 2020 and a lower level of manufacturing-related capital expenditures within the U.K. and the United States from period to period. Capital expenditures during fiscal year 2021 were primarily related to manufacturing equipment which is currently under construction and will be located at our third-party manufacturers in the United States and the United Kingdom once completed.
‎
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities increased $14.1 million to $40.8 million for fiscal year 2021 from $26.7 million for fiscal year 2020. This change was primarily due to $80.0 million in net proceeds that we drew under our line of credit in March 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic with no comparable event occurring in fiscal year 2021. In the first quarter of fiscal year 2021, we repaid $50.0 million of such borrowings outstanding under our line of credit using $52.0 million in proceeds that we received from the issuance and sale of senior notes during the quarter. This net borrowing activity resulted in a $2.0 million cash inflow during the period compared to $29.6 million in net proceeds on our line of credit in the prior fiscal year. In addition, increases in dividends paid to our shareholders of $2.2 million and increases in shares withheld to cover taxes on conversion of equity rewards of $1.0 million, resulted in higher cash outflows from period to period. Offsetting these increases in cash outflows was a decrease in treasury stock repurchases due to the suspension of such repurchases beginning in the third quarter of fiscal year 2020, which resulted in a decrease in cash outflows of $16.8 million from period to period.
Effect of Exchange Rate Changes
All of our foreign subsidiaries currently operate in currencies other than the U.S. Dollar and a significant portion of our consolidated cash balance is denominated in these foreign functional currencies, particularly at our U.K. subsidiary which operates in Pound Sterling. As a result, our cash and cash equivalents balances are subject to the effects of the fluctuations in these functional currencies against the U.S. Dollar at the end of each reporting period. The net effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents, when expressed in U.S. Dollar terms was not significant in fiscal year 2021, while such changes resulted in an increase in cash of $2.2 million in fiscal year 2020 and a decrease in cash of $2.8 million for fiscal year 2019. These changes were primarily due to fluctuations in various foreign currency exchange rates from period to period, but the majority is related to the fluctuations in the Pound Sterling against the U.S. Dollar.
Cash Flows
Fiscal Year Ended August 31, 2020 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended August 31, 2019
For discussion related to changes in the consolidated statements of cash flows for fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019, refer to Part II - Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended August 31, 2020, which was filed with the SEC on October 21, 2020.
Share Repurchase Plans
The information required by this item is incorporated by reference to Part IV-Item 15, “Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules” Note 9 - Share Repurchase Plans, included in this report.
Dividends
We have historically paid regular quarterly cash dividends on our common stock. In March 2021, the Board of Directors declared a 7% increase in the regular quarterly cash dividend, increasing it from $0.67 per share to $0.72 per share. On October 4, 2021, our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend of $0.72 per share payable on October 29, 2021 to shareholders of record on October 15, 2021. Our ability to pay dividends could be affected by future business performance, liquidity, capital needs, alternative investment opportunities and loan covenants.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements as defined by Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Contractual Obligations
We hold borrowings under our Note Purchase and Private Shelf Agreement with fixed repayment requirements and under a Revolving Credit Facility that has variable underlying interest rates. For additional details on these borrowings, including ability and intent assessment on our credit facility agreement with Bank of America, refer to the information set forth in Part IV-Item 15, “Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules”, Note 8 - Debt.
Additionally, we have ongoing relationships with various third-party suppliers (contract manufacturers) that manufacture our products and third-party distribution centers which warehouse and ship our products to customers. The contract manufacturers maintain title and control of certain raw materials and components, materials utilized in finished products, and of the finished products themselves until shipment to our customers or third-party distribution centers in accordance with agreed upon shipment terms. Although we have definitive minimum purchase obligations in the contract terms with certain of our contract
manufacturers, when such obligations have been included, they have either been immaterial or the minimum amounts have been such that they are well below the volume of goods that we have historically purchased. In addition, in the ordinary course of business, we communicate supply needs to our contract manufacturers based on orders and short-term projections, ranging from two to six months. We are committed to purchase the products produced by the contract manufacturers based on the projections provided. Upon the termination of contracts with contract manufacturers, we obtain certain inventory control rights and are obligated to work with the contract manufacturer to sell through all product held by or manufactured by the contract manufacturer on our behalf during the termination notification period. If any inventory remains at the contract manufacturer at the termination date, we are obligated to purchase such inventory which may include raw materials, components and finished goods. The amounts for inventory purchased under termination commitments have been immaterial.
In addition to the commitments to purchase products from contract manufacturers described above, we may also enter into commitments with other manufacturers to purchase finished goods and components to support innovation initiatives and/or supply chain initiatives. As of August 31, 2021, no such commitments were outstanding.
At August 31, 2021, the liability recorded for uncertain tax positions, excluding associated interest and penalties, was approximately $9.3 million. For additional details on our uncertain tax positions, refer to the information set forth in Part IV-Item 15, “Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules” Note 13 - Income Taxes. We have estimated that up to $0.3 million of unrecognized tax benefits related to income tax positions may be affected by the resolution of tax examinations or expiring statutes of limitation within the next twelve months.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our results of operations and financial condition, as reflected in our consolidated financial statements, have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Preparation of financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions affecting the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We use historical experience and other relevant factors when developing estimates and assumptions and these estimates and assumptions are continually evaluated. Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 15 of this report includes a discussion of our significant accounting policies. The accounting policies discussed below are the ones we consider to be most critical to an understanding of our consolidated financial statements because their application places the most significant demands on our judgment. Our financial results may have varied from those reported had different assumptions been used or other conditions prevailed.
Revenue Recognition
Sales are recognized as revenue at a point in time upon transferring control of the product to the customer. This typically occurs when products are shipped or delivered, depending on when risks of loss and title have passed to the customer per the terms of the contract. For certain of our sales we must make judgments and certain assumptions in order to determine when delivery has occurred. Through an analysis of end-of-period shipments for these particular sales, we determine an average time of transit of product to our customers, and this is used to estimate the time of delivery and whether revenue should be recognized during the current reporting period for such shipments. Differences in judgments or estimates related to the lengthening or shortening of the estimated delivery time used could result in material differences in the timing of revenue recognition.
Sales are recorded net of allowances for damaged goods and other sales returns, sales incentives, trade promotions and cash discounts. We apply a five-step approach in determining the amount and timing of revenue to be recognized which includes the following: (1) identifying the contract with a customer, (2) identifying the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determining the transaction price, (4) allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract and (5) recognizing revenue when the performance obligation is satisfied
In determining the transaction price, management evaluates whether the price is subject to refund or adjustment related to variable consideration to determine the net consideration to which we expect to be entitled. We record estimates of variable consideration, which primarily includes rebates/other discounts (cooperative marketing programs, volume-based discounts, shelf price reductions and allowances for shelf space, charges from customers for services they provided to us related to the sale and penalties/fines charged to us by our customers for failing to adhere to contractual obligations), coupon offers, cash discount allowances, and sales returns, as a reduction of sales in the consolidated statements of operations. These estimates are based on the expected value method considering all reasonably available information, including current and past trade promotion spending patterns, status of trade promotion activities and the interpretation of historical spending trends by customer and category, customer agreements and/or currently known factors that arise in the normal course of business. We review our assumptions and adjust these estimates accordingly on a quarterly basis. Our consolidated financial statements could be materially impacted if the actual promotion rates are different from the estimated rates. If our accrual estimates for sales incentives at August 31, 2021 were to differ by 10%, the impact on net sales would be approximately $1.0 million.
Accounting for Income Taxes
Current income tax expense is the amount of income taxes expected to be payable for the current year. A deferred income tax liability or asset is established for the expected future tax consequences resulting from the differences in financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities. Based on changes in the related tax law as well as forecasted results, a valuation allowance is provided if it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. In addition to valuation allowances, we provide for uncertain tax positions when such tax positions do not meet the recognition thresholds or measurement standards prescribed by the authoritative guidance on income taxes. Amounts for uncertain tax positions are adjusted in periods when new information becomes available or when positions are effectively settled. We recognize accrued interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions as a component of income tax expense.
We are required to make assertions on whether our foreign subsidiaries will invest their undistributed earnings indefinitely and these assertions are based on the capital needs of the foreign subsidiaries. Generally, unremitted earnings of our foreign subsidiaries are not considered to be indefinitely reinvested. However, there are exceptions regarding our newly formed subsidiary in Mexico as well as specific statutory remittance restrictions imposed on our China subsidiary. Costs associated with repatriating unremitted foreign earnings, including U.S. state income taxes and foreign withholding taxes, are immaterial to our consolidated financial statements. For additional information on income tax matters, see Part IV-Item 15, “Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules” Note 13 - Income Taxes, included in this report.
Impairment of Definite-Lived Intangible Assets
We assess for potential impairments to our long-lived assets when there is evidence that events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable and/or its estimated remaining useful life may no longer be appropriate. Any required impairment loss would be measured as the amount by which the asset’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value, which is the amount at which the asset could be bought or sold in a current transaction between willing market participants and would be recorded as a reduction in the carrying amount of the related asset and a charge to results of operations. An impairment loss would be recognized when the sum of the expected future undiscounted net cash flows is less than the carrying amount of the asset.
There were no indicators of potential impairment identified as a result of our review of events and circumstances related to our existing definite-lived intangible assets for the periods ended August 31, 2021, 2020 or 2019. In addition to our quarterly evaluation of events and circumstances to assess whether definite-lived intangible assets have been impaired, we also periodically perform quantitative analyses to support these conclusions and determine the sensitivity of such estimates. The majority of our $7.2 million in definite-lived intangible assets as of August 31, 2021 are related to certain brands of our homecare and cleaning products. Although sales of certain of these products have declined in recent periods, according to our most recent analysis performed during fiscal year 2021, sales declines would have to significantly exceed these products’ recent historical trends in order to trigger an impairment, which we do not currently anticipate in future periods. Our review of events and circumstances included consideration of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
Information on Recently Issued Accounting Standards that could potentially impact our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures is incorporated by reference to Part IV-Item 15, “Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules” Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, included in this report.