ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
References to “we”, “us”, “our” or the “Company” are to BowX Acquisition Corp., except where the context requires otherwise. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation on May 19, 2020. We were formed for the purpose of for the purpose of effecting an initial business combination with a target business. Although we are not limited to a particular industry or sector for purposes of consummating a Business Combination, we initially intend to focus our search on target businesses in the technology, media and telecommunications industries. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our sponsor is BowX Sponsor, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company of which Vivek Ranadivé, the Company’s Chairman and Co-Chief Executive Officer, and Murray Rode, our Co-Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, are the managing members (the “Sponsor”). The registration statement for the IPO was declared effective on August 4, 2020. On August 7, 2020, we consummated our IPO of 42,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A common stock included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”) at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $420.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $23.7 million, inclusive of $14.7 million in deferred underwriting commissions. On August 10, 2020, the underwriter exercised the over-allotment option to purchase an additional of 6,300,000 Units at the IPO price at $10.00 per Unit and we consummated the sale of such Units on August 13, 2020, generating additional gross proceeds of $63.0 million, and incurring additional offering costs of approximately $3.5 million, inclusive of approximately $2.2 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 6,933,333 warrants (each, a “Private Placement Warrant” and collectively, the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to certain of the initial stockholders and certain funds and accounts managed by subsidiaries of BlackRock, Inc (the “Private Placement Warrants Purchasers”), generating gross proceeds of $10.4 million. In connection with the consummation of the sale of additional Units pursuant to the underwriter’s over-allotment option on August 13, 2020, we sold an additional 840,000 Private Placement Warrants to the Private Placement Warrants Purchasers, generating additional gross proceeds of approximately $1.3 million.
Upon the closing of the IPO and the Private Placement (including the exercise of the over-allotment) $483.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the IPO and the Private Placement were placed in a trust account located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and held as cash or invested only in U.S. “government securities,” within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
We will only have 24 months from the closing of the IPO, or August 7, 2022, to complete our initial Business Combination (the “Combination Period”). If we do not complete a Business Combination within this period of time (and stockholders do not approve an amendment to the amended and restated certificate of incorporation to extend this date), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay its taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and our board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii) to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law. Our Sponsor and the other holders of the Founder Shares (as defined below), excluding funds and accounts managed by subsidiaries of BlackRock, Inc (the “initial stockholders”), have entered into agreements with us, pursuant to which they have waived their rights to participate in any redemption with respect to their Founder Shares in the event we do not complete a Business Combination within the required time period; provided, however, if the initial stockholders or any of our officers, directors or affiliates acquire Public Shares in or after the Initial Public Offering, they will be entitled to a pro rata share of the Trust Account upon our redemption or liquidation in the event we do not complete a Business Combination within the required time period. In the event of such distribution, it is possible that the per share value in the Trust Account will be less than the price per Unit sold in the IPO.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $0.9 million in cash and working capital of approximately $1.1 million.
Through December 31, 2020, our liquidity needs were satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from our Chairman and Co-Chief Executive Officer to cover for certain offering costs in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares (as defined below), and the loan under the Note (as defined below) of approximately $150,000 to us to cover for offering costs in connection with the IPO. Subsequent to the consummation of the IPO on August 7, 2020, the liquidity needs have been satisfied through the remaining balance of the Note and advancement of funds of approximately $45,000 from a related party, for total outstanding balance of Note and advances of approximately $195,000, and the net proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. We fully repaid the Note on August 7, 2020. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our officers, directors and initial stockholders may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans (as defined below). To date, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Since inception, our entire activity has been related to our formation, IPO, which was consummated on August 7, 2020, and since the IPO, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective Initial Business Combination, and we will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our Initial Business Combination. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from May 19, 2020 through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of approximately $137,000, which consisted of approximately $220,000 in general and administrative expenses, approximately $122,000 in franchise tax expense, and $22,000 of income tax expense, offset by approximately $227,000 of net gain from investments held in Trust Account.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On May 26, 2020, we issued 10,062,500 shares of Class B common stock to our sponsor in exchange for a payment of $25,000 for offering costs made by our Sponsor on behalf of our company (the “Founder Shares”). In July 2020, the sponsor transferred certain Founder Shares to our directors and officers as well as to certain third parties. On August 4, 2020, we effected a stock dividend of 0.2 shares of Class B common stock for each share of Class B common stock outstanding, resulting in an aggregate of 12,075,000 Founder Shares outstanding. All shares and associated amounts have been retroactively restated to reflect the share dividend. On August 13, 2020, the underwriters exercised their 15% over-allotment option in full; thus, the Founder Shares were no longer subject to forfeiture.
The initial stockholders have agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of the Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of the initial Business Combination and (B) subsequent to the initial Business Combination, (x) if the last reported sale price of the Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial Business Combination, or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, capital stock exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction that results in all of our stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of common stock for cash, securities or other property.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, the Private Placement Warrants Purchasers purchased an aggregate of 6,933,333 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrants, generating gross proceeds of $10.4 million in the Private Placement. In connection with the sale of Units pursuant to the over-allotment option on August 13, 2020, we sold an additional 840,000 Private Placement Warrants to the Private Placement Warrants Purchasers, generating additional gross proceeds of approximately $1.3 million.
Each whole Private Placement Warrant is exercisable for one whole share of Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment. A portion of the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants was added to the proceeds from the IPO to be held in the Trust Account. If we do not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless. The Private Placement Warrants will be non-redeemable for cash (subject to certain exceptions) and exercisable on a cashless basis so long as they are held by the initial purchasers or their permitted transferees.
The Private Placement Warrants (and the Class A common stock issuable upon exercise of the Private Placement Warrants) will not be transferable, assignable or salable until 30 days after the completion of the initial Business Combination (subject to certain exceptions).
Related Party Loans
On May 26, 2020, our Chairman and Co-Chief Executive Officer agreed to loan us up to an aggregate of $150,000 pursuant to an unsecured promissory note (the “Note”) to cover expenses related to the IPO. This loan was payable without interest upon the completion of the IPO. We borrowed up to the full amount of the Note and received additional advances of approximately $45,000 advancement of funds from such officer, for a total outstanding loan of approximately $195,000. We fully repaid the Note and the advances to such officer on August 7, 2020.
Working Capital Loans
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial Business Combination, the initial stockholders, officers and directors and their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (the “Working Capital Loans”). Up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender. Such warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans to date. We did not have any borrowings under the Working Capital Loans as of December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The initial stockholders and holders of the Private Placement Warrants are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. The initial stockholders and holders of the Private Placement Warrants will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form registration demands, that we register such securities for sale under the Securities Act. In addition, these holders will have “piggy-back” registration rights to include their securities in other registration statements filed by us. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriter a 45-day option to purchase up to 6,300,000 additional Units to cover any over-allotments, at the IPO price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On August 10, 2020, the underwriter fully exercised the over-allotment option.
The underwriter was entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $8.4 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the IPO. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or $14.7 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriter for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
In connection with the consummation of the sale of Units pursuant to the over-allotment option on August 13, 2020, the underwriter received an aggregate of $1.26 million in underwriting fees and additional deferred underwriting commissions of approximately $2.2 million.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the Trust Account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. The investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in net gain from investments held in Trust Account in the accompanying statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Shares of conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2020, 46,240,424 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Common Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net income per share is computed by dividing net income (loss) applicable to common stockholders by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for the period. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the IPO and Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 23,873,333 shares of Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted earnings per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted earnings per share is the same as basic earnings per share for the period.
Our statement of operations includes a presentation of income per share for common stock subject to redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income per share. Net income per share, basic and diluted for Class A common stock is calculated by dividing the investment income earned on the Trust Account of approximately $227,000, net of applicable income and franchise taxes of approximately $144,000 for the period from May 19, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020, respectively, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A common stock outstanding for the periods. Net loss per share, basic and diluted for Class B common stock for the period from May 19, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 is calculated by dividing the net loss of approximately $137,000, less net income attributable to Class A common stock of approximately $83,000, resulting in a net loss of approximately $220,000, by the weighted average number of Class B common stock outstanding for the period.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our IPO or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe there are any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, that would have a material effect on our financial statements.