Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” should be read for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Our fiscal year end is September 30, and our fiscal quarters end on December 31, March 31, June 30 and September 30. Our fiscal years ended September 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019 are referred to herein as Fiscal Year 2021, Fiscal Year 2020 and Fiscal Year 2019, respectively.
Key Factors Affecting Our Results of Operations
We believe that our performance and future success depend on a number of factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in “Risk Factors.”
Economic Conditions
Demand for our products is significantly affected by a number of economic factors impacting our customers and consumers, such as the availability of credit, consumer confidence and spending, demographic trends, employment levels and other macroeconomic factors (e.g., lockdowns, government mandates, etc.) that may influence the extent to which consumers invest in household products such as grills, and associated accessories, consumables and services.
Seasonality/Weather
Although we generally have demand for our products throughout the year, our sales have historically experienced some seasonality. We have typically experienced our highest level of sales of our products in the second and third fiscal quarters as retailers across North America and Europe changeover their floor sets, build inventory and fulfill consumer demand for outdoor cooking products. Sales are typically lower during our first and fourth fiscal quarters, with the exception of our Australia/ New Zealand business which is counter seasonal to the balance of our business. We have a long track record of investing in our business throughout the year, including in operating expenses, working capital and other growth initiatives. We typically borrow under our short-term revolving facility in the first and second fiscal quarters to fund working capital for building up inventory in anticipation of the higher demand we experience in the second and third fiscal quarters. While these investments drive performance during the primary selling season in our second and third fiscal
quarters, they generally have a negative impact on cash flow and net income during our first and fourth fiscal quarters. Unfavorable weather during our higher sales season can also have a material adverse impact on our results, and can cause shifts in sales across fiscal quarters. A few examples are colder, wetter weather patterns during the key second and third fiscal quarters in North America and Europe, or drought conditions leading to wildfires similar to what Australia experienced in early Fiscal Year 2020.
Business Acquisitions
On January 12, 2021, Weber acquired all of the outstanding stock of June Life, Inc. (“June”), a smart appliance and technology company. The acquisition aligns with the Company’s strategy of revolutionizing the outdoor cooking experience through connected products, services and experiences that make grilling the perfect meal simple with our smartphone-enabled step-by-step cooking experience. Weber Connect, powered by June OS, is our smart cooking software solution developed with June. The acquisition was accounted for as a business combination, and June was acquired for aggregate consideration of $142.2 million, including $108.3 million of cash. The results of operations for June have been included in the consolidated statements of income since the acquisition date, which were not material. The assets acquired and liabilities assumed in connection with this acquisition were included in our consolidated balance sheet as of September 30, 2021, which have been measured at fair value as of the acquisition date.
On April 1, 2021, we acquired substantially all of the operations of R. McDonald Co. Pty. Ltd. (“RMC”), a sales and marketing company in Australia and New Zealand, for approximately $26.3 million in cash and $14.6 million in equity. The results of operations for RMC have been included in the consolidated statements of income since the acquisition date, which were not material. The assets acquired and liabilities assumed in connection with the acquisition were included in our consolidated balance sheet as of September 30, 2021, which have been measured at fair value as of the acquisition date.
We remain open to synergistic acquisitions that enhance our product line, geographic reach, market share and operational capabilities.
Impact of COVID-19
Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have focused on protecting our employees’ health and safety, meeting our customers’ needs as they navigate an uncertain financial and operating environment, working closely with our suppliers to protect our ongoing business operations and rapidly adjusting our short-, medium- and long-term operational plans to proactively and effectively respond to the current and potential future public health crises. While the COVID-19 pandemic presents serious concerns for our business and operations, our employees and their families, our customers and our suppliers, we believe that we are adapting well to the wide-ranging changes that the global economy is currently undergoing. We remain confident in our business continuity strategy, our ability to produce and sell our products safely and in compliance with applicable laws and governmental orders and mandates, our robust and flexible supply chains and our financial flexibility even in the event of a potentially extended economic downturn. This discussion and analysis includes periods prior to the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. For further discussion of the steps we have taken to respond to and mitigate the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, see “Risk Factors.”
We are fully operational as we abide by local COVID-19 safety regulations across the world. To achieve this, we have many employees working remotely and have adopted significant protective measures for our employees on site, including staggered shifts, social distancing and hygiene best practices recommended by the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (the “CDC”) and local public health officials. In addition, we have taken additional steps to monitor and strengthen our supply chain to maintain an uninterrupted supply of our products.
Although we have implemented measures to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, these measures may not be fully effective. We cannot predict the degree to, or the period over, which we will be affected by the pandemic and resulting governmental and other measures. The economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic could continue to affect demand for our products in the foreseeable future. As the COVID-19 pandemic continues, it may also have the effect of heightening many of the risks described in “Risk Factors.”
The severity, magnitude and duration of the current COVID-19 pandemic is uncertain and rapidly changing. We continue to actively monitor the pandemic including, infection and hospitalization rates, vaccination efforts, and related governmental actions such as expanded or reduced stay-at home orders, mask mandates, shutdowns, and social distancing guidelines. We will adjust our mitigation strategies as necessary to address any changing health, operational or financial risks that may arise. Since the onset of the pandemic, we have experienced a significant increase in demand for our grills and accessories. While this demand has moderated to some extent, we will continue to manage our production capacity during this period of volatility. We continue to monitor the business for adverse impacts of the pandemic, including volatility in the foreign exchange markets, supply-chain disruptions in certain markets, and potential disruptions in certain countries. In the event we experience adverse impacts from the above or other factors, we would also evaluate the need to
perform interim impairment tests for our goodwill, intangible assets and property, equipment and leasehold improvements. There can be no assurance that volatility and/or disruption in the global capital and credit markets will not impair our ability to access these markets on terms acceptable to us, or at all.
Components of our Operating Results
We consider a variety of financial and operating measures in assessing the performance of our business. The key U.S. GAAP measures we use are net sales, gross profit, income from operations and net income.
Net Sales
We offer a broad range of products that consist of grills, accessories and consumables. We recognize product sales upon the transfer of products to customers at a point in time. Transfer of control passes to customers upon shipment or upon delivery depending upon the written sales terms with the customer. Sales are recorded net of related discounts, allowances and taxes to be submitted to third parties. Sales are impacted by product/geography/channel mix, pricing actions, foreign exchange fluctuations, promotions, competition and the spending habits of our consumers. Sales growth is primarily driven by new product launches, geographic expansion, direct-to-consumer initiatives, point-of-sale (“POS”) changes and expanding our customer base.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold includes the cost of direct materials, labor, purchased finished products and components, inbound freight, packaging, warranty and depreciation and amortization. Cost of goods sold is recognized primarily using the first-in first-out (“FIFO”) method of accounting for the inventory sold.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit is calculated by taking net sales less cost of goods sold. Gross profit is generally impacted by purchased finished product and component costs, material/commodity costs, labor economics, product pricing, product mix and changes in foreign currencies. Gross margin is defined as gross profit as a percentage of net sales.
Operating Expenses
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of research and development, marketing, advertising and selling costs; non-manufacturing employee compensation and benefit costs; transportation costs of delivering our product to customers and the costs associated with a network of warehousing facilities to house inventory until the point of sale; outside services and fees; legal, insurance, accounting, audit and other administrative expenses; cost of non-cash stock-based compensation; and general corporate infrastructure costs.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Intangible assets other than goodwill are amortized over their useful lives in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other, unless those lives are determined to be indefinite. Intangible amortization expense is primarily related to our trademarks, customer lists, patents, in-process research and development, developed technology, reacquired rights and non-compete agreements. As of September 30, 2021, the weighted average amortization period ranged from 2.3 years to 14.6 years.
Gain on Disposal of Assets Held for Sale
During Fiscal Year 2020, the Company determined that one of our manufacturing sites was considered to be assets held for sale, since the asset group was being marketed for sale and all the criteria to be classified as held for sale under ASC 360, Property, Plant and Equipment, had been met. The related buildings and its content were vacated and we no longer required these assets for our future operations. The carrying value of these assets was $8.3 million as of September 30, 2020. Assets held for sale are measured at the lower of their carrying value or the fair value less cost to sell. On December 30, 2020, we disposed of this manufacturing site, for net cash proceeds of $13.5 million, which resulted in a gain of $5.2 million.
Foreign Currency (Gain) Loss
The functional currencies of the Company’s foreign subsidiaries are predominantly the respective local currencies. Foreign currency (gain) loss includes gains and losses on transactions conducted in foreign currencies other than the functional currency.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents, as well as interest on member notes.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest on our borrowings, including our credit facilities (term loan and revolving facility), foreign currency revolving and overdraft facility and charges for limited standby letters of credit. Interest expense also includes the amortization of deferred financing costs associated with our credit facilities, current year impacts of interest rate swap transactions, as well as interest expense resulting from a financing obligation under a sale-leaseback arrangement.
Loss from Early Extinguishment of Debt
Under extinguishment accounting, the Company recorded a $5.4 million loss from early extinguishment of debt during Fiscal Year 2021, of which $4.1 million related to the term loan of the Company’s senior credit facility and $1.3 million related to revolving credit facility of the senior credit facility, representing a write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs.
Income Taxes
Income taxes consist of U.S. federal, state and international taxes for jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We account for income taxes using an asset and liability approach. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities result from temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the consolidated financial statements that will result in taxable or deductible amounts in future years. Valuation allowances are provided when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
The determination of our provision for income taxes requires management’s judgment in the use of estimates and the interpretation and application of complex tax laws. Judgment is also required in assessing the timing and amounts of deductible and taxable items. We establish liabilities for material, known tax exposures relating to deductions, transactions and other matters involving some uncertainty as to the proper tax treatment of the item. Our liabilities reflect our judgment as to the resolution of the issues involved if subject to judicial review. When facts and circumstances change, including a resolution of an issue or statute of limitations expiration, these liabilities are adjusted through the provision for income taxes in the period of change. Weber’s practice is to recognize interest and penalties related to income tax matters, if assessed, in income taxes.
Reportable Segments
We operate and manage our business in three reportable segments: Americas, which consists of Canada, Chile, Mexico and the United States; the European, Middle East and African regions (“EMEA”); and the Asia-Pacific region (“APAC”), which includes Australia and New Zealand. We identify our reportable segments based on the information used by the Chief Operating Decision Maker (“CODM”) to monitor performance and allocate resources. See Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our reportable segments.
Non-GAAP Measures
In addition to the U.S. GAAP results provided in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we provide supplemental non-GAAP measures to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business and assist us in making strategic decisions. Our management team utilizes a combination of GAAP and non-GAAP financial measures to evaluate business results, to make decisions regarding the future direction of our business, and for resource allocation decisions. As a result, we believe the presentation of both GAAP and non-GAAP financial measures provides investors with increased transparency into financial measures used by our management team and improves investors’ understanding of our underlying operating performance and in their analysis of ongoing operating trends. All historic non-GAAP financial measures have been reconciled with the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures. The use of non-GAAP financial information should not be considered as an alternative to, or more meaningful than, the comparable U.S. GAAP measures. In addition, because our non-GAAP measures are not determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, it is susceptible to differing calculations, and not all comparable or peer companies may calculate their non-GAAP measures in the same manner. Our non-GAAP measures are adjusted income from operations, adjusted net income, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA.
Adjusted Income from Operations and Adjusted Net Income
Adjusted income from operations and adjusted net income is income from operations and net income (loss) adjusted for non-cash stock compensation / Management Incentive Plan (“LTIP”) and profits interest expense, business transformation costs, operational transformation costs, impairment costs, debt refinancing and IPO costs, COVID-19 costs
and gain on disposal of assets held for sale, and, in the case of adjusted net income, loss from early extinguishment of debt, net of the tax impact of such adjustments. Adjusted income from operations is also adjusted for foreign currency gain (loss). Adjusted income from operations excludes loss from early extinguishment of debt, interest expense, net, income taxes and (gain) loss from investments in unconsolidated affiliates. We use adjusted income from operations and adjusted net income as indicators of the productivity of our business and our ability to manage expenses, after adjusting for certain expenses that we view as not indicative of regular operations. Adjusted income from operations and adjusted net income are not calculated in the same manner by all companies, and accordingly, are not necessarily comparable to similarly entitled measures of other companies and may not be an appropriate measure for performance relative to other companies.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
EBITDA is net income before interest expense, net, income taxes and depreciation and amortization.
Adjusted EBITDA is a key metric used by management and our Board of Directors to assess our financial performance. Adjusted EBITDA is also frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate companies in our industry, when considered alongside other U.S. GAAP measures. We use Adjusted EBITDA to supplement U.S. GAAP measures of performance to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies, to make budgeting decisions, and to compare our performance against that of other companies using similar measures.
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income before interest expense, net, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, adjusted for non-cash stock compensation / LTIP and profits interest expense, business transformation costs, operational transformation costs, debt refinancing and IPO costs, COVID-19 operational costs, loss from early extinguishment of debt, impairment costs and gain on disposal of assets held for sale as shown below. Adjusted EBITDA is not calculated in the same manner by all companies, and accordingly, is not necessarily comparable to similarly entitled measures of other companies and may not be an appropriate measure for performance relative to other companies. Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an indicator of a company’s operating performance in isolation from, or as a substitute for, net income, cash flows from operations or cash flow data, all of which are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We have presented Adjusted EBITDA solely as supplemental disclosure because we believe it allows for a more complete analysis of results of operations. Adjusted EBITDA is not intended to represent, and should not be considered more meaningful than, or as an alternative to, measures of operating performance as determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Our presentation of Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by these items.
The following table reconciles income from operations to adjusted income from operations; net income to adjusted net income; net income to EBITDA; and EBITDA to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented:
______________
(1)Adjusted income from operations includes foreign currency gain (loss) in order to align adjusted income from operations with Adjusted EBITDA, with the exception of depreciation and amortization and (gain) loss from investments in unconsolidated affiliates.
(2)Our financial results reflect an increase in compensation expense related to an increase in the value of our LTIP and profits interest units as well as a change in accounting methodology from the intrinsic value method to the fair value method during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. These changes resulted in total compensation expense of approximately $126.0 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021.
(3)“Business transformation costs” are defined as costs incurred to implement the leadership team’s plans to transition the organization to the future operating structure. These costs include major business transformation initiatives that require severance or other costs to transition to a new operating model.
(4)“Operational transformation costs” are defined as restructuring and transformation initiatives related to major supply chain, operational moves and startups that are designed to enable future productivity. These costs also include significant systems integration costs, as well was plant shutdown and closure costs that will drive future efficiencies.
(5)As part of our fiscal year 2019 annual goodwill impairment test, we recognized a non-cash impairment loss of $12.6 million on the iGrill goodwill.
(6)“Debt refinancing and IPO costs” are defined as certain non-capitalizable costs from the refinancing of the Company’s term loan and costs related to the initial public offering.
(7)During the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, the Company incurred a number of significant costs related to the global COVID-19 pandemic. These non-recurring costs included plant shutdown costs, the impact of enhanced employee safety and social distancing protocols as well as overtime and expedited freight costs to fulfill significant unexpected demand increases driven by stay-at-home orders in many of our key markets. These costs have normalized in fiscal year ended 2021.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year 2020
The following table sets forth our summarized consolidated statements of income data for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 and the dollar and percentage change between the respective periods. Refer to “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our prospectus relating to our Registration Statement (Registration No. 333-257824) on Form S-1, as amended, and filed pursuant to Rule 424(b) of
the Securities Act for the year-over year analysis of consolidated results of operations for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 as compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2019.
______________
(1)Amounts include share/unit-based compensation as follows:
______________
(2)Amount includes depreciation expense as follows:
______________
(3)See the section titled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Non-GAAP Measures.”
(4)“N/M” indicates that variance as a percentage is not meaningful.
The following table sets forth our summarized consolidated statements of income data for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, expressed as a percentage of net sales (the table may not foot due to rounding):
Net Sales
Net sales for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 increased by $457.1 million, or 30%, to $1,982.4 million from $1,525.3 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to increased consumer demand for our outdoor cooking products and continued inventory restocking at our retail customers to keep pace with market trends. Fluctuation in foreign exchange rates also increased net sales by $76.3 million, particularly the Euro as compared to the U.S. dollar. Excluding the $76.3 million favorable impact of foreign exchange rates, net sales for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 increased by 25%, as compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. Net sales for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 increased in the Americas by 25%, in EMEA by 34% and in APAC by 49% as compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 increased by $241.6 million, or 26%, to $1,157.2 million from $915.6 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the increased sales volume, and was partially offset by and was partially offset by a decrease in COVID-19 related costs of $15.9 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 increased by $215.5 million, or 35%, to $825.2 million from $609.7 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. Gross margin increased by 160 basis points to 41.6% during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The increase in gross margin was primarily driven by higher sales volumes and pricing actions to offset cost inflation, favorable impact of foreign exchange rates, as well as favorable product mix and a decrease in COVID-19 related costs of $15.9 million, which both reduced cost of goods sold in 2021.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative costs for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 increased by $293.9 million, or 66%, to $738.8 million from $445.0 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. Selling, general
and administrative costs as a percent of net sales increased by 810 basis points to 37.3% during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The increase in selling, general and administrative costs was primarily driven by higher share/unit-based compensation expense of $126.7 million, increased distribution costs of $47.0 million associated with higher sales volumes, higher advertising costs of $41.5 million to drive revenue, higher research and development costs and investment in corporate headcount of $14.8 million to support growth initiatives, debt refinancing and IPO costs of $17.6 million, and additional commission costs of $3.7 million on higher revenue.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 increased by $4.0 million, or 30%, to $17.2 million from $13.2 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The increase in amortization of intangible assets was primarily driven by the amortization of assets related to the June and RMC acquisitions.
Gain on Disposal of Assets Held for Sale
During fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, we determined that one of our manufacturing sites was considered to be assets held for sale, since the asset group was being marketed for sale and all the criteria to be classified as held for sale under ASC 360 had been met. On December 30, 2020, we disposed of this manufacturing site for net cash proceeds of $13.5 million, resulting in the recognition of a gain on the disposal of assets held for sale for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 of $5.2 million. No gain or loss on the disposal of assets held for sale was recognized for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020.
Foreign Currency (Gain) Loss
The impact of foreign exchange resulted in an immaterial gain for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 relative to a loss of $5.1 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 due to the foreign exchange rate impacts on transactions with Weber affiliates conducted in foreign currencies other than the U.S. dollar.
Interest Income
Interest income decreased by $0.2 million, or 14%, during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, primarily due to changes in interest rates and in the balances of cash and cash equivalents.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased by $26.6 million, or 66%, during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, primarily due to the higher term loan balance in Fiscal Year 2021 following the debt refinancing in October 2021.
Loss from Early Extinguishment of Debt
We recognized a loss from the early extinguishment of debt of $5.4 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 and no gain or loss from the early extinguishment of debt was recognized for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense decreased by $10.8 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, primarily due to the decrease in pre-tax book income, changes in valuation allowances, and the IPO and June restructuring transaction. The primary driver for the change in valuation allowance relates to a tax planning action the Company implemented in the fourth quarter of Fiscal Year 2021 related to June, which allowed the Company to utilize the net operating losses and credits carryforwards that were not previously realizable. The income tax benefit of releasing the valuation allowance on these attributes was $16.2 million. This benefit was partially offset when the Company implemented the remaining elements of this planning action by converting June from a C Corporation to a limited liability company, treated as partnership, and recognizing income tax expense of $6.2 million as a result of the conversion.
(Gain) Loss from Investments in Unconsolidated Affiliates
We recorded a gain from investments in unconsolidated affiliates of $5.5 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 and a loss from investments in unconsolidated affiliates of $4.6 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The $5.5 million gain during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 is a result of a $6.9 million gain from the remeasurement of the existing equity interest in June to fair value at the time of acquisition, offset by a $1.4 million loss recorded for Weber’s share of June’s losses in the first quarter of Fiscal Year 2021. The 4.6 million loss during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 is a result of Weber recording its share of June’s losses.
Net Income
Net income decreased by $83.3 million, or 94%, to net income of $5.5 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 from net income of $88.9 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by approximately $131 million of share/unit-based compensation expense, primarily driven by valuation methodology changes as a result of the IPO.
Segment Information
We operate and manage our business in three reportable segments: Americas, which consists of Canada, Chile, Mexico and the United States; EMEA; and APAC, which includes Australia and New Zealand. We identify our reportable segments based on the information used by the CODM to monitor performance and allocate resources. See Note 15 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our reportable segments.
Net sales by reportable segment is summarized as follows:
Adjusted income from operations by reportable segment is summarized as follows:
The following table reconciles segment adjusted income from operations to income from operations for the periods presented:
_____________
(1)See “Non-GAAP Measures-adjusted income from operations” for descriptions of reconciling items from income from operations to adjusted income from operations.
Americas
The following table summarizes certain financial information relating to the Americas segment results that have been derived from our consolidated financial statements:
Total Segment Net Sales. Total segment net sales for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 increased by $221.7 million, or 25%, to $1,102.3 million from $880.6 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to increased orders across all channels during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 as inventories were restocked following a strong fourth quarter of Fiscal Year 2020, and customers reacted to the continuation of favorable outdoor/backyard cooking trends. Foreign exchange rates also trended favorably, contributing an additional $10.1 million of net sales during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, primarily driven by the Canadian dollar as compared to the U.S. dollar. Excluding the $10.1 million favorable impact of foreign exchange rates, Americas net sales for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 increased by 24%, as compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020.
Segment Adjusted Income from Operations. Segment adjusted income from operations for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 increased by $25.6 million, or 14%, to $203.7 million from $178.1 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to $221.7 million sales growth during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, which was partially offset by $30.8 million of increased distribution costs on higher sales, $17.4 million of strategic investments in advertising and marketing to drive revenue, additional commission costs of $3.2 million on higher revenue. Additionally, the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 includes $10.8 million of incremental selling, general and administrative expenses as a result of the June acquisition.
EMEA
The following table summarizes certain financial information relating to the EMEA segment results that have been derived from our consolidated financial statements:
Total Segment Net Sales. Total segment net sales for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 increased by $184.6 million, or 34%, to $726.1 million from $541.6 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to widespread growth across most countries in the region, as consumer demand for at-home/outdoor grilling products continued to strengthen. Foreign exchange rates also trended favorably, contributing an additional $55.1 million of net sales, primarily driven by the Euro as compared to the U.S. dollar. Excluding the $55.1 million favorable impact of foreign exchange rates, EMEA net sales for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 increased by 24%, as compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020.
Segment Adjusted Income from Operations. Segment adjusted income from operations for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 increased by $84.6 million, or 62%, to $221.1 million from $136.5 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to $184.6 million of sales growth during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, which was partially offset by $27.2 million of investments in advertising to drive sales and brand strength in the region and increased distribution expense of $7.9 million on increased sales.
APAC
The following table summarizes certain financial information relating to the APAC segment results that have been derived from our consolidated financial statements:
Total Segment Net Sales. Total segment net sales for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 increased by $50.9 million, or 49%, to $154.0 million from $103.1 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to growth in the Australia and New Zealand markets, driven by strong consumer demand in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. During the first half of fiscal year 2020, bush fires impacted the consumer’s opportunities to cook outdoors, which negatively impacted grill sales during that period. Foreign exchange rates also trended favorably, contributing an additional $11.1 million of net sales, primarily driven by the Australian dollar as compared to the U.S. dollar. Excluding the $11.1 million favorable impact of foreign exchange rates, APAC net sales for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 increased by 39%, as compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020.
Segment Adjusted Income from Operations. Segment adjusted income from operations for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 increased by $12.1 million, or 52%, to $35.4 million from $23.4 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to the $50.9 million sales growth to date, which was partially offset by higher distribution costs of $4.5 million on higher revenues, investments in advertising of $3.1 million to drive sales and $2.9 million of investment in Asia to support future growth.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary working capital requirements are to fund our daily operational activities like purchasing raw materials and component parts to manufacture products, payments to suppliers for goods and services and cash to be received for products sold to customers. Our working capital requirements fluctuate during the year, driven primarily by the seasonality of market demand and the timing of inventory manufacturing and purchases. Our capital expenditures are primarily related to growth initiatives and operational spending, including investments related to new product development, manufacturing and operational activities and investments in technology systems.
Generally, we fund working capital requirements, capital expenditures, payments related to acquisitions and debt service requirements with a combination of both cash on hand and the borrowing capacity under the Secured Credit Facility, as discussed below. The Company considers all investments with initial maturities of three months or less to be cash and cash equivalents, which consist primarily of demand deposits and money market accounts with major financial institutions in the United States and in countries where the Company’s subsidiaries operate. As of September 30, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents totaled $107.5 million, and we had $293.6 million of borrowings available under the revolving facility.
Based on our growth plans, we believe our cash and cash equivalents position, net cash provided by operating activities and availability under our new credit facility will be adequate to finance our working capital requirements, planned capital expenditures and debt service. In the future, we may allocate additional capital towards strategic acquisitions. If cash provided by operating activities and borrowings under our credit facility are not sufficient or available to meet our capital requirements, then we will be required to obtain additional equity or debt financing in the future. There can be no assurance equity or debt financing will be available to us if we need it or, if available, the terms will be satisfactory to us.
Secured Credit Facility
On October 30, 2020, the Company entered into a new credit facility arrangement with a term loan of $1,250.0 million and a revolving credit facility with a maximum commitment of $300.0 million (the “Secured Credit Facility”). The term loan matures on October 30, 2027 and revolving facility matures by October 30, 2025. Proceeds from the term loan and revolving facility were used to pay off the Company’s prior credit agreement, effect a portion of a special dividend, engage in business acquisition and equity repurchase activities, pay fees and expenses in connection with the foregoing and for working capital and general corporate purposes. Borrowings under the credit facilities bear interest at a rate equal to, at our option, either (i) LIBOR for the relevant interest period, adjusted for statutory reserve requirements (subject to a floor of 0.00% per annum for all revolving loans and a 0.75% floor for the term loans), plus an applicable margin or (ii) a base rate equal to the highest of (a) the rate of interest publicly announced from time to time by the administrative agent as its “prime rate”, (b) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.50% and (c) adjusted LIBOR for an interest period of one month plus 1.00% (subject to a floor of 0.00% per annum), in each case, plus an applicable margin. As of September 30, 2021, we were in compliance with the financial covenants of the Secured Credit Facility.
Summary of Cash Flows
A summary of our cash flows provided by (used in) operating, investing and financing activities is presented in the following table:
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased to $54.1 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 from $305.2 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, a decrease of $251.1 million or 82%. While the Company experienced higher operating results, this was partially offset by the unfavorable impact of normalizing inventory levels throughout the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. Additionally, less favorable impacts from accounts payable balances driven by timing of payments further offset the Company's operating results as compared to the prior year period.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities increased to $178.0 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 from $22.2 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, an increase of $155.8 million or 702%. During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, the Company acquired the June business for net cash payments of $102.2 million and the RMC business for cash payments of $26.3 million, for total cash payments of $128.5 million. Additionally, capital expenditures were $34.1 million higher in the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 as compared to the prior year period, primarily related to the Company’s implementation of a Global SAP/S4 HANA ERP platform, the setup of the new European
manufacturing facility in Poland and enhancements to support product line redesigns in the U.S. This was partially offset by higher cash proceeds of $6.8 million from the sale of assets.
Cash Provided by (Used In) Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $109.5 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 as compared to net cash used in financing activities of $213.2 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020. During the first quarter result of Fiscal Year 2021, the Company refinanced its debt, resulting in proceeds of $1,250.0 million, of which $616.6 million was used to the payoff the previous credit facility. The Company paid a total of $27.7 million of costs associated with the debt refinancing and fourth quarter amendments. During fiscal year 2021, $9.4 million was repaid on the term loan based on the payment schedule. In addition, the Company paid member distributions of $315.5 million, repurchased certain members’ interests for cash payments of $188.9 million and paid interest rate swap settlement payments of $5.4 million. These transactions were partially offset by proceeds of $13.1 million for issuance of capital.
Additionally, during Fiscal Year 2021, the Company received proceeds of $237.5 million from its IPO and used the proceeds to repay $220.1 million of the outstanding borrowings under our Secured Credit Facility and certain IPO-related costs of $7.0 million. Subsequently, the Company received proceeds of $35.6 million from the Greenshoe option, which were used to repurchase $35.6 million of Class A shares and LLC units.
The prior year period reflects net repayments on the revolving credit facility of $176.7 million, payments of $33.6 million on the Company’s previous term loan, payments of $18.0 million to acquire the Q Grill Trademark, member distribution payments of $17.0 million and costs of $3.2 million that were incurred in connection with refinancing the previous credit facility in the second quarter of Fiscal Year 2020. These transactions were partially offset by proceeds from the financing obligation of $39.5 million.
Dividends
On November 3, 2021, (i) our Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.04 per share of Class A common stock, payable December 17, 2021 to holders of our Class A common stock of record on December 7, 2021 and (ii) Weber HoldCo LLC declared a distribution of $0.04 per LLC Unit, payable December 17, 2021 to holders of LLC Units as of that date. We will pay the dividend to holders of Class A common stock with the funds we receive from the Weber HoldCo LLC distribution as a holder of LLC Units.
Credit Rating
In October 2021, S&P Global Ratings ("S&P") raised the Weber-Stephen Products LLC credit rating to BB- (stable). At the same time, S&P removed the BB- rating from Weber-Stephen Products LLC and assigned a BB- rating to Weber Inc.
Contractual Obligations
As of September 30, 2021, significant contractual obligations related to debt were $1,020.5 million of principal borrowings and $242.9 million of related interest, which become due through 2027. Projected interest costs on variable rate instruments were calculated using market rates at September 30, 2021. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements. We also have contractual obligations for leases, including machinery and equipment, vehicles, IT assets, office equipment, real estate and other assets. See Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements.
Other Information
As of September 30, 2021, $68.6 million of our $107.5 million in cash and cash equivalents was held in jurisdictions outside of the U.S. Cash held outside the U.S. may be repatriated, subject to certain limitations, and would be available to be used to fund our domestic operations. However, repatriation of funds may result in additional tax liabilities. We believe that our existing cash balance in the U.S. is sufficient to fund our working capital needs in the U.S.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, sales and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base these estimates on historical results and various other assumptions believed to be reasonable, all of which form the basis for making estimates concerning the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe that the following critical accounting policies affect the most significant estimates and management judgments used in preparing the consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") issued Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), which outlines a single comprehensive five-step model for entities to use in accounting for revenue arising from contracts with customers. The Company adopted this standard on October 1, 2018, using the modified retrospective approach with no material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Revenue transactions associated with the sale of grills and related accessories comprise a single performance obligation, which consists of the transfer of products to customers at a point in time. Substantially all of the Company’s revenues relate to the sales of grills and accessories.
The Company satisfies the performance obligation and records revenues for grills and accessories when control has passed to the customer, based on the terms of sale. Transfer of control passes to customers at a point in time, that point in time generally being upon shipment or upon delivery of the performance obligation, depending on the written sales terms with the customer.
The Company’s purchase orders from customers for specific products represent its contracts and include all key terms and conditions related to the sale of products. For all sales, no significant uncertainty exists surrounding the customers’ obligation to pay for grills and accessories. Customers’ obligations to pay are generally under normal commercial terms, with payment terms typically being 30-60 days upon completion of the performance obligation. As payment terms are less than one year from the satisfaction of performance obligation, our sales do not include any significant financing components. Consideration promised in the Company’s contracts with customers is variable due to anticipated reductions, such as cash discounts and customer incentives (volume rebates and advertising programs). The transaction price is determined based upon the invoiced sales price, less anticipated reductions. The cost of these discounts and incentives are estimated at the inception of the contract based on the Company’s annual incentive programs with customers and recognized as a reduction to revenue at the time of sale. Subsequent adjustments to discounts or incentive programs are recognized to revenue in the period the adjustment is determinable.
The Company offers warranties on most of its products, which are considered assurance type warranties and, therefore, are not accounted for as a separate performance obligation.
Accordingly, all shipping and handling activity costs are recognized as selling, general and administrative expenses at the time the related revenue is recognized. Amounts invoiced to customers for shipping and handling are recorded in net sales. Any taxes collected on behalf of government authorities are excluded from net sales. The Company has elected to account for shipping and handling activities as a fulfillment cost.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable consist primarily of amounts due to the Company from its normal business activities, offset by an allowance for expected credit losses. The Company estimates its expected credit losses based on historical experience, the aging of accounts receivable, consideration of current economic conditions and its expectations of future economic conditions. Additionally, the Company establishes customer-specific allowances for known at-risk accounts. The Company does not require collateral from its customers. Accounts receivable are written off when it is determined that the receivable will not be collected.
Inventories
Inventories include finished products and work-in-process and materials associated with production and are recorded at standard cost, which approximates actual cost, on the FIFO. Inventory costs include those costs directly attributable to products, including all manufacturing overhead, but excluding costs to distribute. Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or market (net realizable value), including appropriate consideration given to obsolescence, excessive inventory levels, product deterioration and other factors.
Impairment of Goodwill, Indefinite-Lived Intangibles and Long-Lived Assets
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of consideration transferred over the estimated fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. We evaluate goodwill for possible impairment at least annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. To analyze
goodwill for impairment, we must assign our goodwill to individual reporting units. Our reporting units for goodwill impairment testing purposes are Americas, EMEA and APAC.
In Fiscal Year 2019, the Company adopted ASU 2017-04, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment, which would eliminate the requirement to calculate the implied fair value of goodwill (i.e., Step 2 of the impairment test) to measure a goodwill impairment charge in the event the fair value of a reporting unit was less than its carrying amount.
For goodwill, we may first make a qualitative assessment of whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying value. The qualitative impairment assessment includes considering various factors including macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors, overall financial performance and any reporting unit specific events. If it is determined through the qualitative assessment that the reporting unit’s fair value is more likely than not greater than its carrying value, the quantitative impairment assessment is not required. If the qualitative assessment indicates it is more likely than not that the reporting unit’s fair value is not greater than its carrying value, we must perform a quantitative impairment assessment. If it is determined a quantitative assessment is necessary, we would compare the fair value of the reporting unit to the respective carrying value, which includes goodwill.
To determine the fair value of a reporting unit as part of our quantitative test, we use the income approach. The income approach uses a discounted cash flow analysis, which involves applying appropriate discount rates to estimated future cash flows based on forecasts of sales, costs and capital requirements. The most significant estimates and assumptions inherent in this approach are the enterprise value based on the estimated present value of future net cash flows the business is expected to generate over a forecasted period and an estimate of the present value of cash flows beyond that period, which is referred to as the terminal value. The estimated present value is calculated using a discount rate known as the weighted-average cost of capital, which accounts for the time value of money and the appropriate degree of risks inherent in the business. We estimate future sales growth using a number of critical factors, including among others, our nature and our history, financial and economic conditions affecting us, our industry and the general company, past results and our current operations and future prospects. Forecasts of future operations are based, in part, on operating results and our expectations as to future market conditions. We deem the discount rate used in our analysis to be commensurate with the underlying uncertainties associated with achieving the estimated cash flows we project. This analysis contains uncertainties because it requires us to make assumptions and to apply judgments to estimate industry economic factors and the profitability of future business strategies. If actual results are not consistent with our estimates and assumptions, we may be exposed to future impairment losses that could be material.
As part of our Fiscal Year 2019 annual goodwill impairment test, we recognized a non-cash impairment loss of $12.6 million on the iGrill goodwill. Excluding the iGrill impairment charge, our qualitative assessment indicated that it was more likely than not that the estimated fair value of each reporting unit exceeded the carrying value of our net assets for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Indefinite-Lived Intangibles
Our trademark, Weber, has been assigned an indefinite life as we currently anticipate that this trademark will contribute cash flows to us indefinitely. We evaluate whether the trademark continues to have an indefinite life on an annual basis. The trademark is reviewed for impairment at least annually and may be reviewed more frequently if indicators of impairment are present. Conditions that may indicate impairment include, but are not limited to, a significant adverse change in customer demand or business climate that could affect the value of an asset, a product recall or an adverse action or assessment by a regulator. We perform a qualitative assessment of whether it is more likely than not that the trademark’s fair value is less than its carrying value. The qualitative impairment assessment includes various factors including macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors, overall financial performance and any reporting unit specific events. Impairment losses are recorded to the extent that the carrying value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset exceeds its fair value. No impairment charge for our trademark was recorded for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Long-Lived Assets
A long-lived asset (including amortizable identifiable intangible assets) or asset group is tested for recoverability whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that its carrying amount may not be recoverable. Conditions that may indicate impairment include, but are not limited to, a significant adverse change in customer demand or business climate that could affect the value of an asset, a product recall or an adverse action or assessment by a regulator. When indicators of impairment are present, the Company evaluates the carrying value of the long-lived assets in relation to the operating performance and future undiscounted cash flows of the underlying assets. The Company adjusts the net book value of the long-lived assets to fair value if the sum of the expected future cash flows is less than book value. No impairment charge for our long-lived assets was recorded for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Equity Based Compensation
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company measures stock-based compensation at fair value on the grant date, or modification date if applicable, of the award. The fair value of RSUs is determined based on the number of shares granted and the quoted market price of the Company’s Class A common stock on the date of grant or modification. For equity awards that vest subject to the satisfaction of service requirements, compensation expense is measured based on the fair value of the award on the date of grant and expense is recognized over the service period of the awards based on the graded-vesting method. We account for forfeitures as they occur. Stock-based compensation is classified in the consolidated statements of income based on the function to which the related services are provided.
Unit-Based Compensation
As described within the Change in Accounting Principle section below, in anticipation of becoming a public company, the Company changed its methodology for valuing the profits interest units and Management Incentive Compensation Plan ("LTIP") awards from the intrinsic value methodology to fair value during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. Prior to the IPO, both the LTIP awards and the profits interest units were liability classified. Both awards were modified from liability-based awards to equity-based awards during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. As such, the awards were remeasured on the modification date, with any changes in fair value recognized in compensation expense. No subsequent remeasurement will be performed unless additional modifications are made to the awards. Compensation expense associated with the awards is recognized over the service period of the awards based on the graded-vesting method.
The value of the LTIP awards prior to modification was based on achievement of performance metrics established by the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors. The value of the awards at the end of each reporting period was dependent upon the Company’s estimates of the underlying performance measures. As the units issued were based on performance metrics, the expense was adjusted for the ultimate number of units expected to be issued as of the end of each reporting period prior to the IPO.
The fair value of the profits interest units was estimated using the Black-Scholes option-pricing valuation model. The determination of fair value using an option-pricing model is affected by the Company’s enterprise value as well as assumptions pertaining to several variables, including expected volatility, the expected term of the unit and the risk-free rate of interest. In the option-pricing model for the Company’s profits interest units, expected volatility was based on an analysis of reported data for a group of guideline publicly traded companies. For this analysis, the Company selected companies with comparable characteristics including enterprise value, risk profiles, and with historical share price information sufficient to meet the expected life of the units. The Company determined expected volatility using an average of the historical volatilities of the guideline group of companies. The expected term of the unit was based on expected exercise patterns of unit holders and the risk-free rate of interest was based on U.S. Treasury yields.
Product Warranty
The Company offers warranties on most of its products. The specific terms and conditions of the warranties offered by the Company vary depending upon the product sold. The Company estimates the costs that may be incurred under its warranty plans and the period for which claims are honored, and records a liability in the amount of such costs at the time product revenue is recognized. Factors that affect the Company’s warranty liability include the number of units sold, the type of products sold, historical and anticipated rates of warranty claims and cost per claim. The Company periodically assesses the adequacy of its recorded warranty liabilities and adjusts the amounts as necessary.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements.
Change in Accounting Principle
Profits interest units and LTIP awards historically were accounted for as liability compensatory awards under ASC 710, Compensation-General, and valued using the intrinsic value method, as permitted by ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, for nonpublic entities. In anticipation of becoming a public company, as defined in ASC 718, the Company changed its methodology for valuing the profits interest units and LTIP awards during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. The change resulted in additional compensation expense of $12.5 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. The effect of the change represents the difference in compensation costs measured using the intrinsic value method and the fair value method. The LTIP awards were not impacted by the change in valuation methods due to the nature of the grant terms and underlying calculation.