ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) summarizes the financial statements from management’s perspective with respect to our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and other factors that may affect actual results. The MD&A is organized in the following sections:
•Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
•Overview
•COVID-19
•Results of Operations
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
•Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
•Critical Accounting Estimates
•Inflation
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements:
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains historical information and forward-looking statements based on information currently available to our management. The forward-looking statements in this report, including those made in this Item 7 (Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations), are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, as amended. These safe harbor provisions encourage reporting companies to provide prospective information to investors. Forward-looking statements can be identified by the use of certain words, such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” “project” and other similar terms and language. We believe the forward-looking statements are reasonable based on currently available information. However, forward-looking statements involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions, whether known or unknown, that could cause our actual results, business, financial condition and cash flows to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements. A discussion of important factors relating to forward-looking statements is included in Item 1A (Risk Factors) of Part I of this Form 10-K. Readers should not unduly rely on the forward-looking statements included in this Form 10-K because such statements speak only to the date they were made. Unless otherwise required by applicable securities laws, we undertake no obligation or duty to update or revise any forward-looking statements contained herein to reflect subsequent events or circumstances or the occurrence of unanticipated events.
Overview:
We have two reportable segments, TTS and Werner Logistics, and we operate in the truckload and logistics sectors of the transportation industry. In the truckload sector, we focus on transporting consumer nondurable products that generally ship more consistently throughout the year. In the logistics sector, besides managing transportation requirements for individual customers, we provide additional sources of truck capacity, alternative modes of transportation, a global delivery network and systems analysis to optimize transportation needs. Our success depends on our ability to efficiently and effectively manage our resources in the delivery of truckload transportation and logistics services to our customers. Resource requirements vary with customer demand, which may be subject to seasonal or general economic conditions. Our ability to adapt to changes in customer transportation requirements is essential to efficiently deploy resources and make capital investments in tractors and trailers (with respect to our TTS segment) or obtain qualified third-party capacity at a reasonable price (with respect to our Werner Logistics segment). We may also be affected by our customers’ financial failures or loss of customer business.
Revenues for our TTS segment operating units (Dedicated and One-Way Truckload) are typically generated on a per-mile basis and also include revenues such as stop charges, loading and unloading charges, equipment detention charges and equipment repositioning charges. To mitigate our risk to fuel price increases, we recover from our customers additional fuel surcharge revenues that generally recoup a majority of the increased fuel costs; however, we cannot assure that current recovery levels will continue in future periods. Because fuel surcharge revenues fluctuate in response to changes in fuel costs, we identify them separately and exclude them from the statistical calculations to provide a more meaningful comparison between periods. The key statistics used to evaluate trucking revenues, net of fuel surcharge, are (i) average revenues per tractor per week, (ii) average percentage of empty miles (miles without trailer cargo), (iii) average trip length (in loaded miles) and (iv) average number of tractors in service. General economic conditions, seasonal trucking industry freight patterns and industry capacity are important factors that impact these statistics. Our TTS segment also generates a small amount of revenues categorized as non-trucking revenues, which consist primarily of the intra-Mexico portion of cross-border shipments delivered to or from Mexico where the TTS segment utilizes a third-party capacity provider. We exclude such revenues from the statistical calculations.
Our most significant resource requirements are company drivers, independent contractors, tractors and trailers. Our financial results are affected by company driver and independent contractor availability and the markets for new and used revenue equipment. We are self-insured for a significant portion of bodily injury, property damage and cargo claims; workers’ compensation claims; and associate health claims (supplemented by premium-based insurance coverage above certain dollar levels). For that reason, our financial results may also be affected by driver safety, medical costs, weather, legal and regulatory environments and insurance coverage costs to protect against catastrophic losses.
The operating ratio is a common industry measure used to evaluate our profitability and that of our TTS segment operating fleets. The operating ratio consists of operating expenses expressed as a percentage of operating revenues. The most significant variable expenses that impact the TTS segment are driver salaries and benefits, fuel, fuel taxes (included in taxes and licenses expense), payments to independent contractors (included in rent and purchased transportation expense), supplies and maintenance and insurance and claims. As discussed further in the comparison of operating results for 2020 to 2019, several industry-wide issues have caused, and could continue to cause, costs to increase in future periods. These issues include shortages of drivers or independent contractors, changing fuel prices, compliance with new or proposed regulations and tightening of the commercial truck liability insurance market. Our main fixed costs include depreciation expense for tractors and trailers and equipment licensing fees (included in taxes and licenses expense). The TTS segment requires substantial cash expenditures for tractor and trailer purchases. We fund these purchases with net cash from operations and financing available under our existing credit facilities, as management deems necessary.
We provide non-trucking services primarily through the four operating units within our Werner Logistics segment (Truckload Logistics, Intermodal, WGL and Final Mile). Unlike our TTS segment, the Werner Logistics segment is less asset-intensive and is instead dependent upon qualified associates, information systems and qualified third-party capacity providers. The largest expense item related to the Werner Logistics segment is the cost of purchased transportation we pay to third-party capacity providers. This expense item is recorded as rent and purchased transportation expense. Other operating expenses consist primarily of salaries, wages and benefits. We evaluate the Werner Logistics segment’s financial performance by reviewing the gross margin percentage (revenues less rent and purchased transportation expenses expressed as a percentage of revenues) and the operating income percentage. The gross margin percentage can be impacted by the rates charged to customers and the costs of securing third-party capacity. We have a mix of contracted long-term rates and variable rates for the cost of third-party capacity, and we cannot assure that our operating results will not be adversely impacted in the future if our ability to obtain qualified third-party capacity providers changes or the rates of such providers increase.
COVID-19:
The COVID-19 pandemic, declared March 11, 2020, has profoundly impacted the U.S. economy. During the pandemic, the transportation industry has been designated by the U.S. government as an essential industry for keeping the U.S. supply chain moving. We are working hard to stay healthy while safely delivering our customers’ freight on time. Our leadership team meets frequently to address issues related to customers, freight, drivers, safety, staffing, human resources, and costs and provides regular updates to all our associates. Throughout our offices and terminal network, we are closely following the safety guidelines set forth by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and World Health Organization (WHO), including hygiene and social distancing. We made and intend to continue making significant investments in personal protective products to keep our associates safe, and over half of our office associates continue working from home. We introduced Werner-specific associate relief plans to provide rapid and needed assistance to those Werner associates affected by the virus.
Over the past several years, we have repositioned Werner to increase our ability to execute through different macroeconomic environments. We believe our freight base, which is heavily weighted toward customers delivering essential products that are continually being restocked in today’s economy, is enabling us to more effectively manage through the difficult economic environment created by the pandemic. Revenues from our top 100 customers were 87% of our total revenues in 2020, and 64% of those revenues were from the discount retail, home improvement retail, food and beverage and consumer packaged goods verticals.
Our results in 2020 reflect lower freight demand in the first half of the year and strong freight market conditions in the second half of the year in a rapidly recovering economy and tight driver market. Despite the challenges created by COVID-19, we believe we proactively managed and adapted our fleet and cost structure without compromising service.
While there remain significant uncertainties related to COVID-19 and its effect on the economy, we believe that demand for our
services will be strong in 2021. We performed a customer industry and financial risk assessment on our 100 largest customers shortly after the pandemic declaration. While our financial risk has increased since the pandemic began, we believe we have a relatively lower level of financial risk with the predominance of financially stronger companies in our customer base as well as a lower overall industry risk due to our focus on industries delivering essential products.
At the end of 2020, we believe we are well positioned with a strong balance sheet and sufficient liquidity. Our debt is low at $200 million, or a net debt ratio of 0.3 times earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 31, 2020. We had available liquidity of $278 million, considering cash on hand and available credit facilities of $249 million. We also have sufficient cushion with our two debt covenants. We currently plan to continue paying our quarterly dividend, which we have paid quarterly since 1987. This cash outlay currently results in slightly more than $6 million per quarter. Net capital expenditures in 2021 currently are expected to be in the range of $275 million to $300 million.
We do not currently expect the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), enacted in March 2020, to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. Under the CARES Act, we deferred payment of certain employer payroll taxes for 2020, with 50% due December 31, 2021 and 50% due December 31, 2022. We also expect to utilize a provision allowing accelerated income tax depreciation for certain assets, which will not impact our effective tax rate. There have been a number of regulatory actions and waivers related to the COVID-19 pandemic, in an effort to keep the supply chain moving. We do not currently expect these collective changes to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Results of Operations:
The following table sets forth the Consolidated Statements of Income in dollars and as a percentage of total operating revenues and the percentage increase or decrease in the dollar amounts of those items compared to the prior year.
The following tables set forth the operating revenues, operating expenses and operating income for the TTS segment and certain statistical data regarding our TTS segment operations, as well as statistical data for the One-Way Truckload and Dedicated operating units within TTS.
(1)Net of fuel surcharge revenues
The following tables set forth the Werner Logistics segment’s revenues, rent and purchased transportation expense, gross margin, other operating expenses (primarily salaries, wages and benefits expense) and operating income, as well as certain statistical data regarding the Werner Logistics segment.
2020 Compared to 2019
Operating Revenues
Operating revenues decreased 3.7% in 2020 compared to 2019. When comparing 2020 to 2019, TTS segment revenues decreased $66.6 million, or 3.5%. Revenues for the Werner Logistics segment decreased $19.9 million or 4.1%.
During the first two months of 2020, freight demand in our One-Way Truckload fleet was seasonally normal and slightly below the same period in 2019. We experienced short-lived strengthened demand immediately following the COVID-19 pandemic declaration by WHO on March 11, which weakened in early second quarter 2020 due to some customers temporarily closing or significantly curtailing their businesses. In the second half of 2020, after businesses began to reopen, freight demand was strong and improved throughout the period. In our Dedicated fleet, freight demand was strong throughout 2020, as approximately three-quarters of our Dedicated revenues are with essential products customers. Freight demand in One-Way Truckload has continued to be stronger than normal so far in 2021.
Trucking revenues, net of fuel surcharge, increased 0.9% in 2020 compared to 2019 due to a 3.7% increase in average revenues per tractor per week, net of fuel surcharge, partially offset by a 2.7% decrease in the average number of tractors in service. We attribute the increase in average revenues per tractor per week to higher average revenues per total mile. The increase in average revenues per total mile was due to relative strength in Dedicated pricing and a stronger than expected peak season for the One-Way Truckload fleet. We currently expect average revenues per total mile for the One-Way Truckload fleet to remain strong for the first half of 2021 and to increase in a range of 7% to 10% when compared to the first half of 2020, and we expect Dedicated average revenues per truck per week to increase in a range of 3% to 5% in the first half of 2021 compared to the first half of 2020.
The average number of tractors in service in the TTS segment decreased 2.7% to 7,757 in 2020 compared to 7,969 in 2019. We ended 2020 with 7,830 tractors in the TTS segment, a year-over-year decrease of 170 trucks. The decrease in the average number of tractors in service was anticipated during the early stages of COVID-19 as (i) we aligned our fleet to adjust to reduced demand, (ii) we had delayed implementations of Dedicated fleet start-ups, and (iii) we expected lower numbers of students at driving schools due to COVID-19 social distancing requirements and state licensing cutbacks, which limits the number of placement drivers entering our career track program. Our number of tractors in service increased during the second half of 2020 as (i) demand strengthened, (ii) Dedicated fleets were implemented, and (iii) driving schools adapted to operations during the pandemic. Our Dedicated unit ended 2020 with 4,945 trucks (or 63% of our total TTS segment fleet) compared to 4,630 trucks at the end of 2019. We currently expect our fleet size at the end of 2021 to be in a range of a 1% to 3% higher when compared to the fleet size at year-end 2020. We cannot predict whether future driver shortages, if any, will adversely affect our ability to maintain our fleet size. If such a driver market shortage were to occur, it could result in a fleet size reduction, and our results of operations could be adversely affected.
Trucking fuel surcharge revenues decreased 32.3% to $158.6 million in 2020 from $234.4 million in 2019 because of lower average fuel prices in 2020. These revenues represent collections from customers for the increase in fuel and fuel-related expenses, including the fuel component of our independent contractor cost (recorded as rent and purchased transportation expense) and fuel taxes (recorded in taxes and licenses expense), when diesel fuel prices rise. Conversely, when fuel prices decrease, fuel surcharge revenues decrease. To lessen the effect of fluctuating fuel prices on our margins, we collect fuel
surcharge revenues from our customers for the cost of diesel fuel and taxes in excess of specified base fuel price levels according to terms in our customer contracts. Fuel surcharge rates generally adjust weekly based on an independent U.S. Department of Energy fuel price survey which is released every Monday. Our fuel surcharge programs are designed to (i) recoup higher fuel costs from customers when fuel prices rise and (ii) provide customers with the benefit of lower fuel costs when fuel prices decline. These programs generally enable us to recover a majority, but not all, of the fuel price increases. The remaining portion is generally not recoverable because it results from empty and out-of-route miles (which are not billable to customers) and truck idle time. Fuel prices that change rapidly in short time periods also impact our recovery because the surcharge rate in most programs only changes once per week.
Werner Logistics revenues are generated by its four operating units and exclude revenues for full truckload shipments transferred to the TTS segment, which are recorded as trucking revenues by the TTS segment. Werner Logistics also recorded revenue and brokered freight expense of $0.1 million in 2020 and $0.2 million in 2019 for Intermodal drayage movements performed by the TTS segment (also recorded as trucking revenues by the TTS segment), and these transactions between reporting segments are eliminated in consolidation. Werner Logistics revenues decreased 4.1% to $469.8 million in 2020 from $489.7 million in 2019 due primarily to lower Truckload Logistics revenues (61% of total logistics revenues). The Werner Logistics gross margin dollars decreased 20.1% to $62.5 million in 2020 from $78.2 million in 2019, and the Werner Logistics gross margin percentage decreased to 13.3% in 2020 from 16.0% in 2019. The Werner Logistics operating income percentage decreased to 1.3% in 2020 from 3.3% in 2019, as the percentage decline in gross profit exceeded the percentage decline in other operating expenses. The gross margin decrease was due primarily to a softer freight market in the first half of 2020 and the unprecedented large and rapid rise in spot truckload rates in the second half of 2020 which significantly increased the cost of capacity for contractual brokerage shipments. During third quarter 2020, we addressed customer pricing for many of our contractual brokerage accounts, which resulted in sequential improvement from third quarter 2020 to fourth quarter 2020 in both our gross margin percentage and operating margin percentage.
Operating Expenses
Our operating ratio (operating expenses expressed as a percentage of operating revenues) was 90.4% in 2020 compared to 90.8% in 2019. Expense items that impacted the overall operating ratio are described on the following pages. The tables on pages 16 through 18 show the Consolidated Statements of Income in dollars and as a percentage of total operating revenues and the percentage increase or decrease in the dollar amounts of those items compared to the prior year, as well as the operating ratios, operating margins and certain statistical information for our two reportable segments, TTS and Werner Logistics.
Salaries, wages and benefits decreased $22.6 million or 2.8% in 2020 compared to 2019 and increased 0.4% as a percentage of operating revenues. The lower dollar amount of salaries, wages and benefits expense in 2020 was due primarily to lower fringe benefits and having fewer placement drivers, both of which were impacted by COVID-19. Our workers’ compensation costs improved, and we incurred lower group health insurance costs which we believe is a temporary effect of COVID-19. These decreases were partially offset by higher driver pay rates in 2020. Non-driver salaries, wages and benefits in our non-trucking Werner Logistics segment decreased 11.6% from 2020 to 2019.
We renewed our workers’ compensation insurance coverage on April 1, 2020 and assumed additional risk exposure by increasing our self-insurance retention from $1.0 million to $2.0 million per claim as of April 1, 2020. As a result of the higher self-insured retention, our workers’ compensation insurance premiums for the policy year beginning April 2020 are $0.8 million lower than the premiums for the previous policy year.
The competitive driver recruiting market further intensified throughout 2020, as the improving freight market in the second half of the year caused increased competition for the finite number of experienced drivers that meet our hiring standards. Several ongoing market factors persisted including a declining number of, and increased competition for, driver training school graduates, particularly considering COVID-19 constraints, aging truck driver demographics and increased truck safety regulations. We continued to take significant actions to strengthen our driver recruiting and retention to make Werner a preferred choice for the best drivers, including raising driver pay, maintaining a new truck and trailer fleet, purchasing best-in-class safety features for all new trucks, investing in our driver training school network and collaborating with customers to improve or eliminate unproductive freight. These efforts continued to have positive results on our driver retention. In January 2021, we implemented driver pay increases of approximately $10 million annually in our One-Way Truckload fleet, and we are implementing pay increases as needed in Dedicated. We expect our total TTS driver pay increases to total $16 million to $18 million in 2021. We are unable to predict whether we will experience future driver shortages or maintain our current driver retention rates. If such a driver shortage were to occur and additional driver pay rate increases became necessary to attract and retain drivers, our results of operations would be negatively impacted to the extent that we could not obtain corresponding freight rate increases.
Fuel decreased $78.8 million or 33.4% in 2020 compared to 2019 and decreased 3.0% as a percentage of operating revenues due to lower average diesel fuel prices and approximately 4.5 million fewer company truck miles in 2020. Average diesel fuel prices, excluding fuel taxes, for the full year 2020 were 69 cents per gallon lower than the full year 2019, a 34% decrease.
We continue to employ measures to improve our fuel mpg such as (i) limiting truck engine idle time, (ii) optimizing the speed, weight and specifications of our equipment and (iii) implementing mpg-enhancing equipment changes to our fleet including new trucks, more aerodynamic truck features, idle reduction systems, trailer tire inflation systems, trailer skirts and automated manual transmissions to reduce our fuel gallons purchased. However, fuel savings from mpg improvement is partially offset by higher depreciation expense and the additional cost of diesel exhaust fluid. Although our fuel management programs require significant capital investment and research and development, we intend to continue these and other environmentally conscious initiatives, including our active participation as an EPA SmartWay Transport Partner. The SmartWay Transport Partnership is a national voluntary program developed by the EPA and freight industry representatives to reduce greenhouse gases and air pollution and promote cleaner, more efficient ground freight transportation.
Through February 19, the average diesel fuel price per gallon in 2021 was approximately 11 cents lower than the average diesel fuel price per gallon in the same period of 2020 and approximately 9 cents higher than the average for first quarter 2020.
Shortages of fuel, increases in fuel prices and petroleum product rationing can have a material adverse effect on our operations and profitability. We are unable to predict whether fuel price levels will increase or decrease in the future or the extent to which fuel surcharges will be collected from customers. As of December 31, 2020, we had no derivative financial instruments to reduce our exposure to fuel price fluctuations.
Supplies and maintenance decreased $7.1 million or 3.9% in 2020 compared to 2019 and was flat as a percentage of operating revenues. The lower dollar amount of supplies and maintenance expense was due primarily to lower travel and entertainment costs resulting from COVID-19 restrictions, as well as lower driver and placement driver-related expenses.
Insurance and claims increased $20.9 million or 23.5% in 2020 compared to 2019 and increased 1.0% as a percentage of operating revenues, due primarily to higher expense for new large dollar claims and higher liability insurance premiums of $3.8 million. In January 2020, one of our trucks was involved in a serious accident. We self-insure for the first $10.0 million of liability coverage for this policy period, and have appropriate excess liability coverage with insurance carriers above that amount. As a result, we recorded $10.0 million of insurance and claims expense in 2020 for this accident. We also incurred insurance and claims expense of $4.9 million in 2020 and $3.9 million in 2019 for accrued interest related to a previously-disclosed adverse jury verdict rendered on May 17, 2018, which we are appealing (see Note 9 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements set forth in Part II of this Form 10-K). Interest is accrued at $0.4 million per month, until such time as the outcome of our appeal is finalized, excluding the months of June and July 2019 when the plaintiffs requested an extension of time to respond to our appeal. The majority of our insurance and claims expense results from our claim experience and claim development under our self-insurance program; the remainder results from insurance premiums for claims in excess of our self-insured limits.
We renewed our liability insurance policies on August 1, 2020 and are now responsible for the first $10.0 million per claim on all claims with no annual aggregates. For the policy year that began August 1, 2019, we were responsible for the first $3.0 million per claim with an annual $6.0 million aggregate for claims between $3.0 million and $5.0 million and an additional $5.0 million deductible per claim for each claim between $5.0 million and $10.0 million. We maintain liability insurance coverage with insurance carriers in excess of the $10.0 million per claim. Our liability insurance premiums for the policy year that began August 1, 2020 are $7.8 million higher than premiums for the previous policy year.
Depreciation increased $13.8 million or 5.5% in 2020 compared to 2019 and increased 1.0% as a percentage of operating revenues. During first quarter 2020, we changed the estimated life of certain trucks expected to be sold in 2020 to more rapidly depreciate these trucks to their estimated residual values due to the weak used truck market. These trucks continued to depreciate at the same higher rate per truck until the trucks were sold. The effect of this change in accounting estimate increased 2020 depreciation expense by $9.6 million. Information technology and communication infrastructure upgrades also added to the higher depreciation expense in 2020.
The average age of our truck fleet remains low by industry standards and was 2.0 years as of December 31, 2020, and the average age of our trailers was 4.0 years. We continued to invest in new trucks and trailers and our terminals in 2020 to improve our driver experience, increase operational efficiency and more effectively manage our maintenance, safety and fuel costs. We currently intend to maintain the average age of our truck and trailer fleet at or near current levels.
Rent and purchased transportation expense decreased $30.3 million or 5.5% in 2020 compared to 2019 and decreased 0.4% as a percentage of operating revenues. Rent and purchased transportation expense consists mostly of payments to third-party capacity providers in the Werner Logistics segment and other non-trucking operations and payments to independent contractors in the TTS segment. The payments to third-party capacity providers generally vary depending on changes in the volume of
services generated by the Werner Logistics segment. Werner Logistics rent and purchased transportation expense decreased $4.2 million as a result of lower logistics revenues and increased to 86.7% of Werner Logistics revenues in 2020 from 84.0% in 2019, due primarily to the unprecedented large and rapid rise in spot truckload rates in the second half of 2020, which significantly increased the cost of capacity for contractual brokerage shipments.
Rent and purchased transportation expense for the TTS segment decreased $26.1 million in 2020 compared to 2019. This decrease is due primarily to lower payments to independent contractors in 2020 compared to 2019, resulting from 15.1 million fewer independent contractor miles driven in 2020. Lower average diesel fuel prices in 2020 also resulted in a lower per-mile settlement rate for independent contractors. Independent contractor miles as a percentage of total miles were 8.3% in 2020 and 9.9% in 2019. Because independent contractors supply their own tractors and drivers and are responsible for their operating expenses, the decrease in independent contractor miles as a percentage of total miles shifted costs from the rent and purchased transportation category to other expense categories, including (i) salaries, wages and benefits, (ii) fuel, (iii) depreciation, (iv) supplies and maintenance and (v) taxes and licenses.
Challenging operating conditions continue to make independent contractor recruitment and retention difficult. Such conditions include inflationary cost increases that are the responsibility of independent contractors and a shortage of financing available to independent contractors for equipment purchases. Historically, we have been able to add company tractors and recruit additional company drivers to offset any decrease in the number of independent contractors. If a shortage of independent contractors and company drivers occurs, further increases in per-mile settlement rates (for independent contractors) and driver pay rates (for company drivers) may become necessary to attract and retain these drivers. This could negatively affect our results of operations to the extent that we would not be able to obtain corresponding freight rate increases.
Other operating expenses increased $11.2 million in 2020 compared to 2019 and increased 0.5% as a percentage of operating revenues. Gains on sales of assets (primarily used trucks and trailers) are reflected as a reduction of other operating expenses and are reported net of sales-related expenses (which include costs to prepare the equipment for sale). Gains on sales of assets were $11.3 million in 2020, compared to $21.6 million in 2019, including $3.4 million from sales of real estate in 2019. In 2020, we sold more trucks and fewer trailers than in 2019. We realized significantly lower average gains per truck and slightly lower average gains per trailer sold in 2020 compared to 2019. We experienced low demand for our used equipment in the first half of 2020. Pricing in the market for our used trucks began to improve in third quarter 2020 and continued to improve through the end of 2020. We currently expect gains on sales of equipment in 2021 to improve and to be in the range of $12 million to $15 million. Increased costs associated with software consultant services also contributed to the increase in other operating expenses from 2019 to 2020.
Other Expense (Income)
Other expense (income) decreased $0.8 million in 2020 compared to 2019. Interest expense decreased $2.6 million in 2020 compared to 2019 due to lower average outstanding debt and was partially offset by lower interest income due to lower variable interest rates in 2020.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense increased $0.7 million in 2020 compared to 2019, due to slightly higher pre-tax income. Our effective income tax rate was 24.8% for both 2020 and 2019. We currently estimate our full year 2021 effective income tax rate to be approximately 24.5% to 25.5%.
2019 Compared to 2018
For a comparison of the Company’s results of operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2018, see Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission on February 27, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources:
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated cash flow from operations of $445.9 million, compared to $426.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase in net cash provided by operating activities primarily resulted from deferring payment of 2020 employer payroll taxes totaling approximately $29.3 million as permitted under the CARES Act, partially offset by higher income tax payments. We were able to make net capital expenditures, repay debt, pay dividends, and repurchase stock with the net cash provided by operating activities and existing cash balances, supplemented by short-term borrowings under our existing credit facilities.
Net cash used in investing activities decreased to $263.3 million during 2020 from $272.3 million during 2019. Net property additions (primarily revenue equipment) were $266.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $283.9 million during the same period of 2019. We currently estimate net capital expenditures (primarily revenue equipment) in 2021 to be in the range of $275 million to $300 million. We intend to fund these net capital expenditures through cash flow from operations and financing available under our existing credit facilities, if necessary. As of December 31, 2020, we were committed to property and equipment purchases of approximately $131.3 million.
Net financing activities used $186.0 million in 2020 and used $155.2 million in 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we borrowed $40.0 million of short-term debt and repaid $140.0 million of debt. Our outstanding debt at December 31, 2020 totaled $200.0 million. During 2019, we borrowed $275.0 million and repaid $100.0 million of long-term debt. We paid dividends of $24.9 million in 2020 and $286.2 million in 2019, including the $261.1 million ($3.75 per share) special dividend in 2019 and quarterly dividends in both years.
Financing activities for 2020 also included common stock repurchases of 1,482,992 shares at a cost of $56.5 million. 1,300,000 shares were repurchased in 2019 at a cost of $42.3 million. The Company has repurchased, and may continue to repurchase, shares of the Company’s common stock. The timing and amount of such purchases depends upon economic and stock market conditions and other factors. On May 14, 2019, the Board of Directors approved a new stock repurchase program under which the Company is authorized to repurchase up to 5,000,000 shares of its common stock. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had purchased 2,182,992 shares pursuant to the new authorization and had 2,817,008 shares remaining available for repurchase.
Management believes our financial position at December 31, 2020 is strong. As of December 31, 2020, we had $29.3 million of cash and cash equivalents and nearly $1.2 billion of stockholders’ equity. Cash is invested primarily in government portfolio money market funds. As of December 31, 2020, we had a total of $500.0 million of borrowing capacity under two credit facilities (see Note 5 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8 of Part II of this Form 10-K for information regarding our credit agreements as of December 31, 2020), of which we had borrowed $200.0 million. Subsequent to the end of the year, in January 2021, we repaid $25.0 million of debt. The remaining $300.0 million of credit available under these facilities at December 31, 2020 is reduced by the $50.9 million in stand-by letters of credit under which we are obligated. These stand-by letters of credit are primarily required as security for insurance policies. We believe our liquid assets, cash generated from operating activities, and borrowing capacity under our credit facilities will provide sufficient funds for our planned operating and capital needs for the foreseeable future.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments:
The following table sets forth our contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of December 31, 2020.
Payments Due by Period
See the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 8 of Part II of this Form 10-K for information regarding our credit agreements (Note 5), our leasing arrangements (Note 3), and our purchase commitments (Note 9). As of December 31, 2020, we had recorded a $2.4 million liability for unrecognized tax benefits. We are unable to reasonably determine when the $2.4 million categorized as “period unknown” will be settled.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements:
In 2020, we did not have any arrangements that meet the definition of an off-balance sheet arrangement.
Critical Accounting Estimates:
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the (i) reported amount of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and (ii) reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis as events and circumstances change, utilizing historical experience, consultation with experts and other methods considered reasonable in the particular circumstances. Actual results could differ from those estimates and may significantly impact our results of operations from period to period. It is also possible that materially different amounts would be reported if we used different estimates or assumptions.
Estimates of accrued liabilities for insurance and claims for bodily injury, property damage and workers’ compensation is a critical accounting estimate that requires us to make significant judgments and estimates and affects our financial statements. The accruals for bodily injury, property damage and workers’ compensation (current and non-current) are recorded at the estimated ultimate payment amounts and are based upon individual case estimates and actuarial estimates of loss development for reported losses and incurred-but-not-reported losses using loss development factors based upon past experience. In order to determine the loss development factors, we make judgments relating to the comparability of historical claims to current claims. These judgments consider the nature, frequency, severity, and age of claims, and industry, regulatory, and company-specific trends impacting the development of claims. An independent actuary reviews our calculation of the undiscounted self-insurance reserves for bodily injury and property damage claims and workers’ compensation claims at year-end. The actual cost to settle our self-insured claim liabilities can differ from our reserve estimates because of a number of uncertainties, including the inherent difficulty in estimating the severity of a claim and the potential amount to defend and settle a claim.
Inflation:
Inflation may impact our operating costs. A prolonged inflation period could cause rises in interest rates, fuel, wages and other costs. These inflationary increases could adversely affect our results of operations unless freight rates could be increased correspondingly. However, the effect of inflation has been minimal over the past three years.