ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The discussion below focuses on the factors affecting our consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 and financial condition at December 31, 2020 and 2019 and, where appropriate, factors that may affect our future financial performance, unless stated otherwise. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements, notes to the consolidated financial statements and selected consolidated financial data.
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, or MD&A, is presented in the following sections:
•2020 Highlights and Year in Review
•Subsequent Events
•Recent Events
•Segments
•Results of Operations
•Application of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
•Recently Adopted and New Accounting Standards
•Liquidity, Capital Resources and Cash Flows
2020 Highlights and Year in Review
Our Company’s management regularly monitors key performance indicators to measure our current performance and project future performance. A recurring, comprehensive list is included by segment within the Results of Operations section of this Management's Discussion and Analysis. Management believes the following key performance indicators by segment were important to our overall performance in 2020 as they provide enhanced information and data underlying our financial results. See “COVID-19 Pandemic Response and Impact” included in “Recent Events” below for further information regarding how COVID-19 has impacted the Company’s segments.
Key Performance Indicators
Fleet Solutions
•Average number of vehicles serviced increased 9 percent from 2019 to 15.3 million for 2020, primarily related to growth in our worldwide customer base. As of December 31, 2020, vehicles serviced totaled 15.8 million.
•The average U.S. price per gallon of fuel was $2.29 during 2020, an 18 percent decrease as compared to 2019.
•Fuel transactions processed decreased 6 percent from 2019 to 576.0 million in 2020. We have seen strong over-the-road trucking volumes, with offsetting significant volume declines in small to mid-size North American and international fleets as a result of the impacts of COVID-19.
•Payment processing transactions, which represents the total number of purchases made by fleets that have a payment processing relationship with WEX, decreased 8 percent from 2019 to 463.9 million in 2020.
Travel and Corporate Solutions
•Payment solutions purchase volume, which represents the total dollar value of all WEX issued transactions that use WEX corporate card products and virtual card products, was $20.9 billion in 2020, a 47 percent decrease from 2019, driven primarily by the decline in worldwide travel and tourism as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. This decrease was partly offset by improved volumes in our corporate payments portion of the segment.
Health and Employee Benefit Solutions
•Average number of SaaS accounts, which represents the number of active Consumer-Directed Health, COBRA, and billing accounts on our U.S. SaaS platforms, grew 12% to 14.5 million in 2020 from 12.9 million in 2019.
•Purchase volume, which represents the total US dollar value of all transactions where interchange is earned by WEX, decreased $400.9 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, driven primarily by the impact of COVID-19 on the segment.
Other Performance Metrics
•Credit loss expense in the Fleet Solutions segment decreased 5 percent to $56.6 million during 2020, as compared to $59.8 million during 2019. Our credit losses were 16.7 basis points of fuel expenditures for 2020, as compared to 15.1 basis points of fuel expenditures for 2019, an increase of 11 percent primarily due to higher losses in the small fleet over-the-road business as compared to 2019.
•We recorded an income tax benefit of $20.6 million for 2020 as compared to an income tax provision of $61.2 million for 2019. Our effective tax rate was a 6.8 percent benefit for 2020 as compared to a 28.3 percent provision for 2019. The Company's effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was impacted by no income tax benefit being recorded for i) operating losses generated from WEX Latin America during the current year through the date of sale, ii) the loss on sale of WEX Latin America, and iii) the legal settlement. These losses were included as part of the current year loss and determined to be either non-deductible for income tax purposes or required a valuation allowance.
Subsequent Events
HSA Purchase Agreement
On February 11, 2021, the Company entered into an asset purchase agreement with Bell Bank to acquire certain HSA assets, including the custodial rights for certain HSAs from Bell Bank's HealthcareBank division, the custodian bank for customers of the U.S. Health business. We believe the acquisition will allow the Company to better capture the economics from those HSAs, leverage our investments to provide customers with market-leading HSA solutions, and align with our growth strategy. The transaction is expected to close in the second quarter of 2021, subject to regulatory approvals and other customary closing conditions.
Pursuant to the purchase agreement, the Company will pay Bell Bank initial cash consideration of approximately $200 million, and two additional deferred cash payments of $25 million in July 2023 and January 2024, contingent upon closing of the transaction. The agreement also includes potential additional consideration payable, over the ten years subsequent to the closing date, that is contingent on, and calculated based on, any future increases in the Federal Funds rate. Potential additional consideration may not exceed $225 million in the aggregate over the ten year period and will not adversely impact the Company’s adjusted net income or financial position as net revenues earned on the acquired HSA assets will increase in the event the Federal Funds rate increases in the future.
Notes Redemption Notice
On February 11, 2021, the Company provided irrevocable notice to The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., the trustee for the Notes, of its intent to redeem its outstanding $400 million 4.75% Senior Secured Notes due February 1, 2023 on March 15, 2021. The redemption price of the Notes is $400 million plus accrued and unpaid interest through the proposed redemption date. The redemption is expected to be funded from cash.
Recent Events
2020 Acquisition/Legal Settlement
On January 24, 2020, the Company entered into a purchase agreement to purchase eNett, a leading provider of B2B payment solutions to the travel industry, and Optal, a company that specializes in optimizing B2B payments transactions, subject to certain working capital and other adjustments as described in the purchase agreement. The parties’ obligations to consummate the acquisition were subject to customary closing conditions, including the absence of a Material Adverse Effect (as defined in the purchase agreement between WEX, eNett and Optal, among others). The Company subsequently concluded that the COVID-19 pandemic and conditions arising in connection with it had a Material Adverse Effect on the businesses, which was disproportionate to the effect on others in the relevant industry. Because of this Material Adverse Effect, WEX formally advised eNett and Optal on May 4, 2020 that it was not required to close the transaction pursuant to the terms of the original purchase agreement. On May 11, 2020, the shareholders of eNett and Optal each initiated separate legal proceedings in the High Court of Justice of England and Wales in the United Kingdom against the Company seeking a declaration that no
Material Adverse Effect had occurred and an order for specific performance of WEX's obligations under the purchase agreement. From September 21, 2020 through September 29, 2020, a London court held a trial of certain preliminary issues, and handed down its judgment on October 12, 2020. The Company and the claimants each sought permission to appeal certain portions of the Court’s judgment.
On December 15, 2020, the Company entered into a Deed of Settlement (the “Settlement Deed”) with eNett, Optal and the other parties thereto, providing for among other things, (i) the dismissal with prejudice of the legal proceedings and appeals described above, (ii) amendment of the original purchase agreement and (iii) the release of all claims capable of arising out of, or in any way connected with or relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, but excluding any claims arising under the amended purchase agreement. The closing of the acquisition occurred concurrent with the execution of the Settlement Deed on December 15, 2020. The Amended Purchase Agreement provided for, among other things, a reduction of the aggregate purchase price for the acquisition to $577.5 million (subject to certain working capital and other adjustments as described in the Amended Purchase Agreement, which resulted in a total cash payment of $615.4 million), which the Company paid entirely with cash on hand. The Company determined the aggregate purchase price represents consideration paid for the businesses acquired and for the legal settlement described above. The preliminary fair value of the businesses acquired was estimated to be $415.0 million using a discounted cash flow analysis and guideline transaction method. Since the Company was not able to reliably estimate the fair value of the legal settlement, the residual value of $162.5 million has been allocated to the legal settlement, which has been included in legal settlement expense in the consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Private Placement
On July 1, 2020, the Company closed on a private placement with an affiliate of Warburg Pincus LLC, pursuant to which the Company issued $310 million in aggregate principal amount of its senior Convertible Notes due 2027 and 577,254 shares of the Company’s common stock, with gross proceeds in respect of the common stock of $90 million, reflecting a purchase price of $155.91 per share. The issuance of the Convertible Notes provided the Company with net proceeds of approximately $299 million after original issue discount.
The Convertible Notes, which are unsecured, have a seven-year term and mature on July 15, 2027, unless either converted, repurchased or redeemed. The Convertible Notes bear interest at a rate of 6.5% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears, with the first interest payment due January 15, 2021. At WEX's option, interest is either payable in cash, through accretion to the principal amount of the Convertible Notes, or a combination of cash and accretion.
The Convertible Notes may be converted at any time at the option of holders of the Convertible Notes, based on an initial conversion price of $200 per share, subject to certain adjustments. Conversions of Convertible Notes may be settled in shares of WEX common stock, cash, or a combination thereof at WEX's election. WEX will have the right, at any time following the third anniversary of closing, to redeem the Convertible Notes in whole or in part if the closing price of WEX's common stock is at least 200% of the conversion price of the Convertible Notes for 20 out of 30 days prior to the time WEX delivers a redemption notice (including at least one of the five trading days immediately preceding the last day of such 30 day period), subject to the right of holders of the Convertible Notes to convert their Convertible Notes prior to the redemption date. In the event of certain fundamental change transactions, including certain change of control transactions and delisting events, holders of Convertible Notes will have the right to require WEX to repurchase its Convertible Notes in accordance with the terms of the Convertible Notes at a repurchase price equal to the sum of (i) 105% of then accreted principal amount of the Convertible Notes to be repurchased, plus accrued interest, and (ii) the sum of the present values of the scheduled remaining payments of interest had such notes remained outstanding through the maturity date of the Convertible Notes.
The indenture includes a debt incurrence covenant that restricts the Company from incurring certain indebtedness, including disqualified stock and preferred stock issued by the Company or its subsidiaries, subject to customary exceptions, including if, after giving effect to any such proposed incurrence or issuance, and the receipt and application of the proceeds therefrom, the ratio of (x) the Company’s consolidated EBITDA for the most recent four fiscal quarters for which financial statements are available, to (y) the Company’s consolidated fixed charges for such period would be greater than 1.5:1.0. The indenture contains other customary terms and covenants, including customary events of default. The Convertible Notes are the Company’s general senior unsecured obligations and rank equally with all of the Company’s existing and future senior indebtedness. The Convertible Notes are effectively subordinated to all of the Company’s secured indebtedness, including borrowings under the 2016 Credit Agreement, as amended, to the extent of the value of the collateral securing such indebtedness, and are structurally subordinated to all existing and future indebtedness and other liabilities of the Company’s subsidiaries.
Sale of Subsidiary
On September 30, 2020, the Company sold its wholly-owned subsidiary UNIK S.A. Under the conditions of the sale
agreement, the Company was required to make a payment to the buyer. The Company wrote-off the associated assets and liabilities of this entity as of the date of sale and recorded a pre-tax loss on sale of subsidiary of $46.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The loss on sale of subsidiary is not deductible for tax purposes.
COVID-19 Pandemic Response and Impact
A novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) was first identified in Wuhan, China in January 2020, and subsequently declared a global pandemic by the World Health Organization on March 11, 2020. During the first quarter of 2020, the Company took a number of precautionary steps to safeguard its business and employees from the effects of COVID-19 including restricting business travel, temporarily closing offices and canceling participation in various industry events. Additionally, in an effort to rescale the business and safeguard shareholder value in this unprecedented operating environment, we took certain measures to both permanently reduce headcount and furlough employees across our worldwide offices where necessary. Aside from the employee furloughs, which ended during the third quarter of 2020, the precautionary steps described above largely remain in force as the Company continues to closely track and assess the evolving effect of the pandemic. The Company is actively managing its responses in collaboration with its employees, customers and suppliers.
The spread of COVID-19, and conditions arising in connection with it, including restrictions on businesses and individuals and wider changes in business and customer behavior, had a negative impact on the Company’s businesses during the year ended December 31, 2020. While we have seen varying levels of improvement since the lowest volume levels, we expect a slow and steady volume recovery will continue across our business. Specific to our Travel and Corporate Solutions segment, which has been the most severely impacted, while volumes are slowly improving as leisure travel begins to slowly improve from its lowest levels, we believe that COVID-19 has structurally changed the travel market and we expect these disruptions to have a continuing impact on the Company’s Travel and Corporate Solutions segment operating results. However, the pace and breadth of the vaccine rollout as well as the potential for government stimulus will be critical factors in determining how quickly our existing customer activity across all three segments will rebound. Given the current pace of vaccine distribution as well as our own customer mix, we believe customer activity will increase in the second half of the year, but likely more fully in the fourth quarter. The following describes these impacts by reportable segment:
Fleet Solutions - The Fleet Solutions segment has seen both positive and negative impacts as a result of the world's response to COVID-19, with the negative impacts significantly outweighing the positive. Firstly, 2020 revenue has significantly decreased as a result of lower transaction prices driven by a decrease in the average U.S. price per gallon of fuel as compared to 2019. Volumes have also negatively impacted the segment's results during 2020 as compared to 2019 due to lower volumes in the North American fleet and international portions of the business. Partly offsetting these negatively impacted areas of the business were volume trends in our over-the-road trucking business, which have increased relative to prior year due to increased shipping to individuals during the U.S. lockdown, but represent a smaller portion of the overall segment.
Travel and Corporate Solutions - Of the Company's segments, Travel and Corporate Solutions has been the most severely impacted by the pandemic and the corresponding decline in worldwide travel and tourism. Purchase volume in the travel portion of the segment was significantly lower in 2020 as compared to 2019. In contrast, the corporate payments portion of the segment has seen an increase in purchase volumes during 2020, which is largely attributable to the ongoing migration of businesses to virtual payments and increasing usage of our accounts payable products. These improvements, however, represent a smaller percentage of the total segment.
Health and Employee Benefit Solutions - The Health and Employee Benefit Solutions' volume was most challenged by the pandemic during the second quarter of 2020 as a result of cardholders deferring non-essential medical treatments when U.S. lockdown restrictions were most severe. However, by the fourth quarter of 2020, the U.S. Health business saw a slight increase in purchase volumes relative to the same period in the prior year.
We are closely tracking and assessing the evolving effect of the pandemic and are actively managing our responses in collaboration with our employees, customers and suppliers.
Segments
WEX operates in three reportable segments: Fleet Solutions, Travel and Corporate Solutions, and Health and Employee Benefit Solutions. Our Fleet Solutions segment provides payment, transaction processing and information management services specifically designed for the needs of commercial and government fleets. Our Travel and Corporate Solutions segment focuses on the complex payment environment of business-to-business payments, providing customers with payment processing solutions for their payment and transaction monitoring needs. Our Health and Employee Benefit Solutions segment provides a SaaS platform for consumer directed healthcare payments, and provided payroll related benefits to customers in Brazil until September 30, 2020, the date of sale of our former subsidiary UNIK S.A.
Results of Operations
The Company does not allocate foreign currency gains and losses, financing interest expense, unrealized and realized gains and losses on financial instruments, income taxes, adjustments attributable to non-controlling interests and non-cash adjustments related to our tax receivable agreement to our operating segments as management believes these items are unpredictable and can obscure a segment's operating trends and results. In addition, the Company does not allocate certain corporate expenses to our operating segments, as these items are centrally controlled and are not directly attributable to any reportable segment.
Sources of Operating Expenses
The Company's operating expenses consist of the following:
Cost of Services
•Processing costs - The Company’s processing costs consist of expenses related to processing transactions, servicing customers and merchants and cost of goods sold related to hardware and other product sales.
•Service fees - The Company incurs costs from third-party networks utilized to deliver payment solutions. Additionally, other third-parties are utilized in performing services directly related to generating revenue.
•Provision for credit losses - Changes in the reserve for credit loss are the result of changes in management’s estimate of the losses in the Company’s outstanding portfolio of receivables, including losses from fraud.
•Operating interest - The Company incurs interest expense on the operating debt obtained to provide liquidity for its short-term receivables.
•Depreciation and amortization - The Company has identified those tangible and intangible assets directly associated with providing a service that generates revenue and records the depreciation and amortization associated with those assets under this category. Such assets include processing platforms and related infrastructure, acquired developed technology intangible assets and other similar asset types.
Other Operating Expenses
•General and administrative - General and administrative includes compensation and related expenses for executive, finance and accounting, other information technology, human resources, legal, and other corporate functions. Also included are corporate facilities expenses, certain third-party professional service fees, and other corporate expenses.
•Sales and marketing - The Company’s sales and marketing expenses relate primarily to compensation, benefits, sales commissions, and related expenses for sales, marketing, and other related activities.
•Depreciation and amortization - The depreciation and amortization associated with tangible and intangible assets that are not considered to be directly associated with providing a service that generates revenue are recorded as other operating expenses. Such assets include corporate facilities and information technology assets, and acquired intangible assets other than those included in cost of services.
•Legal settlement - Represents the consideration paid to the sellers of eNett and Optal in excess of the businesses' fair values. See Item 8 - Note 4, Acquisitions, of our consolidated financial statements for more information.
•Impairment charges - During our annual goodwill assessment completed in the fourth quarter of 2020, we recorded a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $53.4 million for our WEX Fleet Europe reporting unit. See Item 8 - Note 9, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, of our consolidated financial statements for more information.
•Loss on sale of subsidiary - The loss on sale of subsidiary relates to the divestiture of the Company's former Brazilian subsidiary as of the date of sale, September 30, 2020, and the associated write-off of its assets and liabilities.
Year Ended December 31, 2020, Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Fleet Solutions
Revenues
The following table reflects comparative revenue and key operating statistics within Fleet Solutions:
1 Foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations had an insignificant impact on Fleet Solutions' revenue in 2020, compared to the prior year.
2 Payment processing transactions represents the total number of purchases made by fleets that have a payment processing relationship with WEX.
3 Payment processing fuel spend represents the total dollar value of the fuel purchased by fleets that have a payment processing relationship with WEX.
4 Net payment processing rate represents the percentage of the dollar value of each payment processing transaction that WEX records as revenue from merchants less certain discounts given to customers and network fees.
Fleet Solutions revenue decreased $120.1 million for 2020, as compared to 2019. As discussed in the preceding “COVID-19 Pandemic Response and Impact” section, the business has been adversely impacted by lower average domestic fuel prices during 2020 as compared to the prior year, and, to a lesser extent, by lower volumes. The decrease was partly offset by improvements in our over-the-road business, as long haul trucking has not seen the same impacts to volume as other parts of our Fleet Solutions segment.
Finance fee revenue is comprised of the following components:
Finance income primarily consists of late fees charged for receivables not paid within the terms of the customer agreement based upon the outstanding customer receivable balance. This revenue is earned when a customer’s receivable balance becomes delinquent and is calculated using the greater of a minimum charge or a stated late fee rate multiplied by the outstanding balance that is subject to a late fee charge. Changes in the absolute amount of such outstanding balances can be attributed to (i) changes in fuel prices; (ii) customer specific transaction volume; and (iii) customer specific delinquencies. Late fee revenue can also be impacted by (i) changes in late fee rates and (ii) increases or decreases in customer overdue balances. Late fee rates are determined and set based primarily on the risk associated with our customers, coupled with a strategic view of standard rates within our industry. Periodically, we assess the market rates associated within our industry to determine appropriate late fee rates. We consider factors such as the Company’s overall financial model and strategic plan, the cost to our business from customers failing to pay timely and the impact such late payments have on our financial results. These assessments are typically conducted at least annually but may occur more often depending on macro-economic factors.
Finance income decreased $49.0 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily due to a reduction of outstanding balances as a result of declining fuel prices and reduced volumes due to COVID-19, as well as lower delinquencies. This decrease was partly offset by an $8.7 million benefit during 2020 arising from higher weighted average late fee rates. For both 2020 and 2019, monthly late fee rates and minimum finance charges ranged up to 9.99 percent and $75, respectively. The weighted average late fee rate, net of related charge-offs was 5.7 percent and 5.4 percent for 2020 and 2019, respectively, resulting from higher minimum finance charge instances relative to prior year. Concessions to certain customers experiencing financial difficulties may be granted and are limited to extending the time to pay, placing a customer on a payment plan or granting waivers of late fees. There were no material concessions granted to customers experiencing financial difficulties during 2020 or 2019. Going forward, we may see an increase in concessions granted to customers as a result of COVID-19.
The primary source of factoring fee revenue is calculated as a negotiated percentage fee of the receivable balance that we purchase. A secondary source of factoring fee revenue is a flat rate service fee to our customers that request a non-contractual same day funding of the receivable balance. Factoring fee revenue for 2020 was generally consistent with factoring fee revenue in 2019.
Other revenue decreased $9.0 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, due primarily to a decline in servicing revenue at our international fleet business due to lower levels of spend as a result of travel bans and restrictions as of result of the government's response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating Expenses
The following table compares line items within operating income for Fleet Solutions:
NM - Not meaningful
Cost of services
Processing costs decreased $4.3 million for 2020, as compared to 2019, due to a reduction in transactions relative to the prior year, primarily as a result of the corresponding reduction in payment processing revenue and charges incurred during the three months ended March 31, 2019 to on-board significant customers.
Service fees for 2020 were generally consistent with service fees in 2019.
Provision for credit losses decreased $3.2 million for 2020, as compared to 2019. The reduction is primarily due to a reduction in fraud losses during 2020 as compared to the prior year. The adoption of the new credit loss accounting standard, Topic 326, coupled with an increase in expected credit losses as a result of COVID-19, increased the provision for credit losses through the first half of 2020. However, reductions in credit losses resulting from changes in customer payment behavior and increased collection efforts substantially offset those increases during the latter half of 2020. The provision reflects the Company’s best estimate for losses that it expects to incur based on the current level of accounts receivable and the anticipated payment difficulty for some fleet customers due to changes in transportation activity as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We generally measure our credit loss performance by calculating fuel-related credit losses as a percentage of total fuel
expenditures on payment processing transactions. This metric for credit losses was 16.7 basis points of fuel expenditures for 2020, as compared to 15.1 basis points of fuel expenditures for 2019.
Operating interest expense decreased $3.8 million in 2020, as compared to 2019. The decrease is due to lower interest rates and a decrease in deposits.
Depreciation and amortization increased $5.4 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, due primarily to the amortization of merchant network access agreements obtained in the Go Fuel Card acquisition in July 2019.
Other operating expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $12.6 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, due primarily to compensation and professional services cost increases in 2020 as a result of the July 2019 acquisition of Go Fuel Card.
Sales and marketing expenses decreased $19.7 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, due primarily to a decline in our discretionary spending as a result of COVID-19 as well as lower relative commission payments to partners.
Depreciation and amortization increased $2.8 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, due primarily to the amortization of the Chevron customer portfolio intangible asset and customer relationships obtained in the Go Fuel Card acquisition in July 2019.
Impairment charges consists of a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $53.4 million for our WEX Fleet Europe reporting unit, which was identified during the annual goodwill assessment completed in the fourth quarter of 2020. See Item 8 - Note 9, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, of our consolidated financial statements for more information.
Travel and Corporate Solutions
Revenues
The following table reflects comparative revenue and key operating statistics within Travel and Corporate Solutions:
1 Foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations had an insignificant impact on Travel and Corporate Solutions revenues in 2020, compared to the prior year.
2 Payment solutions purchase volume represents the total dollar value of all WEX-issued transactions that use WEX corporate card products and virtual card products. As discussed in the preceding “COVID-19 Pandemic Response and Impact” section, our current travel-related transaction volumes have been impacted by the decline in worldwide travel and tourism as a result of COVID-19 and we expect them to continue to be impacted.
Travel and Corporate Solutions total revenue decreased $90.0 million for 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily due to the impact of the pandemic on travel volumes, with revenue down 53 percent in that portion of the business. This unfavorable factor was partly offset by benefits realized as part of a contract amendment executed during the second quarter of 2020 and 13 percent revenue growth in the corporate payments portion of the business as a result of ongoing migration to virtual payments and increasing usage of our accounts payable products.
Finance fee revenue was not material to Travel and Corporate Solutions’ operations in 2020 or 2019. Concessions to certain customers experiencing financial difficulties may be granted and are limited to extending the time to pay, placing a customer on a payment plan or granting waivers of late fees. During the second quarter of 2020, WEX Latin America placed certain delinquent customers, with accounts receivable balances of $11.0 million, on payment plans ranging up to three years in length. As part of the sale of WEX Latin America, the Company retained one of these delinquent, fully reserved customer balances. No late fee income has been recognized associated with these payment plans during 2020. There were no material
concessions to customers experiencing financial difficulties during either 2020 or 2019. Going forward, we may see an increase in concessions granted to customers as a result of the continuing impact that COVID-19 has on their businesses.
Operating Expenses
The following table compares line items within operating income for Travel and Corporate Solutions:
NM - Not meaningful
Cost of services
Processing costs decreased $4.4 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, due primarily to volume related decreases.
Service fees decreased $10.2 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, due to lower processing volumes and the conversion to an internal transaction processing platform.
Provision for credit losses increased $15.7 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, resulting primarily from an increase in expected credit losses as a result of COVID-19 and a specific reserve taken on a customer in Brazil prior to the sale of WEX Latin America. The impact reflects our best estimate for losses that we expect to incur based on the current level of accounts receivable and the anticipated payment difficulty for some online travel agency customers due to reduced travel as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We will continue to actively monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on expected credit losses.
Operating interest decreased $12.2 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, as a result of lower interest rates and lower overall deposit balances.
Depreciation and amortization expenses increased $3.2 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, due primarily to the amortization of software obtained in the Noventis acquisition.
Other operating expenses
General and administrative expenses decreased $4.6 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily due to the expense incurred to accelerate vesting of option awards as part of the Noventis acquisition during 2019.
Sales and marketing expenses increased $23.0 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily due to higher relative commission payments to partners in the corporate payments business, partly offset by a decrease in our discretionary spending as a result of COVID-19.
Depreciation and amortization increased $5.2 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, due primarily to higher amortization on customer relationships acquired as part of the Noventis acquisition.
Legal settlement expenses were $162.5 million in 2020 due to the settlement of legal proceedings, and represents the consideration paid to the sellers of eNett and Optal in excess of the businesses' fair values, as further described in Recent Developments.
Health and Employee Benefit Solutions
Revenues
The following table reflects comparative revenue and key operating statistics within Health and Employee Benefit Solutions:
1 Foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations decreased Health and Employee Benefit Solutions' revenue by $1.6 million in 2020, as compared to the prior year.
2 Purchase volume represents the total U.S. dollar value of all transactions where interchange is earned by WEX.
3 Average number of SaaS accounts represents the number of active Consumer-Directed Health, COBRA, and billing accounts on our SaaS platforms in the U.S.
Payment processing revenues in 2020 were generally consistent with 2019 as a result of a decline in the U.S. Health business customer spend on elective healthcare procedures in connection with COVID-19 restrictions, offset by the acquisition of Discovery Benefits.
Account servicing revenue increased $48.2 million for 2020, as compared to 2019, primarily due to the acquisition of Discovery Benefits and existing WEX Health customer growth, which resulted in a higher number of participants using our SaaS healthcare technology platform.
Finance fee revenue was not material to Health and Employee Benefit Solutions’ operations in either 2020 or 2019. Concessions to certain customers experiencing financial difficulties may be granted and are limited to extending the time to pay, placing a customer on a payment plan or granting waivers of late fees.
Other revenue decreased $1.9 million in 2020 as compared to 2019, which was primarily attributable to lower revenues from the Company's former WEX Latin America business, partly offset by professional services revenue and growth in ancillary services to cardholders associated with the increased number of SaaS platform participants of our U.S. Health Business.
Operating Expenses
The following table compares line items within operating income for Health and Employee Benefit Solutions:
NM - Not meaningful
Cost of services
Processing costs increased $27.3 million in 2020, as compared to 2019. The increase was partly driven by higher personnel-related costs to support account servicing revenue growth. The acquisition of Discovery Benefits contributed to the majority of the increase. This increase was partly offset by the sale of WEX Latin America.
Service fees in 2020 were generally consistent with service fees in 2019.
Provision for credit losses was not material to Health and Employee Benefit Solutions’ operations in either 2020 or 2019.
Operating interest decreased $2.2 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, due primarily to a decrease in operating debt balances at WEX Latin America prior to completing the sale of WEX Latin America during the third quarter of 2020.
Depreciation and amortization expenses increased $1.3 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, resulting primarily from higher depreciation expense on internally developed software as we continued to invest in WEX Health technology, partly offset by lower depreciation and amortization expenses as compared to 2019 as a result of the sale of WEX Latin America during the third quarter of 2020.
Other operating expenses
General and administrative expenses decreased $1.1 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, due to a decrease in professional services expenses incurred in 2019 as a result of the Discovery Benefit acquisition.
Sales and marketing expenses increased $3.5 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, due primarily to expenses in connection with the acquisition of Discovery Benefits, partly offset by the COVID-related cancellation of our annual healthcare payments technology conference and COVID-related travel and entertainment decreases.
Depreciation and amortization increased $7.0 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, due primarily to amortization of customer relationship intangible assets obtained in the Discovery Benefits acquisition.
Unallocated corporate expenses
Unallocated corporate expenses represent the portion of expenses relating to general corporate functions including acquisition and divestiture expenses, certain finance, legal, information technology, human resources, administrative and executive expenses and other expenses not directly attributable to a reportable segment.
The following table compares line items within operating income for unallocated corporate expenses:
General and administrative expenses increased $9.5 million for 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily due to costs incurred in connection with the acquisition of eNett and Optal and personnel-related cost increases including stock-based compensation. The increase was partly offset by a decline in debt restructuring costs incurred in conjunction with our 2019 credit agreement amendments and costs incurred to remediate material weaknesses from 2018 during the prior year, and decreases in employee travel as a result of the Company's current response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Loss on sale of subsidiary relates to the write-off of the associated assets and liabilities of the Company's former WEX Latin America subsidiary as of the September 30, 2020 sale date.
Other unallocated corporate expenses were not material to the Company’s operations in either 2020 or 2019.
Non-operating income and expense
The following table reflects comparative results for certain amounts excluded from operating income:
NM - Not meaningful
Financing interest expense increased $22.4 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, due primarily to financing fees incurred in connection with the eNett and Optal acquisition and interest incurred on our Convertible Notes issued during July 2020, partly offset by lower average interest rates.
Our foreign currency exchange exposure is primarily related to the remeasurement of our cash, accounts receivable and accounts payable balances, including intercompany transactions that are denominated in foreign currencies. In 2020, net foreign currency loss was $25.8 million, as compared to $0.9 million in 2019. The loss in 2020 is the result of the remeasurement of assets and liabilities and losses on intercompany transactions, resulting from the U.S. dollar strengthening relative to numerous major foreign currencies in which we transact, including the Australian dollar and British pound. The majority of these losses were recorded during the three months ended March 31, 2020, as a result of the weakening of foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar arising from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Net unrealized loss on financial instruments decreased $7.6 million in 2020, as compared to 2019, due primarily to a decrease in the LIBOR forward yield curve.
Non-cash adjustments related to tax receivable agreement were not material to operations in 2020 or 2019.
We recorded an income tax benefit of $20.6 million for 2020 as compared to an income tax provision of $61.2 million for 2019. Our effective tax rate was a 6.8 percent benefit for 2020 as compared to a 28.3 percent provision for 2019. The Company's effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was impacted by no income tax benefit being recorded for i) operating losses generated by WEX Latin America during the current year through the date of sale, ii) loss on sale of WEX
Latin America, and iii) legal settlement. These losses were included as part of the current year loss and have been determined to be either non-deductible for income tax purposes or required a valuation allowance.
Net income (loss) from non-controlling interests relates to our non-controlling interests in WEX Europe Services and the U.S. Health business. Such amounts were not material to Company operations for 2020 or 2019.
The Company's redeemable non-controlling interest in the U.S. Health business decreased by $40.3 million during 2020. The decrease was due substantially to a second quarter change in the redemption value resulting from a decline in revenue multiples of peer companies due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Year Ended December 31, 2019, Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2018
Discussion and analysis of the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 is included under the heading “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, as filed with the SEC on February 28, 2020.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures That Supplement GAAP Measures
The Company’s non-GAAP adjusted net income excludes unrealized gains and losses on financial instruments, net foreign currency remeasurement gains and losses, acquisition-related intangible amortization, other acquisition and divestiture related items, loss on sale of subsidiary, stock-based compensation, restructuring and other costs, legal settlement, impairment charges, debt restructuring and debt issuance cost amortization, non-cash adjustments related to tax receivable agreement, similar adjustments attributable to our non-controlling interests and certain tax related items.
Although adjusted net income is not calculated in accordance with GAAP, this non-GAAP measure is integral to the Company’s reporting and planning processes and the chief operating decision maker of the Company uses segment adjusted operating income to allocate resources among our operating segments. The Company considers this measure integral because it excludes the above-specified items that the Company’s management excludes in evaluating the Company’s performance. Specifically, in addition to evaluating the Company’s performance on a GAAP basis, management evaluates the Company’s performance on a basis that excludes the above items because:
•Exclusion of the non-cash, mark-to-market adjustments on financial instruments, including interest rate swap agreements and investment securities, helps management identify and assess trends in the Company’s underlying business that might otherwise be obscured due to quarterly non-cash earnings fluctuations associated with these financial instruments. Additionally, the non-cash, mark-to-market adjustments on financial instruments are difficult to forecast accurately, making comparisons across historical and future quarters difficult to evaluate.
•Net foreign currency gains and losses primarily result from the remeasurement to functional currency of cash, accounts receivable and accounts payable balances, certain intercompany notes denominated in foreign currencies and any gain or loss on foreign currency hedges relating to these items. The exclusion of these items helps management compare changes in operating results between periods that might otherwise be obscured due to currency fluctuations.
•The Company considers certain acquisition-related costs, including certain financing costs, investment banking fees, warranty and indemnity insurance, certain integration related expenses and amortization of acquired intangibles, as well as gains and losses from divestitures to be unpredictable, dependent on factors that may be outside of our control and unrelated to the continuing operations of the acquired or divested business or the Company. In addition, the size and complexity of an acquisition, which often drives the magnitude of acquisition-related costs, may not be indicative of such future costs. The Company believes that excluding acquisition-related costs and gains or losses of divestitures facilitates the comparison of our financial results to the Company’s historical operating results and to other companies in our industry.
•Legal settlement represents the consideration paid to the sellers of eNett and Optal in excess of the businesses' fair values. Management has elected to exclude this item as the charge is nonrecurring and does not reflect future operating expenses resulting from this acquisition.
•The loss on sale of subsidiary relates to the divestiture of our former Brazilian subsidiary as of the date of sale, September 30, 2020, and the associated write-off of its assets and liabilities. As previously discussed, gains and losses from divestitures are considered by us to be unpredictable and dependent on factors that may be outside of our control. The exclusion of these gains and losses are consistent with our practice of excluding other non-recurring items associated with strategic transactions.
•Stock-based compensation is different from other forms of compensation, as it is a non-cash expense. For example, a cash salary generally has a fixed and unvarying cash cost. In contrast, the expense associated with an equity-based award is generally unrelated to the amount of cash ultimately received by the employee, and the cost to the Company is based on a stock-based compensation valuation methodology and underlying assumptions that may vary over time.
•We exclude restructuring and other costs when evaluating our continuing business performance as such items are not consistently occurring and do not reflect expected future operating expense, nor do they provide insight into the fundamentals of current or past operations of our business. This also includes costs related to certain identified initiatives, including technology initiatives, to further streamline the business, improve the Company’s efficiency, create synergies and globalize the Company’s operations and remediate the prior year material weaknesses, all with an objective to improve scale and efficiency and increase profitability going forward. For the year ended December 31, 2020, restructuring and other costs include certain costs incurred in association with COVID-19, including the cost of providing additional health, welfare and technological support to our employees as they work remotely.
•Impairment charges represent non-cash asset write-offs, which do not reflect recurring costs that would be relevant to the Company’s continuing operations. The Company believes that excluding these nonrecurring expenses facilitates the comparison of our financial results to the Company’s historical operating results and to other companies in its industry.
•Debt restructuring and debt issuance cost amortization are unrelated to the continuing operations of the Company. Debt restructuring costs are not consistently occurring and do not reflect expected future operating expense, nor do they provide insight into the fundamentals of current or past operations of our business. In addition, since debt issuance cost amortization is dependent upon the financing method, which can vary widely company to company, we believe that excluding these costs helps to facilitate comparison to historical results as well as to other companies within our industry.
•The adjustments attributable to non-controlling interests, including adjustments to the redemption value of a non-controlling interest, and non-cash adjustments related to the tax receivable agreement have no significant impact on the ongoing operations of the business.
•The tax related items are the difference between the Company’s GAAP tax provision and a pro forma tax provision based upon the Company’s adjusted net income before taxes as well as the impact from certain discrete tax items. The methodology utilized for calculating the Company’s adjusted net income tax provision is the same methodology utilized in calculating the Company’s GAAP tax provision.
For the same reasons, WEX believes that adjusted net income may also be useful to investors as one means of evaluating our performance. However, because adjusted net income is a non-GAAP measure, it should not be considered as a substitute for, or superior to, net income, operating income or cash flows from operating activities as determined in accordance with GAAP. In addition, adjusted net income as used by WEX may not be comparable to similarly titled measures employed by other companies.
The following table reconciles net (loss) income attributable to shareholders to adjusted net income attributable to shareholders:
Application of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. Preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements. We continually evaluate our judgments and estimates in determination of our financial condition and operating results. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Estimates are based on information available as of the date of the financial statements and, accordingly, actual results could differ from these estimates, sometimes materially. Critical accounting policies and estimates are defined as those that are both most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and operating results and require management’s most subjective judgments. Our consolidated financial statements are based on the selection and application of critical accounting policies and estimates, the most significant of which are included in the tables below.
Revenue Recognition
Description Assumptions/Approach Used Effect if Actual Results Differ from
Assumptions
The majority of the Company’s revenues are comprised of transaction-based fees, which are generally calculated based on measures such as: (i) percentage of dollar value of volume processed; (ii) number of transactions processed; or (iii) some combination thereof.
Interchange income, a fee paid by a merchant bank to the card-issuing bank (the Company) through the interchange network, is earned from the Company’s suite of card products. Interchange fees are set by the credit card providers.
The Company has entered into agreements with major oil companies, fuel retailers and vehicle maintenance providers, online travel agencies and health partners, which provide products and/or services to the Company’s customers. These agreements specify that a transaction is deemed to be captured when the Company has validated that the transaction has no errors and has accepted and posted the data to the Company’s records.
Account servicing revenue is primarily comprised of monthly fees charged to cardholders. The Company also recognizes SaaS based service fees in the healthcare market and licensing fees for use of our accounts receivable and accounts payable SaaS platforms.
The Company earns revenue on overdue accounts, calculated using the greater of a minimum charge or a stated late fee rate multiplied by the outstanding balance that is subject to a late fee charge.
The Company assesses fees for providing ancillary services, such as information products and services, software development projects and other services sold subsequent to the core offerings. Other revenues also include international settlement fees, fees for overnight shipping, certain customized electronic reporting and customer contact services provided on behalf of certain of the Company’s customers.
The Company’s primary performance obligation to merchants is a stand-ready commitment to provide payment and transaction processing services as the merchant requires, which is satisfied over time in daily increments.
Within our Travel and Corporate Solutions and Health and Employee Benefit Solutions segments, we provide SaaS services and support, which is satisfied over time in a series of daily increments. Revenue is recognized based on an output method using days elapsed to measure progress as the Company transfers control evenly over each monthly subscription period.
The Company enters into contracts with certain large customers or strategic cardholders that provide for fee rebates tied to performance milestones. When such rebates constitute consideration payable to a customer or other parties that purchase services from the customer, they are considered variable consideration and are recorded as a reduction in payment processing revenue in the same period that related interchange income is recognized. Fee rebates made to certain other partners were determined to be costs to obtain a contract and are recorded as sales and marketing expenses.
The Company earns revenue on overdue accounts, which is recognized as revenue at the time the fees are assessed.
The Company generally records revenue net, equal to consideration retained, based upon its conclusion that the Company is the agent in its principal versus agent relationships.
In preparing the financial statements, management must make estimates related to contractual terms, customer performance and sales volumes to determine the total amounts recorded as deductions, such as rebates and incentives, from revenue. Rebates and incentives are calculated based on estimated performance and the terms of the related business agreements. Management also considers historical results in making such estimates. The actual amounts ultimately paid to the customer may be different from our estimates. Such differences are recorded once they have been determined and have historically not been significant.
Reserve for Credit Losses
Description Assumptions/Approach Used Effect if Actual Results Differ from
Assumptions
The allowance for expected credit losses reflects management’s estimate of uncollectible balances as of the reporting date resulting from credit risk and including fraud losses. The reserve for credit losses reduces the Company’s accounts receivable balances, as reported in the consolidated financial statements, to the net realizable value. The allowance for expected credit losses is primarily calculated by analytical models using actual loss-rate experience, and adjustments, where necessary, for current conditions and forecasts of leading economic indicators correlated to loss-rate trends. Management monitors the credit quality of accounts receivable in making judgments necessary to estimate expected credit losses by analyzing delinquency reports, loss-rate trends, changes in customer payment patterns, economic indicators, recent trends and forecasts, and competitive, legal, and regulatory environments. When such indicators are forecasted to deviate from the current or historical median, the Company qualitatively assesses what impact, if any, the trends are expected to have on the reserve for credit losses. Assumptions regarding expected credit losses are reviewed each reporting period and may be impacted by actual performance of accounts receivable and changes in any of the factors discussed above.
Receivables exhibiting elevated credit risk characteristics from homogeneous pools are assessed on an individual basis for expected credit losses. These receivables are assessed individual expected credit loss estimates based on the occurrence of bankruptcies, disputes, conversations with customers, or other significant credit loss events.
Additionally, the allowance for expected credit losses includes fraud losses. Management monitors known and suspected fraudulent activity identified by the Company, as well as fraudulent claims reported by customers, in estimating the reserve for expected fraud losses.
Lastly, the allowance includes reserves for waived late fees. The Company earns revenue by assessing monthly finance fees on accounts with overdue balances. These fees are recognized as revenue at the time the fees are assessed. The finance fee is calculated using the greater of a minimum charge or a stated late fee rate multiplied by the outstanding balance that is subject to a late fee charge. On occasion, these fees are waived to maintain relationship goodwill. Charges to other accounts represents the offset against the late fee revenue recognized when the Company establishes a reserve for such waived amounts.
To the extent calculated expected credit losses are not indicative of future performance, actual loss experience could differ significantly from management’s judgments and expectations, resulting in either higher or lower future provisions for credit losses, as applicable. As of December 31, 2020, we have an estimated reserve for credit losses, including fraud losses, that is 2.9 percent of the total gross accounts receivable balance.
An increase or decrease to this reserve by 0.5 percent of the total gross accounts receivable balance would increase or decrease the provision for credit losses for the year by $10.3 million.
Business Combinations, Acquired Intangible Assets and Goodwill
Description Assumptions/Approach Used Effect if Actual Results Differ from
Assumptions
Business combinations are accounted for at fair value. The accounting for business combinations requires estimates and judgment as to expectations for future cash flows of the acquired business, and the allocation of those cash flows to identifiable intangible assets, in determining the estimated fair value for assets and liabilities acquired.
An acquisition not meeting the criteria to be accounted for as a business combination is accounted for as an asset acquisition. Asset acquisitions are recorded at purchase price, allocated based on the relative fair value of identifiable assets and liabilities. No goodwill is recorded in an asset acquisition.
Goodwill is comprised of the cost of business acquisitions in excess of the fair value assigned to the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired. Acquired intangible assets result from the allocation of the cost of an acquisition.
Goodwill is not amortized but is reviewed for impairment annually, or when events or changes in the business environment indicate that the carrying value of the reporting units may exceed their fair value. The annual review of goodwill is performed as of October 1 of each year.
The Company tests definite-lived intangible assets for impairment if conditions exist that indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Such circumstances would include, but are not limited to, a significant decrease in the perceived market price of the intangible, a significant adverse change in the way the asset is being used, or a history of operating or cash flow losses associated with the use of the intangible. The fair values assigned to tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed are based on management’s estimates and assumptions, as well as other information compiled by management, including projected financial information, effective income tax rates, present value discount factors, and long-term growth expectations. The Company utilizes third-party specialists to assist management with the identification and valuation of intangible assets using customary valuation procedures and techniques.
During 2020, the Company used a discounted cash flow analysis and guideline transaction method to determine the fair value of the eNett and Optal businesses acquired on December 15, 2020.
The Company’s annual goodwill impairment test is quantitative. For the reporting units that carry goodwill balances, our impairment test consists of a comparison of each reporting unit’s carrying value to its estimated fair value. A reporting unit, for the purpose of the impairment test, is one level below the operating segment level. We have three reporting segments that are further broken into several reporting units for the impairment review. The estimated fair value for the majority of our reporting units is estimated using a combination of discounted estimated future cash flows and prices for comparable businesses. An appropriate discount rate is used, as well as risk premium for specific business units, based on the Company’s cost of capital or reporting unit-specific economic factors. We generally validate the model through a reconciliation of the fair value of all our reporting units to our overall market capitalization. The assumptions used to estimate the discounted cash flows are based on our best estimates about payment processing fees/interchange rates, sales volumes, costs (including fuel prices), future growth rates, working capital needs, capital expenditures and market conditions over an estimate of the remaining operating period at the reporting unit level. The discount rate at each reporting unit is based on the weighted average cost of capital that is determined by evaluating the risk free rate of return, cost of debt, and expected equity premiums.
The Company evaluates its definite-lived intangible assets for impairment under certain circumstances. Such assessment includes considering any negative financial performance, legal, regulatory, contractual or other factors that could affect significant inputs used to determine the fair value of the asset and other relevant entity-specific events such as changes in strategy or customers that could affect significant inputs used in determining fair value. If the Company determines that it is not more likely than not that the asset is impaired, then the Company does not perform a quantitative impairment test. If the Company determines that the asset is more likely than not impaired, then a quantitative test is performed comparing the fair value of the asset with its carrying amount and impairment is measured as the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset group exceeds its fair value. Fair value measurements under FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 820 - Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures, are based on the assumptions of market participants. When determining the fair value of the asset group, entities must consider the highest and best use of the assets from a market-participant perspective.
If the Company incorrectly estimates the useful lives of its intangible assets, it would result in inaccurate amortization expense, which may lead to future impairment.
Our goodwill resides in multiple reporting units. The profitability of individual reporting units may suffer periodically from downturns in customer demand or other economic factors. Individual reporting units may be more impacted than the Company as a whole. Specifically, during times of economic slowdown, our customers may reduce their expenditures. As a result, demand for the services of one or more of the reporting units could decline, which could adversely affect our operations, cash flow, and liquidity and could result in an impairment of goodwill or intangible assets.
During our annual goodwill impairment test performed as of October 1, 2020, we determined that the reduced volumes attributable in part to COVID-19, had a significant impact on the fair value of the WEX Fleet Europe reporting unit (the 2019 Go Fuel Card acquisition). Based on the carrying value of this reporting unit exceeding its fair value, the Company recorded a $53.4 million goodwill impairment charge during the year ended December 31, 2020. There is $65.8 million remaining goodwill associated with this reporting unit.
For our other reporting units with goodwill, our 2020 goodwill impairment test indicated excesses of estimated fair value over the respective carrying amounts by amounts ranging from approximately $10 million to $2.3 billion.
Although no reporting units are deemed at risk of impairment as of December 31, 2020, subsequent to the impairment loss taken by WEX Fleet Europe as of October 1, 2020, there exists the potential for future impairment should actual results deteriorate versus our current expectations. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had approximately $4.2 billion on its consolidated balance sheet related to goodwill and intangible assets of acquired entities.
The Company did not record any goodwill impairments during the year ended December 31, 2019.
The Company did not record any intangible asset impairments during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Income Taxes
Description Assumptions/Approach Used Effect if Actual Results Differ from
Assumptions
In preparing the consolidated financial statements, we calculate income tax expense (benefit) based on our interpretation of the tax laws in the various jurisdictions where we conduct business. This requires us to estimate current tax obligations and to assess temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax bases of assets and liabilities. These differences result in long-term deferred tax assets and liabilities, the net amount of which we show as a line item on the consolidated balance sheet. All or a portion of the benefit of income tax positions is recognized only when we have made a determination that it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained upon examination, based upon the technical merits of the position and other factors. For tax positions that are determined to be more likely than not sustained upon examination, the tax benefit recognized is the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We must also assess the likelihood that the deferred tax assets will be realized.
To the extent we believe that realization is not more likely than not, we establish a valuation allowance. When we establish a valuation allowance or increase this allowance, we generally record a corresponding income tax expense in the consolidated statement of operations in the period of the change. Conversely, to the extent circumstances indicate that realization is more likely than not, the valuation allowance is decreased to the amount realizable, which generates an income tax benefit.
Management must make judgments to determine income tax expense (benefit), deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance to be recorded against deferred tax assets. During the ordinary course of business, there are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. Changes in our estimates occur periodically due to changes in tax rates, changes in business operations, implementation of tax planning strategies, the expiration of relevant statutes of limitations, resolution with taxing authorities of uncertain tax positions and newly enacted statutory, judicial and regulatory guidance. We record a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized.
Significant judgment is required in determining valuation allowances. In evaluating the ability to recover deferred tax assets, we consider all available positive and negative evidence including past operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in the most recent years, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. In establishing a liability for unrecognized tax benefits, assumptions are made in determining whether, and to what extent, a tax position may be sustained. It requires significant management judgment regarding applicable statutes and their related interpretation as they apply to our particular facts and circumstances.
Although we believe that our income tax related judgments and estimates are reasonable, it is possible that our actual results could be different than what we expected, and we may be exposed to a material change in our total income tax expense, tax-related balances, or valuation allowances. Upon income tax audit, any unfavorable tax settlement may require use of our cash and result in an increase in our effective tax rate in the period of settlement. A favorable tax settlement could be recognized as a reduction in our effective tax rate in the period of settlement.
Recently Adopted and New Accounting Standards
We adopted Topic 326 on January 1, 2020, utilizing the modified-retrospective approach. Under the modified-retrospective approach, prior period comparable financial information is not adjusted. See Item 8 - Note 1, Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, and Item 8 - Note 2, Recent Accounting Pronouncements, in this report for further discussion of the impact from the adoption of this new accounting standard. We use a loss-rate methodology to calculate our general allowance for accounts receivable. This methodology considers historical loss experience to calculate actual loss-rates and analyzes trends in the calculated loss-rates against trends in economic indicators. Analyzing trends in loss-rates against trends in economic indicators allows us to identify correlations between economic environments and loss experience. Strong correlations identified from that analysis are factored into the current and expected conditions of the overall credit loss reserve methodology. The expense we recognized in the quarter is the amount necessary to bring the reserve to its required level based on this methodology. When individual accounts receivable exhibit elevated credit risk characteristics as a result of bankruptcies, disputes, conversations with customers, or other significant credit loss events, they are assessed individual credit loss estimates. Assumptions regarding expected credit losses are reviewed each reporting period and may be impacted by actual performance of accounts receivable and changes in any of the factors discussed above.
See Item 8 - Note 2, Recent Accounting Pronouncements, for recently issued accounting standards that have not yet been adopted.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Cash Flows
We believe that our cash generating capability, financial condition and operations, together with the sources of cash listed below, will be adequate to fund our cash needs for at least the next 12 months. The table below summarizes our primary short-term sources and uses of cash:
1 Our long-term cash requirements consist primarily of amounts owed on our 2016 Credit Agreement and Notes and various facilities lease agreements.
Cash Flows
The table below summarizes our cash activities:
Operating Activities
•Cash provided by operating activities for 2020 increased $193.8 million as compared to the prior year, resulting from increased collections on accounts receivable offset in part by a reduction in payables.
•Cash provided by operating activities for 2019 increased $262.9 million as compared to the prior year, resulting from an increase in accounts payable and decrease in accounts receivable primarily due to a factoring arrangement in which the Company retains the merchant payable and sells the related accounts receivable. This arrangement was in place during the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, but not in place until August of 2018.
Investing Activities
•Cash used for investing activities for 2020 decreased $661.5 million as compared to the prior year. The Company completed one acquisition during 2020 with associated payments of $220.7 million, net of cash acquired, as compared to four acquisitions completed during 2019.
•Cash used for investing activities for 2019 increased $736.4 million as compared to the prior year, resulting from $882.4 million of payments made associated with the four acquisitions completed during 2019.
Financing Activities
•Cash used for financing activities during 2020 was $179.3 million as compared to cash provided by financing activities during 2019 of $749.8 million. The decrease of $929.0 million is substantially due to a reduction in overall borrowing needs year over year for the funding of acquisitions.
•Cash used for financing activities for 2019 increased $852.5 million as compared to the prior year, primarily due to higher overall borrowings in connection with funding the acquisitions and raising deposits in order to fund asset growth.
Liquidity
In general, the Company’s trade receivables provide for payment terms of 30 days or less. Receivables not paid within the terms of the agreement are generally subject to late fees based upon the outstanding receivable balance. The Company extends revolving credit to certain small fleets. These accounts are also subject to late fees, and balances that are not paid in full are subject to interest charges based on a revolving balance. The Company had approximately $60.2 million and $62.4 million of receivables with revolving credit balances as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
At December 31, 2020, approximately 97 percent of the outstanding balance of $2.0 billion of total trade accounts receivable was 29 days or less past due and approximately 98 percent of the outstanding balance of total trade accounts receivable was 59 days or less past due. The receivables portfolio consists of a large group of homogeneous smaller balances across a wide range of industries. No one customer receivable balance represented 10 percent or more of the outstanding receivables balance at December 31, 2020 or December 31, 2019.
Our short-term cash requirements consist primarily of funding the working capital needs of our business, payments on maturities and withdrawals of certificates of deposit and brokered money market deposits, payments on borrowed federal funds, required capital expenditures, repayments on our credit facility, interest payments on our credit facility and other operating expenses. WEX Bank can fund our short-term domestic cash requirements through the issuance of brokered deposits and borrowed federal funds. Any remaining cash needs are primarily funded through operations, our borrowings under our 2016 Credit Agreement, our participation debt and our accounts receivable factoring and securitization arrangements. Our long-term cash requirements consist primarily of amounts owed on our 2016 Credit Agreement and Notes and various facilities lease agreements.
Undistributed earnings of certain foreign subsidiaries of the Company amounted to $58.5 million and $77.4 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company had historically asserted that the undistributed earnings of foreign subsidiaries were considered indefinitely reinvested outside the United States. The Company reevaluated its historic indefinite reinvestment assertion and determined that any historical undistributed earnings as well as the future earnings for WEX Australia are no longer considered to be indefinitely reinvested. The Company continues to maintain its indefinite reinvestment assertion for its remaining foreign subsidiaries. The deferred tax liability related to the foreign and state tax costs associated with this change in assertion was immaterial. Upon distribution of the foreign subsidiaries earnings in which the Company continues to assert indefinite reinvestment, the Company would be subject to withholding taxes payable to foreign countries, where applicable, but would generally have no further federal income tax liability.
Earnings outside of the United States are accompanied by certain financial risks, such as changes in foreign currency exchange rates. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates may reduce the reported value of our foreign currency revenues, net of expenses and cash flows. We cannot predict changes in currency exchange rates, the impact of currency exchange rate changes nor the degree to which we will be able to manage the impact of currency exchange rate changes.
Deposits and Borrowed Federal Funds
WEX Bank has issued certificates of deposit in various maturities ranging between 1 year and 5 years, with interest rates ranging from 1.35 percent to 3.52 percent as of December 31, 2020, as compared to maturities ranging between 4 months and 5 years and interest rates ranging from 1.80 percent to 3.52 percent as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $503.4 million of certificates of deposit outstanding at a weighted average interest rate of 1.81 percent, compared to $979.4 million of certificates of deposit outstanding at a weighted average interest rate of 2.57 percent as of December 31, 2019.
WEX Bank also issues interest-bearing brokered money market deposits with variable interest rates ranging from 0.12 percent to 0.30 percent as of December 31, 2020, as compared to variable interest rates ranging from 1.63 percent to 1.90 percent as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $439.9 million of interest-bearing brokered money market deposits at a weighted average interest rate of 0.27 percent, as compared to $362.2 million of interest-bearing brokered money market deposits at a weighted average interest rate of 1.88 percent as of December 31, 2019.
WEX Bank may issue additional brokered deposits without limitation, subject to FDIC rules governing minimum financial ratios, which include risk-based asset and capital requirements. As of December 31, 2020, all brokered deposits were in denominations of $250 thousand or less, corresponding to FDIC deposit insurance limits. Interest-bearing money market funds may be withdrawn at any time. We believe that our brokered deposits are paying competitive yields and that there continues to be consumer demand for these instruments.
We also carry non-interest bearing deposits that are required for certain customers as collateral for their credit accounts. We had $116.7 million and $112.6 million of these deposits at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
In accordance with regulatory requirements, WEX Bank maintains reserves against a percentage of certain customer deposits by keeping balances with the Federal Reserve Bank. There was no required reserve at December 31, 2020 due to temporarily relaxed Federal Reserve requirements enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The required reserve based on the outstanding customer deposits was $24.9 million at December 31, 2019.
WEX Bank also borrows from uncommitted federal funds lines of credit to supplement the financing of our accounts receivable. Our federal funds lines of credit were $376.0 million and $355.0 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, with $20.0 million and $35.0 million of borrowings as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
WEX Bank participates in the ICS service offered by Promontory Interfinancial Network, which allows WEX Bank to purchase brokered money market demand accounts and demand deposit accounts in an amount not to exceed $125.0 million as part of a one-way buy program. At December 31, 2020 and 2019 there was no outstanding balance for ICS purchases.
2016 Credit Agreement
On July 1, 2016, we entered into the 2016 Credit Agreement in order to permit the additional financing necessary to facilitate the EFS acquisition. The 2016 Credit Agreement initially provided for secured tranche A and tranche B term loan facilities in original principal amounts equal to $455.0 million and $1,200.0 million, respectively, and a $470.0 million secured revolving credit facility. As of December 31, 2020, after giving effect to amendments prior to such date, we had an outstanding principal amount of $873.8 million on our secured tranche A term loan, an outstanding principal amount of $1,442.4 million on our secured tranche B term loan and outstanding letters of credit of $51.6 million drawn against our $870.0 million secured revolving credit facility, with a $250.0 million sublimit for letters of credit and $20.0 million sublimit for swingline loans. The tranche B term loans mature during May 2026 while the revolving credit facility and tranche A term loans mature during July 2023, subject to earlier maturity in August 2022 in certain circumstances. The revolving credit loans and tranche A term loans bear interest at variable rates, at the Company’s option, plus an applicable margin determined based on the Company’s consolidated leverage ratio, which is calculated using consolidated funded indebtedness (excluding (i) up to $350.0 million of consolidated funded indebtedness due to permitted securitization transactions and (ii) the amount of consolidated funded indebtedness constituting the non-recourse portion of permitted factoring transactions, and netting up to (x) with respect to calculating the consolidated leverage ratio for purposes of the periods ending prior to June 15, 2021, an unlimited amount and (y) with respect to calculating the consolidated leverage ratio for purposes of the periods ending thereafter, $400.0 million, of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents denominated in U.S. dollars or other lawful currencies (provided that such other currencies are readily convertible to, and deliverable in, U.S. dollars) held by the Company and its subsidiaries) to consolidated EBITDA.
Incremental loans of up to (i) the greater of (x) $375.0 million and (y) 50% of consolidated EBITDA of the Company, plus (ii) the amount of certain voluntary prepayments of the loans, plus (iii) an unlimited amount subject to satisfaction of the Company’s consolidated secured leverage ratio, testing consolidated funded indebtedness that is secured by a lien on the assets of the Company or any of its subsidiaries (excluding (a) up to $400.0 million of consolidated funded indebtedness due to permitted securitization transactions and (b) the amount of consolidated funded indebtedness constituting the non-recourse portion of permitted factoring transactions, and netting up to (x) with respect to calculating the consolidated secured leverage ratio for purposes of the periods ending prior to June 15, 2021, an unlimited amount, and (y) with respect to calculating the consolidated secured leverage ratio for purposes of the periods ending thereafter, $400.0 million, of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents denominated in U.S. dollars or other lawful currencies (provided that such other currencies are readily convertible to, and deliverable in, U.S. dollars) held by the Company and its subsidiaries), minus (iv) the aggregate amount of incremental loans incurred in reliance of clause (i) above since August 24, 2018, could be made available under the 2016 Credit Agreement upon the request of the Company subject to specified terms and conditions, including receipt of lender commitments.
Debt Covenants
The 2016 Credit Agreement and the indenture governing the Notes contain various affirmative and negative covenants that, subject to certain customary exceptions, limit the Company and its subsidiaries’ including, in certain limited circumstances, WEX Bank and the Company’s other regulated subsidiaries, ability to, among other things (i) incur additional debt, (ii) pay dividends or make other distributions on, redeem or repurchase capital stock, or make investments or other restricted payments, (iii) enter into transactions with affiliates, (iv) dispose of assets or issue stock of restricted subsidiaries or regulated subsidiaries, (v) create liens on assets, or (vi) effect a consolidation or merger or sell all, or substantially all, of the Company’s assets. Additionally, the indenture governing the Convertible Notes contains customary negative and affirmative covenants that, subject to certain customary exceptions, limit the Company and its subsidiaries', but excluding WEX Bank and the Company's other regulated subsidiaries, ability to, among other things, incur additional debt. These covenants are subject to important exceptions and qualifications. At any time that the Notes are rated investment grade, which is not currently the case, and subject to certain conditions, certain covenants will be suspended with respect to the Notes. WEX Bank and the Company’s other regulated subsidiaries will not be subject to some of the restrictive covenants in the Indenture that place limitations on the Company and its restricted subsidiaries’ actions, and where WEX Bank and the Company’s regulated subsidiaries are subject to covenants, there are significant exceptions and limitations on the application of those covenants to WEX Bank and the Company’s regulated subsidiaries.
The 2016 Credit Agreement also requires, solely for the benefit of the lenders of the Tranche A Term Loan and lenders under the Revolving Credit Facility, that the Company maintain at the end of each fiscal quarter the following financial ratios:
•a Consolidated Interest Coverage (as defined in the 2016 Credit Agreement) of no less than 2.75 to 1.00 at December 31, 2020 and through March 31, 2021, after which the ratio reverts back to no less than 3.00 to 1.00; and
•a Consolidated Leverage Ratio (as defined in the 2016 Credit Agreement) of no more than 7.50 to 1.00 through March 31, 2021, 7.00 to 1.00 for the quarter ending June 30, 2021, 6.50 to 1.00 for the quarter ending September 30, 2021, 6.00 to 1.00 for the quarters ending December 31, 2021 through September 30, 2022, and 5.00 to 1.00 thereafter.
We were in compliance with all material covenants and restrictions at December 31, 2020.
During 2020, the Company entered into an eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh amendment to the 2016 Credit Agreement. For a description of the Eighth Amendment, Ninth Amendment, Tenth Amendment and Eleventh Amendment to the 2016 Credit Agreement, see Other Liquidity Matters below.
As of December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding borrowings against our $870.0 million revolving credit facility. The combined outstanding debt under our tranche A term loan facility and our tranche B term loan facility totaled $2.3 billion at December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, amounts outstanding under the 2016 Credit Agreement bore a weighted average effective interest rate of 2.3 percent.
See Item 8 - Note 16, Financing and Other Debt, for further information regarding interest rates, voluntary prepayments rights and principal payments required under the 2016 Credit Agreement.
Notes Outstanding
On January 30, 2013, the Company completed an offering in an aggregate principal amount of $400.0 million of 4.750 percent senior notes. Such Notes mature on February 1, 2023. The Notes can be redeemed at the option of WEX without penalty. On February 11, 2020, the Company provided irrevocable notice to The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., the trustee for the Notes, of its intent to redeem the Notes on March 15, 2021. We have elected to redeem for cash all of the $400.0 million aggregate principal amount of the Notes in accordance with the terms of the indenture governing the Notes. The redemption date for the Notes will be March 15, 2021 (the “Redemption Date”). The Notes will be redeemed at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest thereon, if any, to, but excluding, the Redemption Date.
Convertible Notes Outstanding
On July 1, 2020, the Company closed on a private placement with Warburg Pincus, pursuant to which the Company issued $310.0 million in aggregate principal amount of its Convertible Senior Notes due 2027. The issuance of the Convertible Notes provided the Company with net proceeds of approximately $299.2 million after original issue discount. The Convertible Notes have a seven-year term and mature on July 15, 2027, unless earlier converted, repurchased or redeemed. Interest on the Convertible Notes is calculated at a fixed rate of 6.5% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on January 15 and July 15 of each year, with the first interest payment due January 15, 2021. At the Company's option, interest is either payable in cash, through accretion to the principal amount of the Convertible Notes, or a combination of cash and accretion.
The Convertible Notes may be converted at the option of the holders at any time prior to maturity, or earlier redemption or repurchase of the Convertible Notes, based upon an initial conversion price of $200 per share of common stock. The Company may settle conversions of Convertible Notes, at its election, in cash, shares of the Company’s common stock, or a combination thereof. The initial conversion price is subject to adjustments customary for convertible debt securities and a weighted average adjustment in the event of issuances of equity and equity linked securities by the Company at prices below the then applicable conversion price for the Convertible Notes or the then market price of the Company’s common stock, subject to certain exceptions.
The Company will have the right, at any time after July 1, 2023, to redeem the Convertible Notes in whole or in part if the closing price of WEX’s common stock is at least 200% of the conversion price of the Convertible Notes for 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) out of any 30 consecutive trading day period prior to the time the Company delivers a redemption notice (including at least one of the five trading days immediately preceding the last day of such 30 trading day period), subject to the right of holders of the Convertible Notes to convert its Convertible Notes prior to the redemption date.
WEX Latin America Debt
The Company sold its WEX Latin America subsidiary on September 30, 2020. WEX Latin America had debt of approximately $2.7 million as of December 30, 2019, which was comprised of credit facilities held in Brazil and loan arrangements related to our accounts receivable, with various maturity dates, and an effective interest rate of 35.04%. The Company sold its WEX Latin America subsidiary on September 30, 2020 and the Company no longer has this debt obligation.
Participation Debt
From time to time, WEX Bank enters into participation agreements with third-party banks to fund customer balances that exceed WEX Bank’s lending limit to individual customers. Associated unsecured borrowings carry a variable interest rate of 1 month to 3 month LIBOR plus a margin of 225 basis points.
The following table provides the amounts available and outstanding and the remaining funding capacity under the participation debt agreements in place:
1 Amounts available includes up to $60 million under an agreement that terminates on December 31, 2021.
2 Amounts outstanding are recorded in short-term debt, net in our financial statements.
Australian Securitization Facility
The Company maintains a securitized debt agreement with the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, Ltd., which currently extends through April 2021. Under the terms of the agreement, each month, on a revolving basis, the Company sells certain of its Australian receivables to the Company’s Australian Securitization Subsidiary. The Australian Securitization Subsidiary, in turn, uses the receivables as collateral to issue asset-backed commercial paper (“securitized debt”) for approximately 85 percent of the securitized receivables. The amount collected on the securitized receivables is restricted to pay the securitized debt and is not available for general corporate purposes.
The Company pays a variable interest rate on the outstanding balance of the securitized debt, based on the Australian Bank Bill Rate plus an applicable margin. The interest rate was 0.97 percent and 1.80 percent as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company had securitized debt under this facility of approximately $62.6 million and $78.6 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
European Securitization Facility
On April 7, 2016, the Company entered into a five-year securitized debt agreement with the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, Ltd, which expires in April 2021. Under the terms of the agreement, the Company sells certain of its receivables from selected European countries to our European Securitization Subsidiary. The European Securitization Subsidiary, in turn, uses the receivables as collateral to issue securitized debt. The amount collected on the securitized receivables is restricted to pay the securitized debt and is not available for general corporate purposes. The interest rate was 0.98 percent and 0.63 percent as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The Company had $23.4 million and $25.7 million of securitized debt under this facility as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
WEX Latin America Securitization of Receivables
Prior to the sale of WEX Latin America on September 30, 2020, the Company transferred certain unsecured receivables associated with its salary advance payment card product to an investment fund in which WEX Latin America held a non-controlling equity interest, and that is managed by an unrelated third-party. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company received an insignificant distribution from the investment fund and did not make equity contributions to the investment fund during the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2018, the Company’s equity contributions to the investment fund totaled $2.8 million. The securitization arrangement met the derecognition conditions under GAAP and transfers beginning July 1, 2018 under this arrangement were treated as sales and accounted for as a reduction of trade receivables. During the year ended December 31, 2018, the Company recognized operating interest expense of $4.4 million under this financing arrangement. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company recognized a gain on sale of $6.5 million and $16.1 million, respectively. The gain recognized consists of the difference between the sales price and the carrying value of the receivables, and is recorded within other revenue. Cash proceeds from the transfer of these receivables are recorded within operating activities in the consolidated statements of cash flows.
WEX Bank Accounts Receivable Factoring
WEX Bank has entered into a receivables purchase agreement with an unrelated third-party financial institution to sell certain of our trade accounts receivable under non-recourse transactions through July 31, 2021. The purchase agreement can be renewed for successive one-year periods assuming WEX provides advance written notice that is accepted by the purchaser. WEX Bank continues to service the receivables post-transfer with no participating interest. The Company obtained a true-sale opinion from an independent attorney, which states that the factoring agreement provides legal isolation upon WEX Bank bankruptcy or receivership under local law. As such, transfers under this arrangement are treated as a sale. Proceeds from the sale are reported net of a negotiated discount rate and are accounted for as a reduction in trade receivables because the agreements transfer effective control of the receivables to the buyer.
The Company sold approximately $4.1 billion and $14.8 billion of trade accounts receivable under this arrangement during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Proceeds from the sale, which are reported net of a negotiated discount rate, are recorded in operating activities within our consolidated statement of cash flows. The loss on factoring was insignificant and $3.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
WEX Europe Services Accounts Receivable Factoring
WEX Europe Services has entered into a factoring arrangement with an unrelated third-party financial institution (the “Purchasing Bank”) to sell certain of its accounts receivable through December 31, 2020 in order to accelerate the collection of the Company’s cash and reduce internal costs, thereby improving liquidity. Under this arrangement, the Purchasing Bank establishes a credit limit for each customer account. The factored receivables are without recourse to the extent that the customer balances are maintained at or below the established credit limit. For customer receivable balances in excess of the Purchasing Bank’s credit limit, the Company maintains the risk of default. The Company obtained a true sale opinion from an independent attorney, which states that the factoring agreement creates a sale of receivables under local law for amounts transferred both below and above the established credit limits. The Company continues to service these receivables post-transfer with no participating interest. As a result, the Purchasing Bank is deemed the purchaser of these receivables and is entitled to enforce payment of these amounts from the debtor.
This factoring arrangement is accounted for as a sale and accordingly the Company records the receivables sold as a reduction of accounts receivable and proceeds as cash provided by operating activities. The Company sold approximately $452.2 million and $630.3 million of receivables under this arrangement during years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Charge-backs on balances in excess of the credit limit during the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 were insignificant.
WEX Bank
WEX Bank, is subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by the FDIC and the Utah DFI. Under capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action, WEX Bank must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative measures of WEX Bank’s assets, liabilities and certain off-balance sheet items. WEX Bank’s capital amounts and classification are also subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about components, risk weightings and other factors. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate certain mandatory and possible additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could limit our business activities and have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. Qualitative measures established by regulation to ensure capital adequacy require WEX Bank to maintain minimum amounts and ratios as defined in the regulations. As of December
31, 2020, WEX Bank met all the requirements to be deemed “well-capitalized” pursuant to FDIC regulation and for purposes of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
Other Liquidity Matters
At December 31, 2020, we had variable-rate borrowings of $2.3 billion under our 2016 Credit Agreement. We periodically review our projected borrowings under our 2016 Credit Agreement and the current interest rate environment in order to ascertain whether interest rate swaps should be used to reduce our exposure to interest rate volatility. As of December 31, 2020, we maintained six interest rate swap contracts that mature at various times through December 2023. Collectively, these derivative contracts are intended to fix the future interest payments associated with $1.4 billion of our variable rate borrowings at between 0.743 percent to 2.413 percent. See Item 8 - Note 12, Derivative Instruments, Item 8 - Note 19, Fair Value, for more information.
On January 24, 2020, the Company entered into a purchase agreement to purchase eNett and Optal for an aggregate purchase price comprised of approximately $1.3 billion in cash and 2.0 million shares of the Company’s common stock and subject to certain working capital and other adjustments as described in the purchase agreement. On December 15, 2020, the Company entered into a Deed of Settlement with eNett, Optal and the other parties thereto dismissing the legal proceedings and appeals relating to the acquisition and purchase agreement, described more fully in Item 3 of Part I of the Annual Report on Form 10-K, and amending the purchase agreement to provide a reduction of the aggregate purchase price for the acquisition to $577.5 million (subject to certain adjustments) consisting entirely of cash, which the Company paid with cash on hand. The closing of the acquisition occurred concurrent with the execution of the Deed of Settlement on December 15, 2020.
In connection with the purchase agreement, the Company entered into a commitment letter with Bank of America, N.A. and BofA Securities, Inc. on January 24, 2020 (the “Original Commitment Letter”) for senior secured and unsecured credit facilities in the aggregate amount of up to $3.1 billion, inclusive of backstops totaling $1.7 billion that reduced to zero under the terms of the Eighth Amendment to the 2016 Credit Agreement. The Third Amended and Restated Commitment Letter most recently amended and restated the Original Commitment Letter to among other things, reallocate $600.0 million of aggregate credit commitments from a senior secured bridge facility to a 364-day unsecured credit facility and to extend this portion of the commitment by six months to April 22, 2021. The remaining $752.0 million consisted of a seven-year term loan B facility commitment (the “TLB Commitment”) that was not affected by the Third Amended and Restated Commitment Letter. The TLB Commitment terminated in October 2020 and the Third Amended and Restated Commitment Letter terminated concurrently with the closing of the acquisition on December 15, 2020, without the funding of any loans pursuant thereto.
In connection with the Original Commitment Letter, on February 10, 2020, the Company entered into an eighth amendment (the “Eighth Amendment”) to the 2016 Credit Agreement. The Eighth Amendment, among other things, effectuated financial covenant amendments contemplated by the Original Commitment Letter and increased the Company’s capacity to incur additional incremental loan facilities up to $1.4 billion The amendments set forth in the Eighth Amendment would have become effective concurrently with the closing of the pending acquisition of eNett and Optal, but were superseded by the amendments set forth in the Ninth Amendment to the 2016 Credit Agreement.
On June 26, 2020, the Company entered into a Ninth Amendment, which made certain changes to the 2016 Credit Agreement, including among other things, increasing the maximum consolidated leverage ratio following the closing of the eNett and Optal acquisition to 7.5X at December 31, 2020 and March 31, 2021, with step-downs thereafter, tested using consolidated funded indebtedness (excluding (i) up to, for the purpose of determining the applicable pricing tier, $350.0 million and, for any other purpose, $400.0 million, of consolidated funded indebtedness due to permitted securitization transactions and (ii) the amount of consolidated funded indebtedness constituting the non-recourse portion of permitted factoring transactions, and netting up to (x) with respect to calculating the consolidated leverage ratio for purposes of the periods ending prior to June 15, 2021, for the purpose of determining the applicable pricing tier, $287.6 million and, for any other purpose, an unlimited amount, and (y) with respect to calculating the consolidated leverage ratio for purposes of the periods ending thereafter, $400.0 million, of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents denominated in U.S. dollars or other lawful currencies (provided that such other currencies are readily convertible to, and deliverable in, U.S. dollars) held by the Company and its subsidiaries) to consolidated EBITDA, adding a fourth pricing tier and limits certain investment and restricted payment covenants in the case that the consolidated leverage ratio equals or exceeds 5.5X and introducing a LIBOR floor on revolving credit facility borrowings of 75 basis points.
On July 29, 2020, the Company entered into a Tenth Amendment to the 2016 Credit Agreement, which increased commitments under the Company's secured revolving credit facility from $820.0 million to $870.0 million. On August 20, 2020, the Company entered into an eleventh amendment (the “ Eleventh Amendment") to the 2016 Credit Agreement, which limited the borrowing conditions for a $752 million portion of the revolving credit facility solely with respect to any borrowing for the purpose of consummating the acquisition of eNett and Optal on or prior to April 22, 2021. Upon the closing of the
acquisition of eNett and Optal on December 15, 2020, as described above, and the payment of the purchase price with cash, the foregoing ability to borrow a $752 million portion of the revolving credit facility with limited conditions terminated.
The Company’s long-term cash requirements consist primarily of amounts owed on the 2016 Credit Agreement, the Notes and various facility lease agreements.
As of December 31, 2020, we had $51.6 million in letters of credit outstanding and $818.4 million in remaining borrowing capacity under the 2016 Credit Agreement, subject to the covenants as described above.
We currently have authorization from our board of directors to purchase up to $150 million of our common stock until September 2021, which is entirely unused as of December 31, 2020. The program is funded either through our future cash flows or through borrowings on our 2016 Credit Agreement. Share repurchases are made on the open market and may be commenced or suspended at any time. The Company’s management, based on its evaluation of market and economic conditions and other factors, determines the timing and number of shares repurchased.
Contractual Obligations
The table below summarizes the estimated amounts of payments under contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Operating lease obligations - Primarily represents undiscounted cash flows for remaining lease payments under long-term operating leases for office space. See Item 8 - Note 15, Leases, for more information regarding our leases.
(2) Interest payments on term loans - Interest payments are based on effective rates and credit spreads in effect as of December 31, 2020. See Item 8 - Note 16, Financing and Other Debt, for more information.
(3) Interest payments on Convertible Notes - Interest payments are based on the coupon rate and assuming that the Company will elect to settle all interest payments in cash. See Item 8 - Note 16, Financing and Other Debt, for more information.
(4) Securitization facility - Interest payments due on the securitization facility are not included as the amount was not material.
(5) Minimum volume purchase commitments - Two of the Company’s subsidiaries are required to purchase a minimum amount of fuel from suppliers on an annual basis. If the minimum requirement is not fulfilled, they are subject to penalties based on the amount of spend below the minimum annual volume commitment. The table above represents the Company’s annual penalty assuming we purchase no fuel under these commitments after December 31, 2020.
(6) Notes - Included within 1-3 year column due to contractual maturity date of February 2023, however, as discussed in Item 8 - Note 28, Subsequent Events, the Company intends to early redeem the Notes in full during March 2021.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
In addition to the operating leases included in the table above, we have the following off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2020:
•Extension of credit to customers - We have entered into commitments to extend credit in the ordinary course of business. We had approximately $6.6 billion of unused commitments to extend credit at December 31, 2020, as part of established customer agreements. These amounts may increase or decrease during 2021 as we increase or decrease credit to customers, subject to appropriate credit reviews, as part of our lending product agreements. Many of these commitments are not expected to be utilized. We can adjust most of our customers’ credit lines at our discretion at any time. Therefore, we do not believe total unused credit available to customers and customers of strategic relationships represents future cash requirements. We believe that we can adequately fund actual cash requirements related to these credit commitments through the issuance of certificates of deposit, borrowed federal funds and other debt facilities.
•Letters of credit - As of December 31, 2020, we had $51.6 million outstanding in irrevocable letters of credit issued by us in favor of third-party beneficiaries, primarily related to facility lease agreements and virtual card and fuel payment processing activity at our foreign subsidiaries. These irrevocable letters of credit are unsecured and are renewed on an annual basis unless the Company chooses not to renew them.
•Accounts receivable factoring and securitization - See Item 8 - Note 13, Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements, for further information.