ITEM 7 MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
GENERAL
The Company designs and markets quality and innovative footwear for men, women and children under a portfolio of well-recognized brand names, including: Florsheim, Nunn Bush, Stacy Adams, BOGS and Rafters. Inventory is purchased from third-party overseas manufacturers. The majority of foreign-sourced purchases are denominated in U.S. dollars. The Company has two reportable segments, North American wholesale operations (“wholesale”) and North American retail operations (“retail”). In the wholesale segment, the Company’s products are sold to leading footwear, department, and specialty stores, as well as e-commerce retailers, primarily in the United States and Canada. The Company also has licensing agreements with third parties who sell its branded apparel, accessories and specialty footwear in the United States, as well as its footwear in Mexico and certain markets overseas. Licensing revenues are included in the Company’s wholesale segment. The Company’s retail segment consisted of e-commerce businesses and five brick and mortar retail stores in the United States as of December 31, 2020, with such store base subsequently reduced to four stores in early 2021. Retail sales are made directly to consumers by Company employees. The Company’s “other” operations include the Company’s wholesale and retail businesses in Australia, South Africa, Asia Pacific (collectively, “Florsheim Australia”), and Europe (“Florsheim Europe”). The majority of the Company’s operations are in the United States, and its results are primarily affected by the economic conditions and the retail environment in the United States.
This discussion summarizes the significant factors affecting the consolidated operating results, financial position and liquidity of the Company for the two-year period ended December 31, 2020. This discussion should be read in conjunction with Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” below.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
The COVID-19 pandemic significantly impacted the Company’s 2020 financial results, and has continued to affect its results into 2021. Government-mandated shutdowns of non-essential businesses resulted in the majority of retailers temporarily closing their stores in mid-March 2020, with the majority of retailers, including the Company’s retail stores, remaining closed for a majority of the second quarter. While business recovery has been slow, the Company returned to profitability in the fourth quarter, which reflected increased demand in certain areas of the business as well as reductions in expenses as the Company aligned costs with its lower sales volume.
During 2020, BOGS continued to diversify its product mix, selling more lightly-insulated and lifestyle-oriented product in the women’s market while also developing its men’s occupational, work-related footwear. As a result, the BOGS brand performed well during 2020. After initial challenges during the beginning of the pandemic, the BOGS’ business accelerated in the latter part of 2020 as consumers spent more time outdoors. Even with relatively modest precipitation in November and December 2020 across the country, demand for BOGS’ product was very strong. While the Company entered Fall 2020 with adequate levels of inventory, BOGS quickly sold through key programs, as there was a shortage of outdoor boots in the general market to satisfy increasing demand. The Company has been able replenish a good portion of these programs in order to meet unexpected elevated demand in early 2021.
Regarding the Company’s legacy brands (Florsheim, Stacy Adams, and Nunn Bush), the business environment remains challenging. As a result of the pandemic, the Company’s wholesale partners reduced styles in dress and dress-casual footwear that are work or occasion oriented. Management believes the normalization of its legacy business is tied closely to the rollout of vaccinations and people returning to normal activities. The Company believes demand may increase as companies bring workers back to offices and people can be confident going to social events such as weddings and family celebrations; however, the timing is uncertain. While management is disappointed with the level of wholesale shipments across its legacy brands, there were some bright spots in the latter part of 2020. Casual and fashion boot sales were strong, and the Company made significant progress toward introducing new casual footwear. The pandemic motivated the Company to accelerate change and commit to a rapid overhaul of its product mix. The new lines the Company is shipping in Spring 2021, as well as showcasing for customers for its Fall launch, offer a fresh, more relaxed take of its legacy brands. While the Company anticipates increased demand for its traditional dress-oriented styles in the second half of 2021 (but cannot provide assurances), management is optimistic about its prospects to extend into lifestyle categories based on the favorable reception of new product introduced during the pandemic.
As a result of the economic impact of the pandemic, collection of accounts receivable has slowed, and the Company expects that trend to continue into 2021. Two of the Company’s large wholesale customers filed for bankruptcy during 2020. J.C. Penney Company, Inc. and affiliated entities (“JCP”) filed for bankruptcy in May 2020, and Tailored Brands, Inc. (“TB”) filed for bankruptcy in August 2020. The Company wrote-off approximately $4.3 million of receivables in connection with these bankruptcy filings. While the Company endeavors to actively manage receivables to secure payments and mitigate risk, and also monitors the financial health of its other
customers, due to the pandemic and/or its related impact, additional customers could be in financial distress, which could cause the Company to experience other write-downs in the future.
In terms of the U.S. retail segment, management’s focus is on investing in and growing it e-commerce businesses. The Company’s North American e-commerce businesses rose 9% in 2020; BOGS drove this growth with e-commerce sales up 53% in the U.S. and nearly 80% in Canada, as compared to 2019. As a result of the closing of unprofitable stores, the Company currently has only four active brick and mortar retail locations. Accordingly, management believes that the future results of its U.S. retail segment will be driven by its more profitable e-commerce businesses. On a worldwide level, the Company continues to leverage the e-commerce platform it built in the U.S. to other locations including Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, and has seen success in doing so.
The Company’s overseas businesses were down significantly in 2020, but management is starting to see signs of economic recovery, especially in Australia. Australia has begun to increase the percentage of workers allowed in offices, and shopping malls and street stores are seeing steady growth in consumer traffic. The Company has been able to exit a number of unprofitable stores as well as renegotiate retail leases on more favorable terms. In doing so, management believes the Company is on a good path toward improved profitability in 2021 in Australia and New Zealand. In the Pacific Rim, business remains limited as ongoing travel restrictions have reduced store traffic. In late 2020, management decided to close Florsheim Europe, which includes a small wholesale business and two retail stores. Total sales at Florsheim Europe were $2.6 million in 2020. The Florsheim Europe business has been unprofitable the last few years, and management will be winding down this business in 2021.
Looking ahead to 2021, management believes that at least the first half of the year will continue to be impacted by the pandemic. With the rollout of vaccines, the Company is anticipating an improved retail environment and consequently, higher sales, in the second half of the year. With its new leaner operations, coupled with its strong balance sheet, management believes the Company is well-positioned for growth and profitability as conditions improve.
Sales and Earnings Highlights
Consolidated net sales were $195.4 million in 2020, a decrease of 36% compared to $304.0 million in 2019. Consolidated loss from operations totaled totaled $7.6 million in 2020, compared to earnings from operations of $27.0 million in 2019. The Company’s net loss totaled $8.5 million in 2020 versus net earnings of $20.9 million in 2019. Diluted loss per share was $0.87 per share in 2020, compared to diluted earnings per share of $2.10 in 2019.
Financial Position Highlights
At December 31, 2020, cash and marketable securities totaled $47.5 million and there were no amounts outstanding on the Company’s line of credit. During 2020, the Company generated $40.0 million of cash from operations. The Company used funds to pay $11.8 million in dividends, pay down $7.0 million on its line of credit, and repurchase $2.1 million of company stock. The Company also had $3.4 million of capital expenditures in 2020.
SEGMENT ANALYSIS
Net sales and earnings (loss) from operations for the Company’s segments, as well as its “other” operations, in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, were as follows:
North American Wholesale Segment
Wholesale Net Sales
Net sales in the Company’s North American wholesale segment for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, were as follows:
As discussed in the “Executive Overview” above, net sales of the Stacy Adams, Nunn Bush, and Florsheim brands were down in 2020 primarily due to the effects of the pandemic. BOGS net sales were down slightly for the year; since BOGS is an outdoor footwear brand, its sales weren’t as negatively impacted by the pandemic, as compared to the Company’s other brands, due to consumers spending more time outside. Licensing revenues consist of royalties earned on sales of branded apparel, accessories and specialty footwear in the United States and on branded footwear in Mexico and certain overseas markets. Licensing revenues were down for the year, as compared to 2019, in line with reductions in licensees’ sales of branded products.
Wholesale Earnings (Loss) from Operations
Gross earnings as a percent of net sales were 35.5% in 2020 versus 36.6% in 2019. The decrease in gross margins was largely due to additional costs related to the tariff on certain footwear imported from China, and higher overseas freight costs.
The North American wholesale segment’s selling and administrative expenses include, and primarily consist of: distribution costs, salaries and commissions, advertising costs, employee benefit costs, and depreciation. Wholesale selling and administrative expenses were $53.1 million, or 35% of net sales, in 2020, compared to $61.0 million, or 25% of net sales, in 2019. Full year 2020 expenses included the write-off of a net $4.3 million of receivables related to JCP and TB due to bankruptcy filings as a result of the impact of the pandemic, $2.0 in employee costs related to restructuring and temporary closures, and $0.2 in other related charges, partially offset by $1.7 million of income from U.S. and Canada government wage subsidies. Additionally, the Company adjusted its advertising spending, which reduced 2020 selling and administrative expenses by $5.2 million, as compared to 2019.
Earnings from operations were $975,000 in 2020 compared to $27.8 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower sales volumes and higher selling and administrative costs relative to sales.
The Company’s cost of sales does not include distribution costs (e.g., receiving, inspection, warehousing, shipping, and handling costs). Wholesale distribution costs were $11.7 million and $13.1 million in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. These costs were included in selling and administrative expenses. The Company’s gross earnings may not be comparable to other companies, as some companies may include distribution costs in cost of sales.
North American Retail Segment
Retail Net Sales
Net sales were $21.5 million in 2020, down 15% as compared to $25.2 million in 2019. Same store sales, which includes e-commerce sales, decreased 8% for the year, due to a significant decline in brick-and-mortar same store sales resulting from the pandemic, partially offset by a 9% increase in e-commerce sales. There were three fewer domestic brick and mortar stores operating at December 31, 2020 than there were at December 31, 2019, due to the closing of unprofitable stores since last year. Stores are included in same store sales beginning in the store’s 13th month of operations after its grand opening.
Retail Earnings (Loss) from Operations
Gross earnings as a percent of net sales were 64.8% in 2020 and 64.7% in 2019. Selling and administrative expenses for the retail segment include, and are primarily related to, rent and occupancy costs, employee costs, advertising expense and freight. Retail selling and administrative expenses were $15.0 million in 2020 and $13.5 million in 2019. As a percent of net sales, retail selling and administrative expenses were 70% in 2020 and 54% in 2019. Full year 2020 expenses included $1.5 million in early lease termination charges, $1.0 million for the impairment of retail store fixed assets, and $0.3 million in employee costs related to restructuring and temporary closures, partially offset by $0.2 million of income from government wage subsidies. Loss from operations totaled $1.1 million in 2020 compared to earnings from operations of $2.8 million in 2019. The decrease was due to lower sales volumes and higher selling and administrative expenses.
Other
The Company’s other businesses include its wholesale and retail operations of Florsheim Australia and Florsheim Europe. Net sales of the Company’s other businesses were $21.7 million in 2020, down 41% compared to $36.7 million in 2019. The decrease in 2020 was due to lower net sales at both Florsheim Australia and Florsheim Europe, resulting from the impact of the pandemic.
Collectively, Florsheim Australia and Florsheim Europe had a combined loss from operations totaling $7.5 million in 2020 compared to a loss from operations of $3.5 million last year. Operating losses deepened in 2020 primarily due to lower sales volumes and higher selling and administrative expenses relative to net sales. Selling and administrative expenses of the Company’s other businesses included $3.6 million in employee costs related to restructuring and temporary closures, $2.1 million for the impairment of retail store fixed assets and operating lease right-of-use assets, $1.1 million in reserves for obsolete and slow moving inventory due to COVID-19-related impacts, and $0.3 million in related charges, partially offset by $3.5 million of income from government wage and rent subsidies.
OTHER INCOME AND EXPENSE AND TAXES
The majority of the Company’s interest income is generated by investments in marketable securities. Interest income was $527,000 and $823,000 in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in 2020 was primarily due to less interest earned on the lower investment balances this year as a result of maturities of marketable securities and lower interest rates. Interest expense declined to $79,000 in 2020 from $244,000 in 2019, due to the lower average debt balance this year. Other income totaled $96,000 in 2020 versus other expense of $535,000 in 2019. The decrease in expense was primarily due to a decrease in the non-service cost components of pension expense, resulting from lower interest expense and higher expected return on plan assets.
The Company’s effective tax rate was (20.3)% in 2020 versus 22.9% in 2019. The Company’s 2020 tax provision included $2.0 million of tax expense related to deferred tax assets of the Company’s foreign subsidiaries. The Company’s 2020 effective tax rates were also impacted because it did not record an income tax benefit on foreign losses, and, in the U.S., the Company has the ability to carry back current year losses to a tax year when the U.S. federal statutory tax rate was 35% versus the current tax rate of 21%, which is currently permitted under the U.S. Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act ("CARES Act").
LIQUIDITY & CAPITAL RESOURCES
The Company’s primary sources of liquidity are its cash and short-term marketable securities, which aggregated $34.7 million at December 31, 2020, and $15.7 million at December 31, 2019, and its revolving line of credit. The Company generated $40.0 million and $9.4 million of cash from operations in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Fluctuations in net cash from operating activities have mainly resulted from changes in net earnings (loss) and operating assets and liabilities, and most significantly, the year-end inventory balances. The Company reduced its inventory levels during 2020 to align with sales. Specifically, the Company reduced its dress inventory levels
in line with the current decrease in demand for this category as a result of the impact of the pandemic, which has led to more people working from home and few special occasion-related events.
The Company’s capital expenditures were $3.4 million and $7.4 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. In early 2020, the Company completed a project to expand its office space within its corporate headquarters. The Company expects capital expenditures will be between $1.0 million and $2.0 million in 2021.
The Company paid cash dividends of $11.8 million and $9.4 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Company accelerated the timing of its January 2021 quarter dividend payment into 2020. The Company plans to resume its regularly quarterly dividend payment schedule in March 2021.
The Company continues to repurchase its common stock under its share repurchase program when the Company believes market conditions are favorable. In 2020, the Company repurchased 106,490 shares for a total cost of $2.1 million. In 2019, the Company repurchased 222,740 shares for a total cost of $5.6 million. At December 31, 2020, the Company had remaining authorization to repurchase up to 335,780 shares under the program.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had a $30 million revolving line of credit with a bank that is secured by a lien against the Company’s general corporate assets. The line of credit bears interest at LIBOR plus 1.35% and expires on November 4, 2021. The related credit agreement contains customary representations, warranties, and covenants (including a minimum tangible net worth financial covenant) for a facility of this type. At December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding on the Company’s line of credit. The highest balance on the line of credit during 2020 was $8.5 million. At December 31, 2019, outstanding borrowings under a previous revolving line of credit with the Company’s former bank were approximately $7.0 million at an interest rate of 2.5%.
As of December 31, 2020, $4.4 million of cash and cash equivalents was held by the Company’s foreign subsidiaries.
The Company will continue to evaluate the best uses for its available liquidity, including, among other uses, capital expenditures, continued stock repurchases and additional acquisitions. The Company believes that available cash and marketable securities, cash provided by operations, and available borrowing facilities will provide adequate support for the cash needs of the business for at least one year, although there can be no assurances.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not utilize any special purpose entities or other off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies
The Company’s accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. As disclosed in Note 2, the preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Future events and their effects cannot be determined with absolute certainty. Therefore, the determination of estimates requires the exercise of judgment. Actual results inevitably will differ from those estimates, and such differences may be material to the consolidated financial statements. The following policies are considered by management to be the most critical in understanding the significant accounting estimates inherent in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements and the uncertainties that could impact the Company’s results of operations, financial position and cash flows.
Sales Returns, Sales Allowances and Doubtful Accounts
The Company records reserves and allowances (“reserves”) for sales returns, sales allowances and discounts, cooperative advertising, and accounts receivable balances that it believes will ultimately not be collected. The reserves are based on such factors as specific customer situations, historical experience, a review of the current aging status of customer receivables and current and expected economic conditions. The reserve for doubtful accounts includes a specific reserve for accounts identified as potentially uncollectible, plus an additional reserve for the balance of accounts, determined based on historical trends. The Company evaluates the reserves and the estimation process and makes adjustments when appropriate. Prior to 2020, actual write-offs against the reserves had been within the Company’s expectations. However, in 2020, the Company wrote down a net $4.3 million of receivables due to bankruptcy filings by two large customers during the COVID-19 pandemic. Future changes in reserves may be required if actual returns, discounts and bad debt activity varies from the original estimates. These changes could impact the Company’s results of operations, financial position and cash flows.
Pension Plan Accounting
The Company’s pension expense and corresponding obligation are determined on an actuarial basis and require certain actuarial assumptions. Management believes the two most critical of these assumptions are the discount rate and the expected rate of return on plan assets. The Company evaluates its actuarial assumptions annually on the measurement date (December 31) and makes modifications based on such factors as market interest rates and historical asset performance. Changes in these assumptions can result in different expense and liability amounts, and future actual experience can differ from these assumptions.
Discount Rate - Pension expense and projected benefit obligation both increase as the discount rate is reduced. See Note 11 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for discount rates used in determining pension expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the funded status of the plans at December 31, 2020 and 2019. The Company uses the spot-rate approach to determine the service and interest cost components of pension expense. Under the spot-rate approach, the service and interest costs were calculated by applying specific spot rates along the yield curve to the relevant projected cash flows, to provide a better estimate of future service and interest costs. A 0.5% decrease in the discount rate would have a nominal impact on annual pension expense, and would increase the projected benefit obligation by approximately $5.2 million.
Expected Rate of Return - Pension expense increases as the expected rate of return on pension plan assets decreases. In estimating the expected return on plan assets, the Company considers the historical returns on plan assets and future expectations of asset returns. The Company utilized an expected rate of return on plan assets of 7.00% for both 2020 and 2019. This rate was based on the Company’s long-term investment policy of equity securities: 20% - 80%; fixed income securities: 20% - 80%; and other, principally cash: 0% - 20%. A 0.5% decrease in the expected return on plan assets would increase annual pension expense by approximately $209,000.
The Company’s unfunded benefit obligation was $34.0 million and $28.0 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Goodwill and Trademarks
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over fair value of identifiable net assets acquired from a business acquisition. Goodwill is not amortized, but is reviewed for impairment on an annual basis and between annual tests if indicators of impairment are present. The Company’s goodwill resulted from the 2011 acquisition of the BOGS and Rafters brands, and is assigned to its wholesale segment.
The Company evaluates goodwill for impairment annually as of December 31 or more frequently when an event occurs or circumstances change that indicates the carrying value may not be recoverable. Given the substantial reduction in sales, reduced cash flow projections, and the decrease in the Company’s market capitalization in 2020 due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on macroeconomic conditions, the Company determined that potential impairment indicators were present and that quantitative impairment assessments were warranted for its goodwill and trademarks at each quarterly interim period in 2020, and again at December 31, 2020. No impairment charges were recorded on the Company’s goodwill or trademarks during 2020.
In conducting the year-end goodwill impairment assessment, the estimated fair value of the Company’s wholesale reporting unit was determined using a discounted cash flows analysis. The rate used to determine discounted cash flows was a rate that corresponds with the Company’s weighted average cost of capital, adjusted for risk where appropriate. In determining the estimated future cash flows, current and future levels of income were considered as well as trends and market conditions. As of December 31, 2020, the fair value of the Company’s wholesale reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by 37%; therefore, no impairment was recorded on the goodwill. There has never been an impairment recorded on this goodwill.
In evaluating trademarks, estimated fair values were determined using discounted cash flows and implied royalty rates. Based on the results of the trademark assessments, the Company concluded that the fair values of the trademarks substantially exceeded their respective carrying values. Therefore, no impairment was recorded on the Company’s trademarks.
The Company can make no assurances that its goodwill or trademarks will not be impaired in the future. When preparing a discounted cash flow analysis, the Company makes a number of key estimates and assumptions regarding future cash flows and growth. The discount rate used is based on the Company’s weighted average cost of capital, which includes assumptions such as market capital structure, market beta, risk-free rate of return, and estimated costs of borrowing. Changes in key estimates assumptions, and macroeconomic conditions, and/or continued deterioration of the Company’s market capitalization and business, could lead to an impairment charge in a future period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.