ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following is a discussion of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations comparing the calendar years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. This section should be read in conjunction with the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes thereto that are incorporated herein by reference and the other financial information included herein and the notes thereto.
OVERVIEW
The Company’s primary business is fashion model management and complementary business activities. The business of talent management firms, such as Wilhelmina, depends heavily on the state of the advertising industry, as demand for talent is driven by digital, mobile, print and television advertising campaigns for consumer goods, e-commerce, and retail clients. Wilhelmina believes it has strong brand recognition, which enables it to attract and retain top agents and talent to service a broad universe of clients. In order to take advantage of these opportunities and support its continued growth, the Company will need to continue to successfully allocate resources and staffing in a way that enhances its ability to respond to new opportunities. The Company continues to focus on tightly managing costs, recruiting top agents, and scouting and developing talent.
Although Wilhelmina has a large and diverse client base, it is not immune to global economic conditions, such as the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company closely monitors economic conditions, client spending, and other industry factors and continually evaluates opportunities to increase the market share of its existing boards and further expand its geographic reach. There can be no assurance as to the effects on Wilhelmina of future economic circumstances, technological developments, client spending patterns, client creditworthiness and other developments and whether, or to what extent, Wilhelmina’s efforts to respond to them will be effective.
COVID-19 PANDEMIC
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of novel coronavirus (COVID-19) as a pandemic, which spread rapidly throughout the United States and the world. As the global impact of COVID-19 continues, Wilhelmina’s first priority has been to protect the health and safety of its employees and talent. To help mitigate the spread of the virus and in response to health advisories and governmental actions and regulations, the Company has modified its business practices and has implemented health and safety measures that are designed to protect employees and represented talent.
The Company’s revenues are heavily dependent on the level of economic activity in the United States and the United Kingdom, particularly in the fashion, advertising and publishing industries, all of which have been negatively impacted by the pandemic and may not recover as quickly as other sectors of the economy. There have been mandates from federal, state, and local authorities requiring forced closures of non-essential businesses. As a result, beginning in March 2020, the Company saw a significant reduction in customer bookings, resulting in a negative impact to revenue and earnings. During the second half of 2020, bookings increased from the preceding months, but remained significantly below pre-pandemic levels.
In addition to reduced revenue, business operations have been adversely affected by reductions in productivity, limitations on the ability of customers to make timely payments, disruptions in talents’ ability to travel to needed locations, and supply chain disruptions impeding clothing or footwear wardrobe from reaching destinations for photoshoots and other bookings. Many of the Company’s customers are large retail and fashion companies, some of which have had to close stores in the United States and internationally due to the spread of COVID-19. Some of these customers have filed for bankruptcy in 2020 and others may be unable to pay amounts already owed to the Company, resulting in increased current and future bad debt expense. These customers also may not emerge from the pandemic with the financial ability, or need, to purchase Wilhelmina’s services to the extent that they did in previous years. Some model talent have been quarantined with family far from the major cities where Wilhelmina’s offices are located, and also away from where most modeling jobs take place. Many U.S. and international airlines have decreased their flight schedules which, as economic activities resumes and clients increase booking requests, may make it difficult for talent to be available when and where they are needed. The B.1.1.7 variant of the COVID-19 virus, which is believed to spread easily and quickly, has particularly impacted the United Kingdom in recent months, resulting in renewed strict lockdowns that have impacted Wilhelmina’s London operations and are continuing into 2021. While these disruptions are currently expected to be temporary, there continues to be uncertainty around the duration.
Postponed and cancelled bookings related to the pandemic contributed significantly to reduced revenues and increased operating losses during 2020. Although some clients increased activity and bookings during the second half of 2020, rising COVID-19 infection rates in cities where Wilhelmina operates could lead to a slower economic recovery in those markets, and possible additional business closings or local mandates that could slow the recovery in operations there. Since Wilhelmina extends customary payment terms to its clients, even as bookings resume, there is likely to be a lag before significant cash collections return. In the meantime, the Company continues to have significant employee, office rent, and other expenses.
Reduced outstanding accounts receivable available as collateral under the Company’s credit agreement with Amegy Bank has limited its access to additional financing. Net losses in recent periods have also impacted compliance with the financial covenants under the Amegy Bank credit agreement, further impeding the Company’s ability to obtain additional financing. Since the pandemic began, many stock markets, including Nasdaq Capital Market where Wilhelmina’s common stock is listed, have been volatile. A further decline in the Company’s stock price would reduce its market capitalization and could require additional goodwill or intangible asset impairment writedowns.
The Company has taken the following actions to address the impact of COVID-19 and the current recessionary environment, in order to efficiently manage the business and maintain adequate liquidity and maximum flexibility:
- In April 2020, obtained approximately $2.0 million in loans under the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”).
- Eliminated discretionary travel and entertainment expenses.
- Suspended share repurchases. The terms of the Company’s PPP loans restrict share repurchases until 12 months have passed after full repayment.
- Did not renew the leases on three New York City model apartments when the terms ended in June and August, 2020.
- Did not renew the lease on the Company’s New York City office, and required all New York based staff to work remotely.
- Suspended efforts to fill two highly compensated executive roles following the resignation of the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and Vice President in early 2020.
- Negotiated discounts with various vendors and service providers.
- Effective July 1, 2020, implemented layoffs of approximately 36% of its staff, including employees at each of the Company’s five offices, and effected temporary salary reductions for the remaining staff.
If the quarantines and limitations on non-essential work are re-implemented, or persist for an extended period, the Company may need to implement additional cost savings measures.
The Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, which includes The COVID-related Tax Relief Act of 2020 and the Taxpayer Certainty and Disaster Tax Relief Act of 2020, was passed and signed into law the last week of 2020. The many provisions of the legislation include items such as expenses associated with forgiven PPP loans, business meals deductions, individual tax rebates and unemployment benefits. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of this new legislation.
BREXIT
On January 31, 2020, the United Kingdom (“UK”) withdrew from the European Union (“EU”). Effective January 1, 2021, new visa requirements and other restrictions limit the freedom of movement for British workers to travel to the EU for work, which may impact the ability of the Company’s London office to book modeling photoshoots that take place in the European Union. It may also be more difficult, in the future, for talent represented by Wilhelmina London, but based in the EU, to travel to London and other parts of the UK for photoshoots and campaign work. New immigration sponsorship or visa requirements could discourage fashion brands, and other clients, from booking as frequently in London, which has historically been an international fashion and modeling hub, and could impact the revenue of the Company’s London operations.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS OF THE COMPANY FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020 COMPARED TO YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019
In addition to net income, the key financial indicators that the Company reviews to monitor its business are revenues, model costs, operating expenses and cash flows.
The Company analyzes revenue by reviewing the mix of revenues generated by the different boards, by geographic locations and from significant clients. Wilhelmina’s primary sources of revenue include: (i) revenues from principal relationships where the gross amount billed to the client is recorded as revenue when earned and collectability is reasonably assured; and (ii) separate service charges, paid by clients in addition to the booking fees, which are calculated as a percentage of the models’ booking fees and are recorded as revenues when earned and collectability is reasonably assured. See “Critical Accounting Policies - Revenue Recognition.”
Wilhelmina provides professional services. Therefore, salary and service costs represent the largest part of the Company’s operating expenses. Salary and service costs are comprised of payroll and related costs and travel, meals and entertainment (“T&E”) to deliver the Company’s services and to enable new business development activities.
Analysis of Consolidated Statements of Operations
Service Revenues
The Company’s service revenues fluctuate in response to its clients’ willingness to spend on advertising and the Company’s ability to have the desired talent available. In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic had a material impact on revenues, as many customers cancelled or postponed bookings while non-essential business activities were temporarily barred in the cities where Wilhelmina operates. Service revenues decreased 44.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to cancelled bookings resulting from COVID-19, as well as the closure of the Wilhelmina Studios division in the fourth quarter of 2019 and the closure of the hair and makeup artist division in the second half of 2020.
License Fees and Other Income
License fees and other income include franchise revenues from independently owned model agencies that use the Wilhelmina trademark and various services provided by the Company. License fees decreased by 50.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the timing of income from licensing agreements and the closure of Wilhelmina’s Dubai licensee in 2020.
Gross Profit Margin
Gross profit margins were unchanged for the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Salaries and Service Costs
Salaries and service costs consist of payroll and related costs and T&E required to deliver the Company’s services to its clients and talent. The 34.4% decrease in salaries and service costs during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to employee layoffs in July 2020, temporary reductions in staff salaries, the closure of the Wilhelmina Studios division during the fourth quarter of 2019, the closure of the hair and makeup artist division in the second half of 2020, open positions for two executives that resigned in January 2020, and a reduction in share-based payment expense.
Office and General Expenses
Office and general expenses consist of office and equipment rents, advertising and promotion, insurance expenses, administration and technology cost. During the year ended December 31, 2020, office and general expenses decreased 18.1% when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to reduced rent expense, legal fees, computer expense, utilities, and other office expenses, partially offset by an increase in bad debt expense.
Amortization and Depreciation
Amortization and depreciation expense is incurred with respect to certain assets, including computer hardware, software, office equipment, furniture and certain finance lease assets. Amortization and depreciation expense increased by 4.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to new equipment being placed in service, which will be depreciated going forward. Fixed asset purchases (mostly related to technology and computer equipment) totaled approximately $0.2 million in 2020 and $0.4 million in 2019.
Goodwill Impairment
The Company incurred goodwill impairment of $0.8 million and $4.8 million, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, due to the Company’s impairment tests indicating that the carrying value of goodwill exceeded the estimated fair value at the end of the fourth quarter of 2019 and the first quarter of 2020.
Corporate Overhead
Corporate overhead expenses include director and executive officer compensation, legal, audit and professional fees, corporate office rent, and travel. Corporate overhead decreased by 14.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020, when compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to lower corporate travel costs and temporary reductions in fees to the Company’s Board of Directors.
Operating Income and Operating Margin
Operating loss of $4.0 million and negative operating margin of 9.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to operating loss of $4.2 million and negative operating margin of 5.5% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The reduced operating loss but increased negative operating margin was primarily due to the combined impact of lower goodwill impairment and operating expenses, as well as decreased revenue net of model costs.
Foreign Currency Loss
The Company realized a gain of $16 thousand from foreign currency exchange during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to loss of $97 thousand from foreign currency exchange during the year ended December 31, 2019. Foreign currency gain and loss is due to fluctuations in currencies from Great Britain, Europe, and Latin America.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 was primarily attributable to accrued interest on term loans drawn during 2016 and 2018 and on finance leases. See, “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Loss before Income Taxes
Loss before income taxes decreased $0.4 million to a loss of $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a loss of $4.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the decrease in operating loss and foreign currency exchange expense.
Income Taxes
Generally, the Company’s combined effective tax rate is high relative to reported net income as a result of certain valuation allowances on deferred tax assets, amortization expense, foreign taxes, and corporate overhead not being deductible and income being attributable to certain states in which it operates. The Company operates in four states which have relatively high tax rates: California, New York, Illinois, and Florida. The Company had income tax of $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company reported income tax expense for 2020 despite a pre-tax loss due primarily to a $1.5 million valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. The valuation allowance was the result of management’s assessment as of December 31, 2020 that the benefit of the Company’s deferred tax assets would not be realized primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on its business.
Net Income
The Company had a net loss of $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net loss of $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the increase in income tax expense, partially offset by the decrease in operating loss.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s cash balance decreased to $5.6 million at December 31, 2020 from $7.0 million at December 31, 2019. The cash balance decreased primarily as a result of $2.0 million net cash used by operating activities and $0.2 million cash used in investing activities, partially offset by $0.6 million cash provided by financing activities, as well as $0.1 million foreign currency effect on cash flow.
Net cash used in operating activities of $2.0 million was primarily the result of net loss and decreases in amounts due to models, accounts payable and accrued liabilities, and lease liabilities, partially offset by decreases in accounts receivable and right of use assets. The $0.2 million cash used in investing activities was attributable to purchases of property and equipment, including software and computer equipment. The $0.6 million of cash used in financing activities was primarily attributable to receipt of $2.0 million of PPP loans, partially offset by $1.3 million principal payments on the Company’s Amegy Bank term loans, and payments on finance leases.
The Company’s primary liquidity needs are for working capital associated with performing services under its client contracts and servicing its remaining term loan. Generally, the Company incurs significant operating expenses with payment terms shorter than its average collections on billings. The COVID-19 pandemic has had an impact on the Company’s cash flows during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to reduced bookings and modeling jobs and delayed payments from customers. The Company has taken actions to address the impact of COVID-19 by reducing expenses and has the ability to implement more significant cost savings measures if the current limitations on non-essential work persist for an extended period. Based on 2021 budgeted and year-to-date cash flow information, management believes that the Company has sufficient liquidity to meet its projected operational expenses and capital expenditure requirements for the next twelve months.
Amegy Bank Credit Agreement
The Company has a credit agreement with Amegy Bank which provides a $4.0 million revolving line of credit and previously provided up to a $3.0 million term loan which could be drawn through October 24, 2016. Amounts outstanding under the term loan reduce the availability under the revolving line of credit. The revolving line of credit is also subject to a borrowing base derived from 80% of eligible accounts receivable (as defined) and the Company’s minimum net worth covenant. The revolving line of credit bears interest at prime plus 0.50% payable monthly. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had a $0.2 million irrevocable standby letter of credit outstanding under the revolving line of credit and had additional borrowing capacity of $1.7 million. The revolving line of credit presently expires October 24, 2022.
On August 16, 2016, the Company drew $2.7 million of the term loan and used the proceeds to fund the purchase of shares of its common stock in a private transaction. The term loan bore interest at 4.5% per annum and was payable in monthly payments of interest only until November, 2016, followed by 47 equal monthly payments of principal and interest computed on a 60-month amortization schedule. A final $0.6 million payment of principal and interest was paid on October 28, 2020.
On July 16, 2018, the Company amended its credit agreement with Amegy Bank to provide for an additional term loan of up to $1.0 million that could be drawn by the Company through July 12, 2019, for the purpose of repurchases of its common stock. The additional term loan is evidenced by a promissory note bearing interest at 5.15% per annum and was payable in monthly installments of interest only through July 12, 2019. Thereafter, the note is payable in monthly installments sufficient to fully amortize the outstanding principal balance in 60 months with the balance of principal and accrued interest due on July 12, 2023.
Amounts outstanding under the additional term loan reduce the availability under the Company’s revolving line of credit with Amegy Bank. On August 1, 2018, the Company drew $0.7 million of the additional term loan and used the proceeds to fund the purchase of 100,000 shares of its common stock in a private transaction. On December 12, 2018, the Company drew $0.3 million of the additional term loan and used the proceeds to partially fund a purchase of 50,000 shares of its common stock in a private transaction. As of December 31, 2020, a total of $0.7 million was outstanding on the term loan.
Reduced outstanding accounts receivable available as collateral under the Company’s credit agreement with Amegy Bank has limited access to additional financing. Net losses in recent periods have also impacted compliance with the financial covenants under the Amegy Bank credit agreement, further impeding the Company’s ability to obtain additional financing. On March 26, 2020, the Company entered into a Thirteenth Amendment to Credit Agreement (the “Thirteenth Amendment”) with Amegy Bank. The Thirteenth Amendment amended the minimum net worth covenant to require the Company to maintain tangible net worth (as defined therein) of $4.0 million, determined on a quarterly basis. Under the Thirteenth Amendment, Amegy Bank also waived an existing default caused by the Company’s failure to satisfy the old $20.0 million minimum net worth covenant as of December 31, 2019. On May 12, 2020, the Company entered into a Fourteenth Amendment to Credit Agreement (the “Fourteenth Amendment”) with Amegy Bank. The Fourteenth Amendment amended the line of credit to reduce the maximum borrowing capacity to $3.0 million. Under the Fourteenth Amendment, Amegy Bank also waived an existing default caused by the Company’s failure to satisfy both the minimum fixed charge coverage ratio through March 31, 2020 and minimum tangible net worth as of March 31, 2020. The Company obtained waivers from Amegy Bank of its failures to satisfy the fixed charge coverage ratio, the minimum tangible net worth, and the borrowing base for the quarters ended June 30, 2020 and September 30, 2020. On November 10, 2020, the Company entered into a Fifteenth Amendment to Credit Agreement (the “Fifteenth Amendment”) with Amegy Bank. The Fifteenth Amendment waived the minimum tangible net worth covenant until December 31, 2021, after which a minimum tangible net worth of $1.5 million will be required. The Fifteenth Amendment also revised the calculation of the fixed charge coverage ratio such that it will be tested at December 31, 2020 based on the preceding six month period, tested at March 31, 2021 based on the preceding nine month period, and tested at June 30, 2021 and subsequent periods using a twelve month rolling period.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
On April 15, 2020, Wilhelmina International, Ltd. (the “Borrower”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, executed a Business Loan Agreement and a Promissory Note each dated April 13, 2020 (collectively, the “Sub PPP Loan Documents”), with respect to a loan in the amount of $1.8 million (the “Sub PPP Loan”) from Amegy Bank. The Sub PPP Loan was obtained pursuant to the PPP. The Sub PPP Loan originally matured on April 13, 2022 and bears interest at a rate of 1.00% per annum. As allowed under the Paycheck Protection Flexibility Act, the Sub PPP Loan was extended to mature on April 13, 2025 and is payable in 44 equal monthly payments of $43 thousand commencing in August 2021.
On April 18, 2020, the Company executed a Business Loan Agreement and a Promissory Note each dated April 17, 2020 (collectively, the “Parent PPP Loan Documents”), with respect to a loan in the amount of $128 thousand (the “Parent PPP Loan”) from Amegy Bank. The Parent PPP Loan was also obtained pursuant to the PPP. The Parent PPP Loan originally matured on April 17, 2022 and bears interest at a rate of 1.00% per annum. As allowed under the Paycheck Protection Flexibility Act, the Parent PPP Loan was extended to mature on April 17, 2025 and is payable in 44 equal monthly payments of $3 thousand commencing in August 2021.
Both the Sub PPP Loan and the Parent PPP Loan (collectively, the “PPP Loans”) may be prepaid at any time prior to maturity with no prepayment penalties. Both the Sub PPP Loan Documents and the Parent PPP Loan Documents contain various provisions related to the PPP, as well customary representations, warranties, covenants, events of default and other provisions. Neither of the PPP Loans is secured by either the Borrower or the Company, and both are guaranteed by the SBA. All or a portion of the PPP Loans may be forgiven by the SBA upon application by the Borrower or the Company, respectively, accompanied by documentation of expenditures in accordance with the SBA requirements under the PPP. In the event all or any portion of the PPP Loans is forgiven, the amount forgiven is applied to outstanding principal, and would be recorded as forgiveness of debt income.
As of December 31, 2020, a total of $2.0 million was outstanding on the PPP Loans.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had outstanding a $0.2 million irrevocable standby letter of credit under the Company’s revolving credit facility with Amegy Bank. The letter of credit served as security under the lease relating to the Company’s office space in New York City that expired on February 28, 2021.
Effect of Inflation
Inflation has not been a material factor affecting the Company’s business. General operating expenses, such as salaries, employee benefits, insurance and occupancy costs, are subject to normal inflationary pressures.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The consolidated financial statements of the Company are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting practices in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs, and expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. In many instances, we could have reasonably used different accounting estimates, and in other instances, changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Accordingly, actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by our management. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows may be affected.
The following items require significant estimation or judgement. For additional information about our accounting policies, refer to “Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the audited financial statements included herewith.
Revenue Recognition
The Company has adopted the requirements of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) (“ASC 606”). ASC 606 establishes a principle for recognizing revenue upon the transfer of promised goods or services to customers, in an amount that reflects the expected consideration received in exchange for those goods or services.
Our revenues are derived primarily from fashion model bookings, and representation of social media influencers and actors for commercials, film, and television. Our performance obligations are primarily satisfied at a point in time when the talent has completed the contractual requirements.
A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. The performance obligations for most of the Company’s core modeling bookings are satisfied on the day of the event, and the “day rate” total fee is agreed in advance when the customer books the model for a particular date. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the contract’s transaction price to each performance obligation based on the estimated relative standalone selling price.
Model Costs
Model costs include amounts owed to talent, including taxes required to be withheld and remitted directly to taxing authorities, commissions owed to other agencies, and related costs such as those paid for photography. Costs are accrued in the period in which the event takes place consistent with when the revenue is recognized. The Company typically enters into contractual agreements with models under which the Company is obligated to pay talent upon collection of fees from the customer.
Share Based Compensation
Share-based compensation expense is estimated at the grant date based on the award’s fair value as calculated by the Black-Scholes option pricing model and is recognized on a straight line basis as an expense over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. The determination of the fair value of share-based awards on the date of grant using an option pricing model is affected by our stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables. These variables include the estimated volatility over the expected term of the awards, actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviors, risk-free interest rates, estimated forfeitures and expected dividends.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States, the United Kingdom, and numerous local jurisdictions.
Deferred tax assets are recognized for unused tax losses, unused tax credits, and deductible temporary differences to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which they can be used. Unused tax loss carry-forwards are reviewed at each reporting date and a valuation allowance is established if it is doubtful we will generate sufficient future taxable income to utilize the loss carry-forwards.
In determining the amount of current and deferred income tax, we take into account whether additional taxes, interest, or penalties may be due. Although we believe that we have adequately reserved for our income taxes, we can provide no assurance that the final tax outcome will not be materially different. To the extent that the final tax outcome is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will affect the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made and could have a material impact on our financial condition and operating results.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Accounts receivable are accounted for at net realizable value, do not bear interest and are short-term in nature. The Company maintains an allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability to collect on accounts receivable. Based on management’s assessment, the Company provides for estimated uncollectible amounts through a charge to earnings and a credit to the allowance. Balances that remain outstanding after the Company has used reasonable collection efforts are written off through a charge to the allowance and a credit to accounts receivable. The Company generally does not require collateral.
Goodwill and Intangible Asset Impairment Testing
The Company performs impairment testing at least annually and more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. An impairment loss is recognized to the extent that the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value. The Company sometimes utilizes an independent valuation specialist to assist with the determination of fair value. In accordance with ASU 2017-03, effective January 1, 2020, only a one-step quantitative impairment test is performed, whereby a goodwill impairment loss will be measured as the excess of a reporting unit’s carrying amount over its fair value. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit’s goodwill exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized for any excess of the carrying amount of the reporting unit’s goodwill.
Whenever events or circumstances change, entities have the option to first make a qualitative evaluation about the likelihood of goodwill impairment. If impairment is deemed more likely than not, management would perform the goodwill impairment test. Otherwise, the goodwill impairment test is not required. In assessing the qualitative factors, the Company assesses relevant events and circumstances that may impact the fair value and the carrying amount of the reporting unit. The identification of relevant events and circumstances and how these may impact a reporting unit’s fair value or carrying amount involve significant judgments and assumptions. The judgment and assumptions include the identification of macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, overall financial performance, Company specific events and share price trends, an assessment of whether each relevant factor will impact the impairment test positively or negatively, and the magnitude of any such impact