ITEM 7: MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following is management’s discussion and analysis of certain significant factors which have affected our financial position and operating results during the periods included in the accompanying consolidated financial statements and should be read in conjunction with those consolidated financial statements. This section of this 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-date comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K, can be found in ‘Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations’ in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 28, 2019.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The emergence of the coronavirus (COVID-19) around the world, and particularly in the United States and Canada, presents significant risks to the Company, not all of which the Company is able to fully evaluate or even foresee at the current time. The COVID-19 pandemic adversely affected the Company’s financial results and business operations in the Company’s fiscal year ended December 26, 2020, as noted below, and economic and health conditions in the United States and across most of the globe have continued to change throughout the year. Notably, a substantial number of the Company’s franchised store locations were temporarily closed to in-store consumer activities for a portion of 2020. Such temporary store closings may reoccur and customer traffic at those locations operational may continue to be reduced and may not return to historical levels in the near term depending on the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, the length of time it takes for normal economic and operating conditions to resume, additional governmental actions that may be taken and/or the re-imposition of restrictions that have been imposed to date, and numerous other uncertainties. The resulting economic disruption could also affect our ability to generate leasing revenue from new and existing leasing customers through reduced equipment leases and possible increases in defaults by existing leasing customers.
The COVID-19 pandemic has affected the Company’s operations in 2020, and may continue to do so indefinitely thereafter. All of these factors may have far reaching impacts on the Company’s business, operations, and financial results and conditions, directly and indirectly, including without limitation impacts on the health of the Company’s management and employees, its franchisees and leasing customers, customer and consumer behaviors, and on the overall economy. The scope and nature of these impacts, most of which are beyond the Company’s control, continue to evolve and the outcomes are uncertain.
Management cannot predict the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s franchisees or leasing customers nor to economic conditions generally, including the effects on consumer spending. The ultimate extent of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company is highly uncertain and will depend on future developments, and such effects could exist for an extended period of time even after the pandemic might end.
Overview
As of December 26, 2020, we had 1,264 franchises operating under the Plato’s Closet, Once Upon A Child, Play It Again Sports, Style Encore and Music Go Round brands and had a leasing portfolio of $13.3 million. Management closely tracks the following financial criteria to evaluate current business operations and future prospects: royalties, leasing activity, and selling, general and administrative expenses.
Our most significant source of franchising revenue is royalties received from our franchisees. During 2020, our royalties decreased $5.1 million or 10.0% compared to 2019, due to reduced franchisee retail sales resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Leasing income net of leasing expense in 2020 was $11.9 million compared to $14.0 million in 2019. Fluctuations in period-to-period leasing income and leasing expense can result from the manner and timing in which leasing income and leasing expense is recognized over the term of each particular lease in accordance with accounting guidance applicable to leasing. For this reason, we believe that more meaningful levels of leasing activity are the medium- to long-term trend in the purchases of equipment for lease customers and the size of the leasing portfolio. During 2020, we purchased $4.1 million in equipment for lease customers compared to $9.0 million in 2019 and $23.1 million in 2018. Our leasing portfolio (net investment in leases - current and long-term) was $13.3 million at December 26, 2020 compared to $25.3 million at December 28, 2019 and $39.0 million at December 29, 2018. The lower equipment purchases and the
decrease in the size of the leasing portfolio were a direct result of a decrease in the number of our customers installing leased equipment. We continue to explore ways to grow leased assets and add new customers to our leasing portfolio; however, continued low levels of equipment purchases for lease customers and decreases in the size of our portfolio will impact the long-term operating income of our leasing segment.
Management continually monitors the level and timing of selling, general and administrative expenses. The major components of selling, general and administrative expenses include salaries, wages and benefits, advertising, travel, occupancy, legal and professional fees. During 2020, selling, general and administrative expense decreased $4.5 million, or 17.6%, compared to the same period last year.
Management also monitors several nonfinancial factors in evaluating the current business operations and future prospects including franchise openings and closings and franchise renewals. The following is a summary of our franchising activity for the fiscal year ended December 26, 2020:
Renewal activity is a key focus area for management. Our franchisees sign 10-year agreements with us. The renewal of existing franchise agreements as they approach their expiration is an indicator that management monitors to determine the health of our business and the preservation of future royalties. In 2020, we renewed 99% of franchise agreements up for renewal. This percentage of renewal has ranged between 98% and 100% during the last three years.
Our ability to grow our operating income is dependent on our ability to: (i) effectively support our franchise partners so that they produce higher revenues, (ii) open new franchises, (iii) increase lease originations and minimize write-offs in our leasing portfolios, and (iv) control our selling, general and administrative expenses. A detailed description of the risks to our business along with other risk factors can be found in Item 1A “Risk Factors”.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth selected information from our Consolidated Statements of Operations expressed as a percentage of total revenue and the percentage change in the dollar amounts from the prior period:
Revenue
Revenues for the year ended December 26, 2020 totaled $66.1 million compared to $73.3 million in 2019.
Royalties and Franchise Fees
Royalties decreased to $46.3 million for 2020 from $51.4 million for the same period in 2019, a 10.0% decrease. The decrease is due to lower franchisee retail sales in 2020 compared to 2019. Lower franchisee retail sales were directly attributable to the temporary store closings and reduced customer traffic resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Franchise fees of $1.4 million for 2020 were comparable to $1.5 million for 2019. Franchise fees include initial franchise fees from the sale of new franchises and transfer fees related to the transfer of existing franchises. Franchise fee revenue is recognized over the estimated life of the franchise, beginning when the franchise opens. An overview of retail brand franchise fees is presented in the Franchising subsection of the Business section (Item 1).
Leasing Income
Leasing income decreased to $14.5 million in 2020 compared to $16.1 million for the same period in 2019. The decrease is primarily due to lower levels of interest income from the smaller lease portfolio, partially offset by a higher level of equipment sales to customers, when compared to last year.
Merchandise Sales
Merchandise sales include the sale of product to franchisees either through our Computer Support Center or through the Play It Again Sports buying group (together, “Direct Franchisee Sales”). Direct Franchisee Sales decreased to $2.2 million in 2020 from $2.6 million in 2019. The decrease is primarily due to a decrease in technology purchases by our franchisees.
Cost of Merchandise Sold
Cost of merchandise sold includes in-bound freight and the cost of merchandise associated with Direct Franchisee Sales. Cost of merchandise sold decreased to $2.1 million in 2020 from $2.5 million in 2019. The decrease was due to a decrease in Direct Franchisee Sales in 2020 discussed above. Cost of merchandise sold as a percentage of Direct Franchisee Sales for 2020 and 2019 was 95.0% and 94.3%, respectively.
Leasing Expense
Leasing expense increased to $2.6 million in 2020 compared to $2.0 million in 2019. The increase was due to an increase in the associated cost of equipment sales to customers discussed above.
Provision for Credit Losses
Provision for credit losses was ($79,300) in 2020 compared to ($78,300) in 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased 17.6% to $21.2 million in 2020 from $25.7 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in compensation related expenses inclusive of those related to organizational changes made in 2019, as well as decreases in conference and travel expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Interest Expense
Interest expense of $1.7 million in 2020 was comparable to $1.7 million in 2019.
Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes was calculated at an effective rate of 22.6% and 22.5% for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Segment Comparison of Fiscal Years 2020 and 2019
We currently have two reportable business segments, franchising and leasing. The franchising segment franchises value-oriented retail store concepts that buy, sell, trade and consign merchandise. The leasing segment includes (i) Winmark Capital Corporation, our middle-market equipment leasing business and (ii) Wirth Business Credit, Inc., our small-ticket financing business. Segment reporting is intended to give financial statement users a better view of how we manage and evaluate our businesses. Our internal management reporting is the basis for the information disclosed for our business segments and includes allocation of shared-service costs. The following tables summarize financial information by segment and provide a reconciliation of segment contribution to income from operations:
Revenues are all generated from United States operations other than franchising revenue from Canadian operations of $4.0 million and $4.7 million in each of fiscal 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Franchising Segment Operating Income
The franchising segment’s 2020 operating income decreased by $3.3 million, or 9.4%, to $31.9 million from $35.2 million for 2019. The decrease in segment contribution was primarily due to decreased royalty revenues, partially offset by a decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses.
Leasing Segment Operating Income
The leasing segment’s operating income for 2020 increased by $0.3 million, or 4.6%, to $8.3 million from $8.0 million for 2019. The increase in segment contribution was primarily due to a decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity have historically been cash flow from operations and borrowings. The components of the Consolidated Statements of Operations that reduce our net income but do not affect our liquidity include non-cash items for depreciation and compensation expense related to stock options.
We ended 2020 with $6.7 million in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash compared to $25.2 million in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at the end of 2019.
Operating activities provided $43.2 million of cash during 2020 compared to $50.6 million provided during 2019. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to decreases in principal collections on lease receivables and net income.
Investing activities used $4.2 million of cash during 2020 compared to $9.2 million used during 2019. Our most significant investing activities consist of the purchase of equipment for lease contracts as our franchising business is not capital intensive. Purchase of equipment for lease customers in 2020 was $4.1 million compared to $9.0 million in 2019.
Financing activities used $57.6 million of cash during 2020 compared to $18.9 million used during 2019. Our most significant financing activities over the past two years have consisted of net borrowings/payments on our debt facilities, the payment of dividends, repurchase of common stock, and net proceeds received from the exercise of stock options and discounted lease rentals. During 2019, we paid $3.4 million in cash dividends, used $24.0 million to purchase 150,000 shares of our common stock in a tender offer (the “2019 Tender Offer”) and made net payments on our Line of Credit and notes payable of $3.3 million; partially offset by $10.9 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options and $0.9 million in proceeds received from discounted lease rentals. During 2020, we used $49.0 million to purchase 300,000 shares of our common stock in a tender offer (the “2020 Tender Offer”), paid $14.2 million in cash dividends (including a $3.00 per share special cash dividend; the “2020 Special Dividend”) and made net payments on our line of credit and notes payable of $3.8 million; partially offset by $8.3 million of proceeds from exercise of stock options and $1.2 million in proceeds received from discounted lease rentals. (See Note 5 - “Shareholders’ Equity (Deficit)” and Note 6 - “Debt”).
We have debt obligations and future operating lease commitments for our corporate headquarters and satellite office space. As of December 26, 2020, we had no other material outstanding commitments. (See Note 12 - “Commitments and Contingencies”). The following table summarizes our significant future contractual obligations at December 26, 2020:
(1) Includes interest payable quarterly at rates ranging from 5.10% to 5.50% assuming principal payments in accordance with amortizing schedules.
(2) Refer to Part II, Item 8 in this report under Note 6 - “Debt” for additional information regarding long-term debt.
During 2020, our Line of Credit with CIBC Bank USA (formerly known as the PrivateBank and Trust Company) and BMO Harris Bank N.A. was amended to, among other things:
● Decrease the aggregate commitments from $40.0 million to $25.0 million;
● Remove BMO Harris Bank N.A. as a lender under the Credit Agreement;
● Extend the termination date from July 19, 2021 to August 31, 2024;
● Amend the tangible net worth covenant requirement to be reset as of September 26, 2020;
● Permit us to issue up to $25.0 million in additional term notes to one or more affiliates or managed accounts of Prudential;
● Provide the consent of CIBC Bank USA for the 2020 Special Dividend;
● Amend the fixed charge coverage ratio definition to remove the effect of the 2020 Special Dividend.
The Line of Credit has been and will continue to be used for general corporate purposes. During 2020 and 2019, the Line of Credit was used to finance in part the 2020 and 2019 Tender Offer. During 2020, in response to uncertainty resulting from the COVID-19 outbreak, we drew additional amount on the Line of Credit to increase our cash balances. All amounts drawn on the Line of Credit during 2020 were repaid by December 26, 2020.
The Line of Credit is secured by a lien against substantially all of our assets, contains customary financial conditions and covenants, and requires maintenance of minimum levels of debt service coverage and tangible net worth and maximum levels of leverage (all as defined within the Line of Credit). As of December 26, 2020, our borrowing availability under our Line of Credit was $25.0 million (the lesser of the borrowing base or the aggregate Line of Credit). There were no borrowings outstanding under the line of credit leaving $25.0 million available for additional borrowings.
The Line of Credit allows us to choose between two interest rate options in connection with our borrowings. The interest rate options are the Base Rate (as defined) and the LIBOR Rate (as defined) plus an applicable margin of 0% and 2.0% respectively. Interest periods for LIBOR borrowings can be one, two, three, six or twelve months, as selected by us. The Line of Credit also provides for non-utilization fees of 0.25% per annum on the daily average of the unused commitment.
We have a Note Agreement (the “Note Agreement”) with Prudential Investment Management, Inc., its affiliates and managed accounts (“Prudential”) that was entered into in May 2015. As of December 26, 2020, the aggregate principal outstanding under the Note Agreement was $21.9 million, consisting of $13.5 million from the $25.0 million Series A notes issued in May 2015 and $8.4 million from the $12.5 million Series B notes issued in August 2017.
The final maturity of the Series A and Series B notes is 10 years from the issuance date. For the Series A notes, interest at a rate of 5.50% per annum on the outstanding principal balance is payable quarterly, along with required prepayments of the principal of $500,000 quarterly for the first five years, and $750,000 quarterly thereafter until the principal is paid in full. For the Series B notes, interest at a rate of 5.10% per annum on the outstanding principal balance is payable quarterly, along with required prepayments of the principal of $312,500 quarterly until the principal is paid in full. The Series A and Series B notes may be prepaid, at our option, in whole or in part (in a minimum amount of $1.0 million), but prepayments require payment of a Yield Maintenance Amount, as defined in the Note Agreement.
During 2020, the Note Agreement was amended to, among other things, amend the tangible net worth coverage requirement to be reset as of September 26, 2020, to provide the consent of Prudential for the declaration and payment of the 2020 Special Dividend and to amend the fixed charge covenant ratio definition to remove the effect of the 2020 Special Dividend.
Our obligations under the Note Agreement are secured by a lien against substantially all of our assets, and the Note Agreement contains customary financial conditions and covenants, and requires maintenance of minimum levels of fixed charge coverage and tangible net worth and maximum levels of leverage (all as defined within the Note Agreement).
As of December 26, 2020, we were in compliance with all of the financial covenants under the Line of Credit and Note Agreement.
We expect to generate the cash necessary to pay our expenses, finance our leasing business and to pay the principal and interest on all of our outstanding debt from cash flows provided by operating activities and by opportunistically using other means to repay or refinance our obligations as we determine appropriate. Our ability to pay our expenses, finance
our leasing business and meet our debt service obligations depends on our future performance, which may be affected by financial, business, economic, and other factors including the risk factors described under Item 1A of this report. If we do not have enough money to pay our debt service obligations, we may be required to refinance all or part of our existing debt, sell assets, borrow more money or raise equity. In such an event, we may not be able to refinance our debt, sell assets, borrow more money or raise equity on terms acceptable to us or at all. Also, our ability to carry out any of these activities on favorable terms, if at all, may be further impacted by any financial or credit crisis which may limit access to the credit markets and increase our cost of capital.
We may utilize discounted lease financing to provide funds for a portion of our leasing activities. Rates for discounted lease financing reflect prevailing market interest rates and the credit standing of the lessees for which the payment stream of the leases are discounted. We believe that discounted lease financing will continue to be available to us at competitive rates of interest through the relationships we have established with financial institutions.
We believe that the combination of our cash on hand, the cash generated from our franchising business, cash generated from discounting sources and our Line of Credit will be adequate to fund our planned operations through 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies
The Company prepares the consolidated financial statements of Winmark Corporation and Subsidiaries in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. As such, the Company is required to make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions that it believes are reasonable based on information available. These estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the periods presented. There can be no assurance that actual results will not differ from these estimates. The critical accounting policies that the Company believes are most important to aid in fully understanding and evaluating the reported financial results include the following:
Revenue Recognition - Royalty Revenue and Franchise Fees
The Company collects royalties from each retail franchise based on a percentage of retail store gross sales. The Company recognizes royalties as revenue when earned. At the end of each accounting period, estimates of royalty amounts due are made based on the most recent franchisee sales information available. If there are significant changes in the actual performance of franchisees versus the Company’s estimates, its royalty revenue would be impacted. During 2020, the Company collected $10,200 more than it estimated at December 28, 2019. As of December 26, 2020, the Company’s royalty receivable was $1,518,000.
The Company collects initial franchise fees when franchise agreements are signed and recognizes the initial franchise fees as revenue over the estimated life of the franchise, beginning when the franchise is opened. Franchise fees collected from franchisees but not yet recognized as income are recorded as deferred revenue in the liability section of the consolidated balance sheet. As of December 26, 2020, deferred franchise fee revenue was $6,823,100.
Leasing Income Recognition
Leasing income for direct financing leases is recognized under the effective interest method. The effective interest method of income recognition applies a constant rate of interest equal to the internal rate of return on the lease.
For sales-type leases in which the equipment has a fair value greater or less than its carrying amount, selling profit/loss is recognized at commencement. For subsequent periods or for leases in which the equipment’s fair value is equal to its carrying amount, the recording of income is consistent with the accounting for a direct financing lease.
For leases that are accounted for as operating leases, income is recognized on a straight-line basis when payments under the lease contract are due.
Generally, when a lease is more than 90 days delinquent (when more than three monthly payments are owed), the lease is classified as being on non-accrual and the Company stops recognizing leasing income on that date. Payments received on leases in non-accrual status generally reduce the lease receivable. Leases on non-accrual status remain classified as such until there is sustained payment performance that, in the Company’s judgment, would indicate that all contractual amounts will be collected in full.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, “Significant Accounting Policies - Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements.