Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References herein to “we,” “us” or the “Company” refer to Simplicity Esports and Gaming Company, formerly known as Smaaash Entertainment Inc. and prior to that as I-AM Capital Acquisition Company. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere herein.
Overview
We are a global esports organization, that is capitalizing on the growth in esports through three business units, Simplicity One Brasil Ltda (“Simplicity One”), Simplicity Esports, LLC (“Simplicity Esports LLC”) and PLAYlive Nation, Inc. (“PLAYlive”).
Online Tournaments
As mentioned elsewhere herein, we acquired a database of over 400,000 paying esports gaming center customers in the acquisition of PLAYlive. In response to demand from customers for online esports tournaments and due to increased demand from COVID-19 related social distancing, we introduced a new initiative of online esports tournaments. We will directly promote our online Simplicity Esports tournaments to this database of over 400,000 existing customers via text messages. If we can convert merely 1% of these existing customers from the PLAYlive database to play in paid entry online Simplicity Esports tournaments, this may be a profitable business unit resulting in approximately $1,000,000 in annual revenues. At a 5% conversion rate, this business unit may generate approximately $5,000,000 in annual revenue. Management also intends to sell sponsorship and marketing activations for these online tournaments that would create additional revenue.
Esports Teams
We own and manage m professional esports teams domestically and internationally. Revenue is generated from prize winnings, corporate sponsorships, advertising, league subsidy payments and potential league revenue sharing payments from the publishers of video games.
Domestic Esports Teams - Simplicity Esports LLC
Through our wholly owned subsidiary Simplicity Esports LLC, we own and manage multiple professional esports teams competing in games such as Overwatch, Apex Legends, PUBG and more. We are committed to growing and enhancing the esports industry, fostering the development of amateurs to compete professionally and signing established professional gamers to support their paths to greater success.
International Esports Team - Simplicity One
Since January 2020, through our 90% owned subsidiary Simplicity One, we manage Flamengo eSports, one of the leading Brazilian League of Legends® teams. Flamengo eSports was established in 2017 as the Esports division of Clube de Regatas do Flamengo, a successful Brazilian sports organization, with over 30 million followers across social media accounts, known for its world-famous soccer team. Flamengo eSports’ League of Legends® team won the CBLoL Championship in September 2019, which qualified the team to compete at the 2019 League of Legends® World Championship in Europe as one of 24 teams from 13 different regions around the world. Flamengo Esports @flaesports was ranked as the 9th most tweeted about esports organization in the world in 2020.
Gaming Centers
We own and operate corporate and franchise esports gaming centers, through our wholly owned subsidiaries Simplicity Esports LLC and PLAYlive, throughout the U.S. giving casual gamers the opportunity to play in a social setting with other members of the gaming community. In addition, aspiring and established professional gamers have an opportunity to compete in local and national esports tournaments held in our gaming centers for prizes, notoriety, and potential contracts to play for one of our professional esports teams. In this business unit, revenue is generated from franchise royalties, the sale of game time, memberships, tournament entry fees, birthday party events, corporate party events, concessions and gaming-related merchandise.
Our business plan encompasses a brick and click physical and digital approach to further recognize revenue from all verticals, which we believe to be unique in the industry. The physical centers, together with our esports teams, lifestyle brand and marketing campaigns offer opportunities for additional revenue via strategic partnerships with both endemic and non-endemic brands. Our ultimate goal is to further engage a diverse fan base with a 360-degree approach driving traffic to both our digital platform, tournaments, and physical real estate to maximize the monetization opportunities with these relationships. In addition, we have proprietary intellectual capital, fan engagement strategies and brand development blueprints which complement our publicly available information.
Optimally, the esports gaming centers of Simplicity Esports LLC (“Simplicity Esports Gaming Centers”) will measure between 2,000 and 4000 square feet, with dozens of gaming stations. The Simplicity Esports Gaming Centers will feature cutting edge technology, futuristic aesthetic décor and dynamic high-speed gaming equipment. We believe our brick-and-click strategy will present attractive opportunities for sponsors and advertisers to connect with our audience, creating an intriguing monetization opportunity for sponsors and advertisers.
Creating content that engages fans, sponsors and developers, while promoting our brand is one of our primary goals. Our talented team will continue to produce unique in-depth content which showcases aspects of esports for fans. We seek to reach a broad demographic encompassing the casual, amateur and professional gaming community. Our philosophy is to enhance our footprint for both endemic and non-endemic partnerships. We believe we possess a deep perception of our markets and understand the new age of branding while maintaining authenticity to the gaming community that comprises our fanbase.
Corporate Gaming Centers
Through our subsidiary entities, we currently operate 15 corporate-owned retail Simplicity Esports Gaming Centers, one of which was acquired during the third fiscal quarter ended February 28, 2021 and two of which were acquired in the fourth fiscal quarter ended May 31, 2021. Furthermore, we have engaged a national tenant representation real estate broker to assist in the strategic planning and negotiations for our future Simplicity Esports Gaming Center locations. We contemplate that new Simplicity Esports Gaming Centers will be funded by us as well as a combination of tenant improvement allowances from landlords and sponsorships. As announced in June 2020, we are in discussions with commercial property owners regarding their desire to have us open 7,000 to 12,000 square foot Arenas at their properties. There are multiple locations available to us with a percentage of gross sales rent lease structure (as opposed to fixed rent payments), and construction funds offered by the landlord to assist with the build out and equipping of our planned Arenas. These Arenas are planned as hubs in our hub and spoke model that will see smaller corporate and franchisee owned gaming centers as spokes connected to Arenas as hubs for larger events and tournaments.
Franchised Gaming Centers
Due to interest from potential franchisees, we have launched a franchising program to accelerate the expansion of our planned nationwide footprint. We sell specific franchise territories, through our wholly owned subsidiary PLAYlive, and assist with the establishment and buildout of esports gaming centers to potential business owners that desire to use our branding, infrastructure and process to open and operate gaming centers. We currently operate 12 fully constructed franchise esports gaming centers. Franchise revenue is generated from the sale of franchise territories, supplying furniture, equipment and merchandise to the franchisees for buildout of their centers, a gross sales royalty fee and a national marketing fee. We license the use of our branding, assist in identifying and negotiating commercial locations, assist in overseeing the buildout and development, provide access to proprietary software for point of sale, inventory management, employee training and other HR functions. Franchisees also have an opportunity to participate in our national esports tournament events, and benefit from the growing profile of our professional esports teams. Once an esports gaming center is opened, we provide operational guidance, support and use of branding elements in exchange for a monthly royalty fee calculated as 6% of gross sales. On January 1, 2020, we implemented a national marketing fee of 1% of gross sales. To date, we have sold five of these franchise territories. COVID-19 travel restrictions caused us to suspend the sale of new franchise territories from April 1, 2020 until October 1, 2020. During this time, a pipeline of interested applicants has accumulated, and we anticipate new franchise territory sales over the next 12 months as a result.
The combination of the esports gaming centers, owned or franchised by our wholly owned subsidiaries Simplicity Esports LLC or PLAYlive, provides us with what we believe is the largest footprint of esports gaming centers in North America. Over the next 12 months, existing PLAYlive esports gaming centers will be rebranded to Simplicity Esports gaming centers. All newly opened franchise esports gaming centers will be branded as Simplicity Esports gaming centers and have numerous gaming PC’s. All gaming centers in our footprint will be participating venues in our national esports tournaments.
Franchise Roll Up Strategy
We began implementing a franchise roll-up strategy in July 2020 as a result of the disruption caused by COVID-19 related stay at home orders, and the disruption it caused to the commercial real estate market. The reduction in revenues for some franchisees because of stay-at-home orders, and government mandates to remain closed created significant accrued rent payments due to landlords. We have been able to come to terms with many franchisees to acquire the assets of their gaming centers and make them corporate owned. We have simultaneously negotiated new leases with some of the largest national mall chains, including Simon Property Group and Brookfield Asset Management, and are in the process of negotiating additional locations with other landlords. The new leases involve significant reductions in or elimination of fixed rent and the addition of percentage of revenues rent terms. To date, we have signed 13 letters of intent and executed definitive agreements for 11 of those locations during fiscal year 2021. We expect each of these locations to be profitable as a result of the significant reduced rent expense via the percentage rent structure.
Our Stream Team
The Simplicity Esports and Flamengo Esports stream team encompasses over 30 commentators (commonly known as “casters”), influencers and personalities who connect to a dedicated fan base. This group of live personalities represent our organization to the fullest with their own unique style. We are proud to support and present a diverse group of gamers as we engage fans across a multiple of esports genres. Our Twitch affiliation has enabled our stream team influences to reach a broad fan base. Additionally, we have created several niches within the streaming community which has enabled us to engage fans within certain titles on a 24/7 basis. Our notoriety in the industry is evidenced by our audience that views millions of minutes of Simplicity Esports’ and Flamengo Esports’ content monthly, via various social media outlets including YouTube, Twitter and Twitch. Through Simplicity Esports LLC, we have begun to implement a unique approach to ensure the ultimate fan friendly esports experience. Our intention is to have gamers involved at the grassroots level and feel a sense of unity as we compete with top class talent. Our management and players are known within the esports community and we plan to use their skills to create a seamless content creation plan helping gamers feel closer to our brand than any other in the industry.
For the fiscal years ended May 31, 2021 and 2020, we generated revenues of $1,552,000 and $861,000 and reported net losses of $6,096,000 and $2,620,000, respectively, and negative cash flow from operating activities of $1,416,452 and $1,522,486, respectively. We had an accumulated deficit of $12,292,000 at May 31, 2021. We anticipate that we will continue to report losses and negative cash flow. There is substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern as a result of our historical recurring losses and negative cash flows from operations as well as our dependence on private equity and financings. See “Risk Factors- We have a history of operating losses and our auditors have indicated that there is a substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.”
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our operating results for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2021 and 2020.
Summary of Statement of Operations for the Fiscal Year Ended May 31, 2021 and 2020:
Revenue
We generated $1,551,923 of revenue for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021 as compared to $861,410 for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020. The increase in revenue is principally due to the increase in the number of company owned stores we operate offset by a reduction in franchise royalties as franchises were converted to company owned stores.
Franchise royalties, franchise deposit and termination revenue and company-owned stores sales, totaling $1,359,000 and $697,000, in the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021 and 2020. In addition, Esports revenue was $193,000 during the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, up from $164,000 in the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020. This increase was due to inclusion of the full year of operations of Simplicity One Brazil which was acquired in January 2020.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold during the fiscal years ended May 31, 2021 and 2020 totaled $1,014,000 and $592,000, respectively. Cost of goods sold is related to player and team expenses related to esports revenues and cost of gaming system and store merchandise sold at company owned store including the depreciation on the gaming equipment needed to generate these revenues. The increase is cost of goods sold is directly related to the increase in company owned store revenues.
Other Operating Expenses
Other operating expenses for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021 totaled $5,335,000, a $3,002,000 increase from the $2,333,000 of other operating expense in the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020. Included in this increase were compensation and related benefits increase of $1,227,000 primarily due to $862,000 increase in stock based compensation coupled with a $253,000 increase in salaries, wages and the related insurance and taxes predominantly driven by the increase in employees related to the new company owned stores; professional fees increase of $272,000 of which $175,000 was for new design services and the $97,000 was for increased legal, accounting and consulting services; an increase in general and administrative expenses of $475,000 primarily due to an increase in amortization of $85,000, an increase in rent of $198,000, an increase in contracted services of $141,000 and an increase in utilities of $51,000. In addition, there was an increase of $359,000 in impairment expense on terminated franchises.
Other income (expense)
Other income/(expense) was an expense of $1,397,000 and income of $66,000 during the fiscal years ended May 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in other expense of $1,463,000 is due to an increase of $1,368,000 of interest expense on the notes payable mentioned herein, $20,000 increase in foreign exchange losses, a $94,000 reduction in debt forgiveness income and a $69,000 reduction in other income offset by a $19,000 increase in other income.
Net loss attributable to non-controlling interest
As part of the conversion of franchises into company-owned stores, two of the original franchisees retained a 21% interest in the stores, one retained a 49% interest and 24% of our interest in Simplicity One Brasil, some of which is owned by our Chairman, as noted in the related party footnote. As such, a portion of the net loss incurred during the year is allocated to those parties. For the fiscal year ended May 31, 2021 the net loss attributable to non-controlling interests was $98,000 which is an increase of $52,000 from the year ended May 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In 2018, the completion of the Initial Public Offering and simultaneous Private Placement, inclusive of the underwriters’ exercise of their over-allotment option, generated gross proceeds to the Company of $54,615,000. Related transaction costs amounted to approximately $3,838,000, consisting of $3,360,000 of underwriting fees, including $1,820,000 of deferred underwriting commissions payable (which was held in the Trust Account) and $478,000 of Initial Public Offering costs.
Following the Initial Public Offering and the underwriter’s partial exercise of the over-allotment option, a total of $52,780,000 was placed in the Trust Account and we had $552,190 of cash held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of all costs related to the Initial Public Offering.
On November 20, 2018, in connection with the closing of our initial Business Combination, the funds in the Trust Account were used for, among other things, the following:
● $45,455,596 to redeem 4,448,260 shares
● $7,255,306 to fund the escrow agreement for Polar and K2
● $150,000 to fund our investment in Smaaash
As of May 31, 2020, we had no cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account.
As of May 31, 2021 and 2020, we had cash of $414,000 and $160,000, which is available for use by us to cover the costs associated with general corporate purposes. In addition, as of May 31, 2021 and 2020, we had accounts payable and accrued expenses of $1,605,000 and $1,549,000, respectively.
For the fiscal years ended May 31, 2021 and 2020, cash used in operating activities amounted to $1,409,000 and $1,523,000, respectively. The decline in net cash used of $115,000 is due to an increase in shares for services of $2,822,000, and increase in non-cash interest expense of $1,118,000, an impairment loss of $359,000 an increase in depreciation and amortization charges of $258,000 and a decline in debt forgiveness income of $94,000 offset by an increased net loss of $3,529,000. In addition changes in our operating liabilities and assets used $174,000 of cash, a decline of $981,000 from May 31, 2020. The decline in cash provided is due to reduced accounts payable and accrued expenses of $778.000, a reduction in deferred revenues of $281,000, an increase in inventory of $47,000, an increase in prepaid expenses and security deposits of $34,000 and an increase in due from franchisee of $25,000, offset by reduced accounts receivable of $96,000 and increased deferred brokerage fees of $88,000. Cash used in investing activities amounted to $152,000, a reduction of $15,000 from the prior year. The reduction is attributable to reduced purchase of property and equipment of $161,000, offset by higher use of cash for acquisitions of $176,000. Cash provided from financing activities amounted to $1,815,000, an increase of $1,534,000 over the prior year. The increase is mainly attributable to a net cash increase of $1,087,000 for the net effect of the issuance in notes payable, coupled with an increase in funds received from private placement units of $379,000, an increase non-controlling interest in subsidiaries of $179,000, offset by an increase in deferred financing costs of $111,000.
We will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Going Concern
The Company’s consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that it will continue as a going concern, which contemplates continuity of operations, realization of assets, and liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business.
As reflected in the consolidated financial statements, the Company has an accumulated deficit as of May 31, 2021, a net loss and net cash used in operating activities for the reporting period then ended. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year from the of the date that the financial statements are issued.
The Company’s cash position may not be sufficient to support the Company’s daily operations. Management plans to raise additional funds by way of a private or public offering. While the Company believes in the viability of its strategy and its ability to generate sufficient revenue and to raise additional funds, there can be no assurances to that effect. Should the Company fail to raise additional capital, it may be compelled to reduce the scope of its planned future business activities.
The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the Company’s ability to further implement its business plan, to generate sufficient revenue and to raise additional funds by way of public and/or private offerings.
The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments related to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) emerged in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China. While initially the outbreak was largely concentrated in China and caused significant disruptions to its economy, it has now spread to several other countries and infections have been reported globally.
Because COVID-19 infections have been reported throughout the United States, certain federal, state and local governmental authorities have issued stay-at-home orders, proclamations and/or directives aimed at minimizing the spread of COVID-19. Additional, more restrictive proclamations and/or directives may be issued in the future. As a result, all of our corporate and franchised Simplicity Gaming Centers had been closed effective April 1, 2020. Although our franchise agreements with franchisees of Simplicity Gaming Centers require a minimum monthly royalty payment to us from the franchisees regardless of whether the franchised Simplicity Gaming Centers are operating, there is a potential risk that franchisees of Simplicity Gaming Centers will default in their obligations to pay their minimum monthly royalty payment to us. As of May 31, 2020, some of our franchised gaming centers have begun to re-open.
The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s operations is unknown and will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the duration of the COVID-19 outbreak, new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, and any additional preventative and protective actions that governments, or the Company, may direct, which may result in an extended period of continued business disruption, reduced customer traffic and reduced operations. Any resulting financial impact cannot be reasonably estimated at this time but is anticipated to have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
The measures taken to date impacted the Company’s business for the fiscal fourth quarter and potentially beyond. Management expects that all of its business segments, across all of its geographies, will be impacted to some degree, but the significance of the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on the Company’s business and the duration for which it may have an impact cannot be determined at this time.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, except as follows:
On November 20, 2018, the Company entered into a settlement and release agreement with Maxim Group, LLC, the underwriter for the IPO. Pursuant to the Settlement Agreement, the Company made a cash payment of $20,000 to Maxim and issued a demand secured promissory note in favor of Maxim in the amount of $1.8 million to settle the payment obligations of the Company under the underwriting agreement dated August 16, 2017, by and between the Company and Maxim. The Company also agreed to remove the restrictive legends on an aggregate of 52,000 shares of its common stock held by Maxim and its affiliate.
The Company has entered into various lease agreements in support of our corporate offices and our gaming centers. The majority of the gaming center leases have all been recorded with the appropriate Right of Use (“ROU”) asset and related liability.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates.
Revenue Recognition
As of January 1, 2018, the Company adopted Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) (“ASC 606”). The new guidance sets forth a new five-step revenue recognition model which replaces the prior revenue recognition guidance in its entirety and is intended to eliminate numerous industry-specific pieces of revenue recognition guidance that have historically existed in GAAP. The underlying principle of the new standard is that a business or other organization will recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects what it expects to receive in exchange for the goods or services. The standard also requires more detailed disclosures and provides additional guidance for transactions that were not addressed completely in the prior accounting guidance. The Company adopted the standard using the modified retrospective method and the adoption did not have a material impact on its financial statements.
The Company recognizes revenue when performance obligations under the terms of a contract with the customer are satisfied. Product sales occur once control is transferred upon delivery to the customer. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for transferring goods and services. Our revenue is derived from two sources, the first is from the sale of the rights to our players to third parties and second from participation and prize money awarded at gaming tournaments.
Intangible Assets and impairment
Intangible assets that are subject to amortization are reviewed for potential impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that carrying amounts may not be recoverable. Assets not subject to amortization are tested for impairment at least annually. The Company had intangible assets subject to amortization related to its acquisition of Simplicity Esports, LLC. These costs were included in intangible assets on our balance sheet and amortized on a straight-line basis when placed into service over the estimated useful lives of the costs, which is 3 to 5 years.
The Company periodically reviews its intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be fully recoverable. The Company recognizes an impairment loss when the sum of expected undiscounted future cash flows is less that the carrying amount of the asset. The amount of impairment is measured as the difference between the asset’s estimated fair value and its book value. For the year ended May 31, 2021, the company used a third-party valuation expert to review our intangible assets and based upon this independent valuation, the company did not need to take an impairment charge.
Goodwill
Goodwill is the excess of our purchase cost over the fair value of the net assets of acquired businesses. We do not amortize goodwill, but we assess our goodwill for impairment at least annually. Our assessment date was May 31, 2021, and the company used a third-party valuation expert to review our goodwill and this independent valuation, indicated no impairment.
Operating Lease Right-of-Use Assets and Operating Lease Liabilities
The Company adopted ASC Topic 842, Leases (Topic 842) and has elected the ‘package of practical expedients’, which permits it not to reassess under the new standard its prior conclusions about lease identification, lease classification and initial direct costs. In addition, the Company elected not to apply Topic 842 to arrangements with lease terms of 12 months or less. The Company has entered into various lease agreements mainly to support the operations of its gaming centers.
The significant assumption used to determine the present value of the lease liability was a discount rate ranging from 10% to 12% which was based upon the Company’s estimated incremental borrowing rate at the start of the lease term.