Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, including statements that involve expectations, plans or intentions (such as those relating to future business, future results of operations or financial condition, new or planned features or services, management strategies or timing and other expectations regarding our business). You can identify these forward-looking statements by words such as “may,” “will,” “would,” “should,” “could,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “intend,” “plan” and other similar expressions. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in our forward-looking statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, among others, those discussed in “Item 1A: Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as in our consolidated financial statements, related notes, and the other information appearing elsewhere in this report and our other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. We do not intend, and undertake no obligation, to update any of our forward-looking statements after the date of this report to reflect actual results or future events or circumstances. Given these risks and uncertainties, readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements. You should read the following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in conjunction with the special note regarding forward-looking statements, consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in this report.
Financial Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2020
•
Total revenue was $2.5 billion, an increase of 34% year-over-year.
•
Total costs and expenses were $3.2 billion, including stock-based compensation expense of $390 million.
•
Loss from operations was $631 million.
•
Net loss was $745 million.
•
Cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities were $2.1 billion.
As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $2.2 billion. We expect losses from operations to continue for the foreseeable future as we incur costs and expenses related to brand development, expansion of market share, continued development of our mobile shopping marketplace infrastructure and development of other businesses.
Initial Public Offering
In December 2020, we completed our IPO of Class A common stock, in which we sold 46 million shares. The shares were sold at an IPO price of $24.00 per share for net proceeds of $1.1 billion, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $52 million. We incurred offering costs, net of reimbursements, of approximately $6 million.
Our Financial Model
Our business benefits from powerful network effects, fueled by our data advantage and massive scale. As more users join Wish, attracted by our affordable value proposition and shopping experience, we are able to increase revenue potential for our merchants. As more merchants succeed on Wish, more merchants join the platform and grow their businesses with Wish, broadening our product selection, which in turn improves user experience. By developing a strategy focused on users and merchants, we align user and merchant success with the success of our financial model. The growth in users and merchants generates more data, further strengthens our data advantage and creates an even better experience for everyone on our platform, in turn attracting more users and high-quality merchants.
Our model relies on cost-effectively adding new users, converting those users into buyers and improving engagement and monetization of those buyers on Wish over time as well as adding new merchants, delivering economic success for those merchants, and having those merchants use more of our end-to-end platform.
The following are key elements of our financial model that drive our growth:
•
Increase the scale and growth of our user and buyer base. Attracting and engaging users have been our key areas of focus since our founding. We measure our effectiveness in attracting and engaging users through metrics such as our MAUs, which increased over 19% from the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase has primarily been driven by the growing popularity and recognition of our brand and platform, the user preferences for our differentiated mobile shopping experience, wide selection of attractively priced products, and the success of our promotional and marketing campaigns. As a result, we have experienced significant revenue growth in recent periods. We will need to continue to invest in our marketing efforts to attract additional users and buyers and to enhance our brand and drive user engagement, and over time we will need to do this cost-effectively in order to achieve profitability.
•
Invest in our sales and marketing engine. We have made significant investments in our data science which underpins all aspects of our operations including marketing and user acquisition. By leveraging our unique and scaled data set and algorithms, our goal is to execute cost-effective and successful digital marketing strategies to acquire new users and re-engage existing users on the Wish platform. We consider our user acquisition expertise a strong competitive advantage and have invested in this capability over time to continue to drive user and revenue growth. We will need to continue to invest in our marketing efforts to attract new users and increase user engagement.
•
Increase the lifetime value of our users. Our ability to successfully drive improvements in user engagement and monetization on the Wish platform will be an important driver in expanding the lifetime value of our users and allow us to achieve profitability. We utilize data science to estimate lifetime value of users and accordingly adjust our user acquisition strategies to maximize our return on marketing investment. We also deploy dynamic pricing to drive effective monetization of our user base. Dynamic pricing utilizes our data to adjust prices across products to optimize user conversion and has increased our margins.
•
Continue to grow and diversify our merchant base and product categories. As of December 31, 2020, we had over 550,000 merchants on our platform. While most of our merchants today are based in China and sell unbranded goods, we plan to continue to grow our merchant base globally and diversify our product categories. While we initially grew our platform focusing on merchants in China due to their production strength, we have since started to diversify our merchant base around the world; the number of merchants on our platform in North America, Europe, and Latin America has grown since 2019. We believe the increase in the number and the diversity of merchants leads to more competitive pricing and broader product categories, which will in turn help us attract more users, generating powerful network effects.
•
Continue to innovate and expand our platform. We generate revenue primarily from commissions earned on the sales by our merchants on the Wish marketplace, as well as from fees from offering our logistics platform to our merchants. In addition, we utilize our data to dynamically vary prices across products to optimize conversion as well as our margin. We aim to enhance the value of our platform by broadening our marketplace service offerings, expanding the size and engagement of our user base, and improving data insights and services available to our merchants across digital marketing, payments, logistics, user support, and operations. We believe that expanding our platform will attract more merchants to Wish and drive our revenue.
In recent periods, our logistics and ProductBoost offerings provided critical capabilities to our merchants to improve their operations and sales, which has driven their success on Wish and in turn, our growth. We have been able to drive strong adoption of these merchant offerings and intend to continue to invest to increase this adoption. We generated $514 million of logistics revenue and $200 million of ProductBoost revenue in 2020. We aim to continue to expand our platform so that we can grow and diversify our future revenue streams.
•
Our ability to manage our costs by leveraging the scale of our business. Our results of operations depend on our ability to manage our costs. While we expect our costs to increase as we grow our business, we do not expect our costs to grow at the same pace as our revenue because we do not require a proportional increase in the size of our workforce and infrastructure to support our revenue growth. This operating leverage resulted in revenue per employee of approximately $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which increased from approximately $2.8 million in 2019. We believe that our platform model has significant operating leverage and enables us to realize structural cost savings.
As we focused on driving the growth of our marketplace, we invested significantly in marketing activities to target and acquire users we believe will have a high propensity to transact on our platform, and promote our brand and our platform. Our sales and marketing expenses were $1.7 billion in 2020, $1.5 billion in 2019, and $1.6 billion in 2018, representing 67%, 77%, and 91% of revenue, respectively. While our sales and marketing expenses comprise the majority of our operating expenses, we have the flexibility to scale them up or down on a daily basis depending on the unit economics of the users. These marketing spend decisions are informed by deep data science optimized to maximize return. We anticipate that sales and marketing expenses will continue to be our most significant operating expense in the future and our overall profitability will depend on the success of our investments in sales and marketing.
As our business continues to grow, we believe we will be able to take advantage of economies of scale to further improve our operational efficiency.
•
Capital efficiency of our business model. We operate an asset-light business model and have achieved substantial revenue growth with limited capital requirements. Our business model enables us to avoid the costs, risks and capital requirements associated with sourcing merchandise or holding inventory. As a result, our growth has been highly capital efficient.
Key Financial and Performance Metrics
In addition to the measures presented in our consolidated financial statements, we monitor the following key metrics and other financial information to measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, and make strategic decisions.
Monthly Active Users
We define MAUs as the number of unique users that visited the Wish platform, either on our mobile app, mobile web, or on a desktop, during the month. MAUs for a given reporting period equal the average of the MAUs for that period. An active user is identified by a unique email-address; a single person can have multiple user accounts via multiple email addresses. The change in MAUs in a reported period captures both the inflow of new users as well as the outflow of existing users who did not visit the platform in a given month. We view the number of MAUs as key driver of revenue growth as well as a key indicator of user engagement and awareness of our brand.
LTM Active Buyers
As of the last date of each reported period, we determine our number of unique active buyers by counting the total number of individual users who have placed at least one order on the Wish platform, either on our mobile app, mobile web, or on a desktop, during the preceding 12 months. We, however, exclude from the computation those buyers whose order is cancelled before the item is shipped and the purchase price is refunded. The number of Active Buyers is an indicator of our ability to attract and monetize a large user base to our platform and of our ability to convert visits into purchases. We believe that increasing our Active Buyers will be a significant driver to our future revenue growth.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
We provide Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure that represents our net income (loss) before interest and other income (expense), net (which includes foreign exchange gain or loss and gain or loss on one time transactions recognized), income tax expense, and depreciation and amortization, adjusted to eliminate stock-based compensation expense and remeasurement of redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability, and to add back certain recurring other items. Additionally, we provide Adjusted EBITDA Margin, a non-GAAP financial measure that represents Adjusted EBITDA divided by revenue. Below is a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure.
We have included Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin in this report because they are key measures used by our management and board of directors to understand and evaluate our operating performance and trends and how we are allocating internal resources, to prepare and approve our annual budget and to develop short- and long-term operating plans. We also believe that the exclusion of certain items in calculating Adjusted EBITDA can provide a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our business as it removes the impact of non-cash items and certain variable charges.
Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical measure, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•
although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not consider the impact of stock-based compensation and related charges;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us; and
•
other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these limitations, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin alongside other financial performance measures, including various cash flow metrics, net income (loss) and our other GAAP results.
The following table reflects the reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA and net loss as a percentage of revenue to Adjusted EBITDA margin for each of the periods indicated:
(1)
Prior to our IPO, we granted restricted stock units (RSUs) that contain both service-based and liquidity-based vesting conditions to our executives and employees. Vesting of these RSUs is subject to continuous service with the Company and satisfaction of a liquidity condition. The service condition for these RSUs is satisfied over four to five years. The liquidity condition was satisfied upon the completion of our IPO in December 2020. As a result, we recognized in the fourth quarter of 2020 a cumulative stock-based compensation expense of approximately $379 million related to these RSUs for which both the service and liquidity vesting conditions were achieved as of December 31, 2020. Refer to Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data for more information.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Free Cash Flow
We also provide Free Cash Flow, a non-GAAP financial measure that represents net cash provided by (used in) operating activities less purchases of property and equipment. We believe that Free Cash Flow is an important measure since we use third parties to host our services and therefore we do not incur significant capital expenditures to support revenue generating activities.
Free Cash Flow has limitations as an analytical measure, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•
it is not a substitute for net cash provided by (used in) operating activities;
•
other companies may calculate Free Cash Flow or similarly titled non-GAAP measures differently or may use other measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of free cash flow as a tool for comparison; and
•
the utility of free cash flow is further limited as it does not reflect our future contractual commitments and does not represent the total increase or decrease in our cash balance for any given period.
Because of these limitations, you should consider Free Cash Flow alongside other financial performance measures, such as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities, net income (loss) and our other GAAP results.
The following table reflects the reconciliation of net cash provided by (used in) operating activities to Free Cash Flow for each of the periods indicated:
Key Factors Affecting our Performance
We believe that our performance and future success depend on a number of factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in the section titled “Risk Factors.”
Buyer Lifetime Value and Buyer Acquisition Cost Efficiency
Our success relies in part on our ability to engage users and convert them to buyers, while simultaneously optimizing our efficiency and marketing spend and efforts. Failure to effectively engage users and convert them to buyers on a cost-effective basis would adversely affect our revenue growth and operating results.
We are intently focused on optimizing the lifetime value (“LTV”) of our buyers and we seek to improve the ratio of LTV to buyer acquisition cost (“BAC”) in an effort to optimize the efficiency of our marketing spend.
We define LTV per buyer as the cumulative gross profit over a period of time attributable to new buyers acquired during a particular year (a “cohort”) divided by the total number of new buyers acquired in that cohort. We define BAC as the total digital advertising expense targeting new installations of our app in a given period divided by the number of new buyers acquired during that same period.
We look at LTV per buyer to demonstrate the long-term value attributable to each buyer acquired. We see LTV of our buyers as an indicator of the success or challenges we have in engaging our buyers, and driving monetization on our platform over time.
Revenue from New Buyers and Existing Buyers
Our success also depends on our ability to increase engagement from existing buyers while simultaneously attracting and engaging new buyers. Therefore, we focus on increasing revenue from both new and existing buyers. If we are unable to increase engagement and revenue from existing buyers and attract new buyers to our platform, our revenue and results of operations will be negatively impacted.
We have been able to consistently grow revenue from both new and existing buyers. While we continue to acquire new buyers, the share of revenue from existing buyers has also increased over time, indicating our ability to improve engagement and monetization of existing buyers. However, these positive trends in revenue from new buyers and existing buyers may not continue and may be negatively impacted by our inability to continue to increase engagement from existing buyers and attract and engage new buyers.
Average Revenue per Active Buyer
Our success also relies on our ability to continue to improve our platform and maintain and increase engagement from our active buyers. Therefore, we use average revenue per active buyer in a given cohort as an indicator of the level of engagement, the success of our discovery-based and personalized user experience, the quality of our products listed, and the overall scale and growth of our business. If we are unable to improve our platform, including, among other things, creating a positive user experience, ensuring that quality products are listed for sale, and otherwise increasing or maintaining engagement, then average revenue per active buyer may decline, which could lead to decreased revenue, which would have an adverse effect on our results of operations.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenue consists of marketplace and logistics revenue.
Marketplace revenue: We provide a mix of marketplace services to merchants. We provide merchants access to our marketplace where merchants display and sell their products to users. We also provide ProductBoost services to help merchants promote their products within our marketplace. Marketplace revenue includes commission fees collected in connection with user purchases of the merchants’ products. The commission fees vary depending on factors such as user location, demand, product type, and dynamic pricing. We recognize revenue when a user’s order is processed and the related order information has been made available to the merchant. Commission fees are recognized net of estimated refunds and chargebacks. Marketplace revenue also includes ProductBoost fees for displaying a merchant’s selected products in preferential locations within our marketplace. We recognize revenue when the merchants’ selected products are displayed. We refer to our marketplace revenue, excluding ProductBoost revenue, as our core marketplace revenue.
Logistics revenue: Our logistics offering for merchants, introduced in 2018, is designed for direct end-to-end single order shipment from a merchant’s location to the user. Logistics services include transportation and delivery of the merchant’s products to the user. Merchants are required to prepay for logistics services on a per order basis.
We recognize revenue over time as the merchant simultaneously receives and consumes the logistics services benefit as the services are performed. We use an output method of progress based on days in transit as it best depicts our progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation.
Cost of Revenue and Operating Expenses
Cost of revenue. Cost of revenue includes colocation and data center charges, interchange and other fees for credit card processing services, fraud and chargeback prevention service charges, costs of refunds and chargebacks made to our users that we are not able to collect from our merchants, depreciation and amortization of property and equipment, shipping charges, tracking costs, warehouse fees, and employee-related costs, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation expense for our infrastructure, merchant support, and logistics personnel. Cost of revenue also includes an allocation of general IT and facilities overhead expenses.
Sales and marketing. Our sales and marketing expenses are primarily driven by the cost of acquiring and engaging users by targeting social media and search engine digital advertisements, outsourced user support services, sponsorships and local marketing campaigns, and employee-related costs, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation, for our employees involved in marketing, user support, and business development functions. Sales and marketing spend also includes an allocation of general IT and facilities overhead expenses as well as business development expenses for attracting merchants and conducting ongoing merchant education. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to decrease as a percentage of our revenue over the long term, although our expenses may fluctuate from period to period due to the timing of expenses related to our sales and marketing campaigns.
Product development. Our product development expenses consist primarily of employee-related costs, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation for our engineers and other employees involved in product development activities. Product development costs have historically been expensed as incurred. Product development costs also include the cost of IT used by the product development team as well as an allocation of general IT and facilities overhead expenses. We expect our product development expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in the development of our marketplace and merchant offerings.
General and administrative. Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee-related costs, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation for our executives, finance, legal, information technology, human resources, and other administrative teams. General and administrative expenses also include outside consulting, legal, tax, and accounting services, and facilities and other supporting overhead costs. We expect our general and administrative expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in our corporate infrastructure to support our revenue growth. Further, we expect to incur additional general and administrative expenses in connection with being a public company.
Remeasurement of Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Warrant Liability
Remeasurement of our redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability was as a result of the change to the underlying redeemable convertible preferred stock value at the end of each reporting period. After our IPO, we no longer incur expenses related to the change in fair value of our redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability as the related warrant was exercised upon our IPO and the redeemable convertible preferred warranty liability was reclassified to Class A common stock and additional paid-in capital as it is now considered permanent equity.
Interest and Other Income (expense), net
Interest and other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, interest expense, foreign exchange gain or loss and gain or loss from our foreign currency forward contracts.
Income Tax
Income taxes consist primarily of income taxes in certain U.S. state and foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. As we have expanded our global operations, we have incurred an increase in foreign tax expense. We expect this trend to continue.
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 to be a pandemic. In an effort to contain and mitigate the spread of COVID-19, many countries, as well as many states within the United States, have imposed unprecedented restrictions on travel and business operations, and there have been business closures and a substantial reduction in economic activity in countries that have had significant outbreaks of COVID-19. As a result, the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting global disruptions have affected our business, as well as our users and third-party merchants.
To provide additional information on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, we have included below the quarterly revenue of 2020, as well as year-over-year comparisons.
Core Marketplace Revenue
Our core marketplace revenue declined by 8% on a year-over-year basis in the first quarter of 2020. In January and February of 2020, businesses across China were impacted by the initial outbreak of COVID-19 before the virus spread globally, and many businesses shut down due to nation-wide lockdowns. This affected many of our China-based merchants who experienced severe manufacturing and supply disruptions in the first quarter. China represents the majority of our merchant base today, and as a result, we saw a reduction in the number of merchants selling and the number of products available for sale on our platform.
The second quarter of 2020 showed strong recovery with core marketplace revenue growing at 67% year-over-year as our China-based merchants recovered due to the reopening of the economy in China. We also benefited from increasing consumer demand globally driven by greater mobile usage, online shopping, and less competition from physical retail as a result of shelter-in-place mandates in various countries. In the United States, we also experienced increased buyer spending due to U.S. government stimulus programs that were implemented as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. While manufacturing and supply capacity had recovered in China, we experienced severe disruptions in the global logistics network that affected delivery times to our buyers around the world. We temporarily shifted from air freight to ocean transport, which increased delivery times. However, the impact of challenging global logistics and longer delivery times was more than offset by the increase in consumer demand.
In the third quarter of 2020, our core marketplace revenue growth moderated to 17% year-over-year, largely due to the extended delivery times in the second quarter and early part of the third quarter as we continued to experience COVID-19 related disruption in the global logistics network. These longer delivery times, particularly severe in the second quarter, impacted buyer engagement and retention on our platform in the third quarter and led to a lower conversion of monthly active users into buyers compared to the second quarter of 2020. The consumer demand for online shopping also declined from the peak levels of the second quarter with fewer shelter-in-place mandates and more physical retail reopenings around the world.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, our core marketplace revenue growth accelerated to 24% year-over-year, largely due to our efforts to improve monetization of buyers, including through dynamic pricing. In addition, we added more buyers in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to the third quarter of 2020.
We believe that our continued investments in expanding our logistics platform will have a long-term positive impact on our user experience by offering a combination of low delivery times and door to door tracking, leading to improvements in buyer retention and MAU to buyer conversion.
ProductBoost Revenue
Our ProductBoost revenue declined by 31% year-over-year in the year ended December 31, 2020. In the first quarter of 2020, during the initial outbreak of COVID-19 in China, our merchants’ advertising activities declined materially due to a significant shutdown of business activity in China. In the second quarter of 2020, because consumer demand increased significantly on our platform for the reasons stated above, many merchants did not see the need to pay for advertising like they did in the past because they experienced very robust consumer demand without incremental advertising spend. In the third and fourth quarters of 2020, we saw modest month-over-month increases in ProductBoost revenue as countries reopened and many merchants began to resume normalized business activities including marketing.
Logistics Revenue
Logistics revenue experienced consistent robust growth in 2020 as we continued to expand our logistics offerings around the world and more of our merchants adopted our logistics programs. In July 2020, in the United States, we launched our most comprehensive logistics offering, our A+ program, which manages first mile collection from merchants to warehousing operations all the way to last mile delivery to the buyer.
This expansion of our logistics platform globally has led to an improvement in delivery times towards the end of the third quarter of 2020 and continued to improve in the fourth quarter of 2020. The expansion of our logistics platform and the subsequent improvement in delivery times have lowered refund rates, which we believe is an indicator of improved buyer experience and satisfaction. Because our core marketplace revenue is recognized net of estimated refunds, changes in our refund rates also impact our core marketplace revenue.
Business Operations
To serve our users while also providing for the safety of our merchants and service providers, we have made numerous changes to aspects of our supply chain, purchasing, and third-party merchant processes.
We have implemented a number of measures to protect the health and safety of our workforce. These measures include substantial modifications to employee travel, employee work locations, and virtualization or cancellation of meetings, among other modifications. Currently, the vast majority of our employees are working remotely. For the employees who are in the office, we are following the guidance from public health officials and government agencies, including implementation of enhanced cleaning measures, social distancing guidelines and wearing of masks.
The global outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may impact our business will depend on future developments related to the geographic spread of the disease, the duration and severity of the outbreak, travel restrictions, required social distancing, governmental mandates, business closures or governmental or business disruptions, and the effectiveness of actions taken in the United States and other countries to prevent, contain and treat the virus and any additional government stimulus programs. These impacts are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. See the section titled “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business and Industry-The COVID-19 pandemic may adversely affect our business and results of operations.”
We continue to monitor the rapidly evolving situation and expect to continue to adapt our operations to address foreign, federal, state, and local standards as well as to implement standards or processes that we determine to be in the best interests of our employees, users, and merchants.
Results of Operations
The following table show our results of operations for the periods presented and express the relationship of certain line items as a percentage of revenue for those periods. The period-to-period comparison of financial results is not necessarily indicative of future results.
(1)
Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
The following table presents the components of our consolidated statements of operations as a percentage of revenue:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
(1)
Core marketplace revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 included approximately $7 million net gains from our cash flow hedging program. We did not have a hedging program prior to 2020.
Revenue increased $640 million, or 34%, to $2.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $1.9 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was attributable to both increased marketplace and logistics revenue.
Marketplace revenue increased $263 million, or 15% to $2.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $1.8 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to our efforts to improve monetization of buyers, including through dynamic pricing and an increase in buyers in 2020 compared to 2019. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in merchant utilization of our ProductBoost service, as the result of economic uncertainties related to the global pandemic.
Logistics revenue increased $377 million to $514 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $137 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to accelerated merchant adoption of our logistics offerings, as well as the expansion of our A+ program, in
which Wish manages first mile collection from merchants to warehousing operations all the way to last mile delivery to the buyer.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue increased $504 million, or 114%, to $947 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $443 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to costs related to the increased volume of logistics services provided and increased headcount. The increase was also driven by a $35 million cumulative stock-based compensation expense that we recognized associated with vested RSUs upon IPO, for our employees involved in infrastructure, merchant support, and logistics functions.
The gross margin decreased to 63% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 77% for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to increased volume of logistics services provided and notable reduction to our ProductBoost revenue year-over-year.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased $245 million, or 17%, to $1.7 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in sales and marketing expenses consisted primarily of incremental digital advertising spend as we temporarily moderated acquisition spend in the first half of 2019 in order to focus on the launch of the logistics platform, which was not repeated in 2020. The increase was also driven by increased headcount and a $23 million cumulative stock-based compensation expense that we recognized associated with vested RSUs upon our IPO, for our employees involved in marketing, user support, and business development functions.
Product Development
Product development expense increased $148 million, or 200%, to $222 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $74 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of an increase in employee-related costs driven by increased headcount and a $118 million cumulative stock-based compensation expense that we recognized associated with vested RSUs upon our IPO, for our employees involved in product development activities, and an increase in headcount in our
product and engineering teams. The increase was also, to a lesser extent, driven by expenses associated with data warehousing, processing and analytics.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased $230 million, or 354%, to $295 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $65 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily related to a $214 million cumulative stock-based compensation expense that we recognized associated with vested RSUs upon our IPO, increased legal related costs, increased taxes associated with digital services taxes and other indirect taxes, and increased headcount in our general and administrative teams.
Interest and Other Income (Expense), net
Interest and other income (expense), net decreased $21 million, to $2 million net expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $19 million income for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily as a result of decreased interest rates and increased foreign exchange losses incurred from unhedged exposures prior to our initiation of a foreign exchange hedging program.
Remeasurement of Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Warrant Liability
The change in fair value of redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability for the year ended December 31, 2020 was an expense of $110 million as compared with $3 million of expense for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to changes in the fair value of the underlying redeemable convertible preferred stock.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes increased $1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The change in provision for income taxes was due primarily to an increase of taxes for our international operations.
For discussion on comparison of the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, see the Results of Operations section disclosed in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Prospectus, which was filed with the SEC on December 16, 2020 and incorporated by reference herein and considered part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K only to the extent referenced.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $2.1 billion, a majority of which were held in cash deposits and money market funds, and were held for working capital purposes. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for at least the next 12 months. Additional future financing may be necessary to fund our operations and there can be no assurance that, if needed, we will be able to secure additional debt or equity financing on terms acceptable to us or at all, especially in light of the market volatility and uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Although we believe we have adequate sources of liquidity over the long term, the success of our operations, the global economic outlook, and the pace of sustainable growth in our markets, in each case, in light of the market volatility and uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, among other factors, could impact our business and liquidity.
Sources of Liquidity
Prior to our IPO, we satisfied our liquidity needs primarily through the sale of redeemable convertible preferred stock and cash flows generated from operations. We raised a total of $1.5 billion from the sale of redeemable convertible preferred stock (including redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant exercises), net of costs and expenses associated with such financings, and net of repurchases. In December 2020, we completed our IPO of Class A common stock and received net proceeds of approximately $1.1 billion after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $52 million, but before deducting offering costs, net of reimbursements, of approximately $6 million. As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any outstanding borrowings.
November 2020 Credit Facility
In November 2020, we entered into the Revolving Credit Facility which enables us to borrow up to $280 million. The Revolving Credit Facility contains an accordion option which, if exercised and provided we are able to secure additional lender commitments and satisfy certain other conditions, would allow us to increase the aggregate commitments by up to $100 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had not made any borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility. Refer to Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional details related to the Revolving Credit Facility.
Cash Flows
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Operating Activities
Our cash flows from operations are largely dependent on the amount of revenue we generate. Net cash provided by operating activities in each period presented has been influenced by changes in funds receivable, prepaid expenses, and other current and noncurrent assets, accounts payable, merchants payable, accrued and refund liabilities, lease liabilities, and other current and noncurrent liabilities.
We did not generate or use any cash in our operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, as our net loss of $745 million was partially offset by non-cash expenses, such as stock-based compensation expense of $390 million and remeasurement of the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability of $110 million, which was further offset by favorable net working capital. Favorable working capital movement was mainly driven by accounts payable and accrued and refund liabilities due to increased operations.
Net cash used in operating activities was $60 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, as a result of net loss of $129 million, off-set by non-cash expense of $21 million, which was offset by favorable net working capital. Favorable working capital movement was driven by accounts payable and accrued and refund liabilities due to increased operations.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities
Our primary investing activities have consisted of investing excess cash balances in marketable securities and also have consisted of capital expenditures which are primarily purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $165 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily due to maturities of marketable securities, net of purchases, of $167 million, partially offset by capital expenditures of $2 million.
Net cash used in investing activities was $40 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily due to purchases of marketable securities, net of sales and maturities, of $29 million and capital expenditures of $11 million.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to net proceeds from our IPO.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $132 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This was primarily due to net proceeds of $160 million from the sale of our Series H redeemable convertible preferred stock, partially off-set by $28 million in repurchases of our capital stock.
For discussion on operating, investing, and financing activities of the year ended December 31, 2018, see the Liquidity and Capital Resources section disclosed in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Prospectus, which was filed with the SEC on December 16, 2020 and hereby incorporated by reference herein and considered part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K only to the extent referenced.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated organizations or financial partnerships, such as structured finance or special purpose entities that would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Contingencies
We are involved in claims, lawsuits, government investigations, and proceedings arising from the ordinary course of our business. We record a provision for a liability when we believe that it is both probable that a liability has been incurred, and the amount can be reasonably estimated. Significant judgment is required to determine both probability and the estimated amount. Such legal proceedings are inherently unpredictable and subject to significant uncertainties, some of which are beyond our control. Should any of these estimates and assumptions change or prove to be incorrect, it could have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position, and cash flows.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
We believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with revenue recognition, operating lease obligations, stock-based compensation, valuation of common stock, redeemable convertible preferred stock and related redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant, and income taxes have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. Therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies and estimates. For further information on all of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 of the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue from marketplace and logistics services provided to merchants. Revenue is recognized as we transfer control of promised goods or services to our customers, in an amount that reflects consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. We consider both the merchant and the user to be customers. We evaluate whether it is appropriate to recognize revenue on a gross or net basis based upon our evaluation of whether we obtain control of the specified goods or services by considering if we are primarily responsible for fulfillment of the promise, have inventory risk and have latitude in establishing pricing and selecting suppliers, among other factors. Based on these factors, marketplace revenue is generally recognized on a net basis and logistics revenue is generally recognized on a gross basis. Revenue excludes any amounts collected on behalf of third parties, including indirect taxes.
Marketplace Revenue
We provide a mix of marketplace services to merchants. We provide merchants access to our marketplace where merchants display and sell their products to users. We also provide ProductBoost services to help merchants promote their products within our marketplace.
Marketplace revenue includes commission fees collected in connection with user purchases of the merchants’ products. The commission fees vary depending on factors such as user location, demand, product type, and dynamic pricing. We recognize revenue when a user’s order is processed and the related order information has been made available to the merchant. Commission fees are recognized net of estimated refunds and chargebacks. Marketplace revenue also includes ProductBoost revenue for displaying a merchant’s selected products in preferential locations within our marketplace. We recognize revenue when the merchants’ selected products are displayed. We refer to our marketplace revenue, excluding ProductBoost revenue, as our core marketplace revenue.
Logistics Revenue
Our logistics offering for merchants, introduced in 2018, is designed for direct end-to-end single order shipment from a merchant’s location to the user. Logistics services include transportation and delivery of the merchant’s products to the user. Merchants are required to prepay for logistics services on a per order basis.
We recognize revenue over time as the merchant simultaneously receives and consumes the logistics services benefit as the services are performed. We use an output method of progress based on days in transit as it best depicts our progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation.
Deferred Revenue
Deferred revenue consists of amounts received, primarily related to unsatisfied performance obligations of logistics services, at the end of the period. Due to the short-term duration of contracts, all of the performance obligations will be satisfied in the following reporting period.
Refunds and Chargebacks
Refunds and chargebacks are associated with marketplace revenue. Returns are not material to our business. Estimated refunds and chargebacks are recognized on the consolidated balance sheets as refunds liability. The merchants’ share of the refunds are recognized as a reduction to the amount due to merchants. The revenue recognized on transactions subject to refunds and chargebacks is reversed. We estimate future refunds and chargebacks using a model that incorporates historical experience and considering recent business trends and market activity.
Incentive Discount Offers
We provide incentive discount offers to our users to encourage purchases of goods through our marketplace. Such offers include current discount offers of a certain percentage off current purchases, and inducement offers, such as set percentage offers off future purchases subject to a minimum current purchase. We generally record the related discounts taken as a reduction of revenue when the offer is redeemed. We also offer free products to encourage users to make purchases on our marketplace. The resulting discount is recognized as a reduction of revenue when the offer for free product is redeemed.
Wish Cash Liability
We award Wish Cash to end-users who opt to receive it for their refundable transactions. We also offer Wish Cash as part of our various referral and incentive programs. We accrue a liability for issued Wish Cash which is reduced when Wish Cash is redeemed by our users. Based on historical experience, we analyze the Wish Cash liability considering usage patterns to determine the probability of redemption. While we will continue to honor all Wish Cash presented for payment, management may determine the likelihood of redemption to be remote for Wish Cash balances due to, among other things, long periods of inactivity. In these circumstances, to the extent management determines there is no requirement for remitting Wish Cash balances to government agencies under unclaimed property laws, the portion of Wish Cash balances not expected to be redeemed are recognized in Core Marketplace revenue.
Operating Lease Obligations
We lease facilities and data center co-locations in multiple locations under non-cancelable lease agreements through 2025. We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. For leases where we are the lessee, ROU assets represent our right to use the underlying asset for the term of the lease and the lease liabilities represent an obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Certain lease agreements contain tenant improvement allowances, rent holidays and rent escalation provisions, all of which are considered in determining the ROU assets and lease liabilities. We begin recognizing rent expense when the lessor makes the underlying asset available for use by us. Lease liabilities are recognized at the lease commencement date based on the present value of the future lease payments over the lease term. Lease renewal periods are considered on a lease-by-lease basis in determining the lease term. The interest rate we use to determine the present value of future lease payments is our incremental borrowing rate, which is the estimated rate we would be required to pay for a collateralized borrowing equal to the total lease payments over the term of the lease. We estimate our incremental borrowing rate based on an analysis of publicly-traded debt securities of companies with credit and financial profiles similar to our own. The ROU asset is determined based on the lease liability initially established and adjusted for any prepaid lease payments and any lease incentives received. The lease term to calculate the ROU asset and related lease liability includes options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise the option. Certain leases contain variable costs, such as common area maintenance, real estate taxes, or other costs. Variable lease costs are expensed as incurred on the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure and recognize compensation expense for all stock-based awards, including restricted stock units (“RSUs”), performance-based units (“PSUs”), and purchase rights issued to employees under our employee stock purchase plan (“ESPP”), based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the grant date. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of ESPP purchase rights and the Monte Carlo Simulation model to estimate the fair value of PSUs. The fair value of RSUs is based on the fair value of our Class A common stock on the date of the grant. The fair value of service-based RSUs is recognized as an expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally four years. For stock-based awards granted to employees with a performance condition, we recognize stock-based compensation expense under the accelerated attribution method over the requisite service period. The fair value of the ESPP purchase rights is recognized as an expense on a straight-line basis over the offering period.
The vesting requirements of RSUs that we granted to employees prior to our IPO in December 2020 consisted of both a service and a liquidity condition. The service condition for these awards is satisfied over four or five years. The liquidity condition was satisfied upon our IPO. Refer to Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for the cumulative expense that we recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to these RSUs.
We account for forfeitures as they occur.
Our use of the Black-Scholes option-pricing and Monte-Carlo Simulation models require the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the fair value of the underlying common stock, expected term of the option, expected volatility of the price of our common stock, risk-free interest rates, and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. The assumptions used in these valuation models represent management’s best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
Valuation of Common Stock, Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock, and Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Warrant
Prior to our IPO, we determined the fair value of common stock, redeemable convertible preferred stock, and redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant in 2020, 2019 and 2018 based on the market approach under which our equity value was estimated by applying valuation multiples derived from the observed valuation multiples of comparable public companies to management forecasted financial results.
We used the Probability Weighted Expected Return Method (“PWERM”) to allocate our equity value among outstanding common stock, redeemable convertible preferred stock, warrant, and equity awards. We applied the PWERM by first defining the range of potential future liquidity outcomes, such as an IPO, and then allocating its value to outstanding stock, warrant, and equity awards based on the relative probability that each outcome would occur. The valuation and allocation approaches involved the use of estimates, judgments, and assumptions that were highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding expected future revenue, as well as discount rates, valuation multiples, the selection of comparable public companies and the probability of future events.
Prior to our IPO in December 2020, we classified the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant as a liability on the consolidated balance sheet and re-measured to fair value at each balance sheet date with the corresponding changes in fair value recognized in other income (expense), net. Immediately prior to the completion of our IPO, the outstanding redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant was exercised and the fair value of the related liability at that time was reclassified into our Class A common stock and additional paid-in capital.
Subsequent to our IPO, we use the market closing price for our Class A common stock as reported on the Nasdaq Global Select Market on the date of grant.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax liabilities and assets are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between consolidated financial statement carrying amounts and the tax basis of assets and liabilities and net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
We determine whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination. If it is not more likely than not that a position will be sustained, no amount of benefit attributable to the position is recognized. The tax benefit to be recognized for any tax position that meets the more likely than not recognition threshold is calculated as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon resolution of the contingency.
It is our policy to include penalties and interest expense related to income taxes as a component of interest and other income (expense), net as necessary.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for accounting pronouncements recently adopted and recent accounting pronouncements not yet adopted as of December 31, 2020.