Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of our operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below, and those discussed in “Section 1A. Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
Workiva simplifies complex work for thousands of organizations worldwide. We are a leading provider of cloud-based compliance and regulatory reporting solutions that are designed to solve business challenges at the intersection of data, process and people.
Workiva changes the way enterprises manage and report business data. Our open, intelligent and intuitive platform is based on single instance, multi-tenant software applications deployed in the cloud. Our platform connects data, documents and teams, which results in improved efficiency, greater transparency and reduced risk of errors. We offer customers controlled collaboration, data linking, data integrations, granular permissions, process management and a full audit trail on our proprietary platform. As of December 31, 2020, 3,723 organizations, including 75% of Fortune 500® companies, subscribed to our platform for at least one solution.(1)
Customers use our platform to create, review and publish data-linked documents and reports with greater control, consistency, accuracy and productivity. Customers collaborate in the same document simultaneously, which improves efficiency and version control. Our platform is flexible and scalable, so customers can easily adapt it to define, automate and change their business processes in real time.
Our platform lets our customers connect data from Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), Governance Risk and Compliance (GRC), Human Capital Management (HCM) and Customer Relationship Management (CRM) systems, as well as other third-party cloud and on-premise applications.
While our customers use our platform for dozens of different use cases, our sales and marketing resources are organized into four solution groups: Regulatory Reporting, Non-Regulatory Reporting, Financial Services and Integrated Risk.
We operate our business on a Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) model. Customers enter into annual and multi-year subscription contracts to gain access to our platform. Our subscription fee includes the use of our software and technical support. Prior to the third quarter of 2018, our subscription pricing was based primarily on the number of corporate entities, number of users, level of customer support and length of contract. Thereafter, we began converting existing customer orders to, and signing new orders primarily based on, a solution-based licensing model. Under this model, operating metrics related to a customer’s expected use of each solution determine the price. At December 31, 2020, over 80% of our subscription revenue was priced on a solution-based licensing model. We charge customers additional fees primarily for document setup and XBRL tagging services.
(1) Claim not confirmed by FORTUNE or Fortune Media IP Limited. FORTUNE® and FORTUNE 500® are registered trademarks of Fortune Media IP Limited and are used under license. FORTUNE and Fortune Media IP Limited are not affiliated with, and do not endorse products or services of, Workiva Inc.
We generate sales primarily through our direct sales force and, to a lesser extent, our customer success and professional services teams. In addition, we augment our direct sales channel with partnerships. Our advisory and service partners offer a wider range of domain and functional expertise that broadens the capabilities of our platform, bringing scale and support to customers and prospects. Our technology partners enable more data and process integrations to help customers connect critical transactional systems directly to our platform.
We continue to invest in the development of our solutions, infrastructure and sales and marketing to drive long-term growth. Our full-time employee headcount expanded to 1,718 at December 31, 2020 from 1,580 at December 31, 2019, an increase of 8.7%.
We have achieved significant revenue growth in recent periods. Our revenue grew to $351.6 million in 2020 from $297.9 million in 2019, an increase of 18.0%. We incurred net losses of $48.4 million and $47.5 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Impact of COVID-19
A pandemic of respiratory disease (abbreviated “COVID-19”) began to spread globally, including to the United States, in early 2020. The World Health Organization declared COVID-19 to be a public health emergency of international concern. The full impact of the COVID-19 outbreak continues to be inherently uncertain at the time of this report. The COVID-19 outbreak has resulted in travel restrictions, prohibitions of non-essential activities, disruption and shutdown of certain businesses and greater uncertainty in global financial markets.
On March 27, 2020, legislation intended to support the economy during the COVID-19 pandemic, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), was signed into law. The CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions relating to refundable payroll tax credits, deferment of employer side social security payments, net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property. We do not believe the CARES Act will have a material impact on our business, results of operations, financial condition or liquidity.
We cannot fully predict the extent to which the ongoing COVID-19 outbreak will impact our business or operating results, which is highly dependent on inherently uncertain future developments, including the severity and duration of the COVID-19 outbreak and the actions taken by governments and businesses in relation to COVID-19 containment. We have adopted several measures in response to the COVID-19 outbreak, including advising employees to work from home, restricting non-critical business travel by our employees, and canceling in-person marketing events (including our annual user conference in September 2020 and September 2021) and replacing them with digital events. These travel restrictions and conversion of marketing and internal events to a virtual format resulted in an expense reduction of approximately $16.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 relative to the same period in the prior year. Notwithstanding these measures, we have been able to continue to meet the needs of our customers, keeping our platform fully operational and delivering the services contracted by our customers.
As a result of the work and travel restrictions relating to the ongoing COVID-19 outbreak, substantially all of our sales and operating activities are being conducted remotely. This global work-from-home operating environment may adversely impact the productivity of certain employees, and these conditions may persist and harm our business, including our future operating results. Additionally, we believe a number of customers and prospects have delayed purchasing decisions as result of the COVID-19 outbreak. Furthermore, in response to the COVID-19 outbreak existing and potential customers may ultimately choose to reduce technology spending or attempt to renegotiate contracts and obtain concessions, which could materially and negatively impact our operating results and financial condition. Because our platform is offered as a subscription-based service, the effects of the outbreak may not be fully reflected in our operating results until future periods.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Generate Growth From Existing Customers. The Workiva platform can exhibit a powerful network effect within an enterprise, meaning that the usefulness of our platform attracts additional users. Since solution-based licensing offers our customers an unlimited number of seats for each solution purchased, we expect customers to add more seats over time. As more employees in an enterprise use our platform, additional opportunities for collaboration and automation drive demand among their colleagues for additional solutions. Furthermore, the conversion of most of our customer contracts to solution-based licensing generated a one-time increase in contract value for each solution converted.
Pursue New Customers. We sell to organizations that manage large, complex processes with many contributors and disparate sets of business data. We market our platform to professionals in the areas of: finance and accounting, regulatory reporting, management and performance reporting, integrated risk management, and global statutory reporting. We intend to continue to build our sales and marketing organization and leverage our brand equity to attract new customers.
Offer More Solutions. We intend to introduce new solutions to continue to meet growing demand for our platform. Our close and trusted relationships with our customers are a source for new use cases, features and solutions. We have a disciplined process for tracking, developing and releasing new solutions that are designed to have immediate, broad applicability; a strong value proposition; and a high return on investment for both Workiva and our customers. Our advance planning team assesses customer needs, conducts industry-based research and defines new markets. This vetting process involves our sales, product marketing, customer success, professional services, research and development, finance and senior management teams.
Expand Across Enterprises. Our success in delivering multiple solutions has created demand from customers for a broader-based, enterprise-wide Workiva platform. In response, we have been improving our technology and realigning sales and marketing to capitalize on our growing enterprise-wide opportunities. We believe this expansion will add seats and revenue and continue to support our high revenue retention rates. However, we expect that enterprise-wide deals will be larger and more complex, which tend to lengthen the sales cycle.
Add Partners. We continue to expand and deepen our relationships with global and regional partners, including consulting firms, system integrators, large and mid-sized independent software vendors, and implementation partners. Our advisory and service partners offer a wider range of domain and functional expertise that broadens our platform’s capabilities and promotes Workiva as part of the digital transformation projects they drive for their customers. Our technology partners enable powerful data and process integrations to help customers connect critical transactional systems directly to our platform, with powerful linking, auditability and control features. We believe that our partner ecosystem extends our global reach, accelerates the usage and adoption of our platform, and enables more efficient delivery of professional services.
Investment in growth. We plan to continue to invest in the development of our platform to enhance our current offerings and build new features. In addition, we expect to continue to invest in our sales, marketing, professional services and customer success organizations to drive additional revenue and support the needs of our growing customer base and to take advantage of opportunities that we have identified in EMEA, as well as use cases for integrated risk, global statutory reporting, and the U.S. government. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, regulatory authorities may delay the adoption of new regulations and policy mandates, which could adversely impact our business. For example, the Financial Conduct Authority in the United Kingdom (FCA) has set out proposed rule changes to postpone by one year the mandatory European Single Electronic Format (ESEF) requirements for annual financial reporting Additionally, member states' ambassadors to the European Union agreed to the European Council’s position to adopt an optional one-year delay to the planned schedule for implementation of the ESEF mandate, as part of a broader package designed to make it easier for capital markets to support economic recovery from the COVID-19 crisis.
Seasonality. Our revenue from professional services has some degree of seasonality. Many of our customers employ our professional services just before they file their Form 10-K, often in the first calendar quarter. As of December 31, 2020, the majority of our SEC customers reported their financials on a calendar-year basis. Sales and marketing expense is generally higher in the third quarter since we hold our annual user conference in September. Our transition to a virtual event in September 2020 and September 2021 has mostly mitigated this trend. In addition, the timing of the payments of cash bonuses to employees during the first and fourth calendar quarters may result in some seasonality in operating cash flow.
Key Performance Indicators
Total customers. We believe total number of customers is a key indicator of our financial success and future revenue potential. We define a customer as an entity with an active subscription contract as of the measurement date. Our customer is typically a parent company or, in a few cases, a significant subsidiary that works with us directly. Companies with publicly-listed securities account for a substantial majority of our customers.
Subscription and support revenue retention rate. We calculate our subscription and support revenue retention rate based on all customers that were active at the end of the same calendar quarter of the prior year (“base customers”). We begin by annualizing the subscription and support revenue recorded in the same calendar quarter of the prior year for those base customers who are still active at the end of the current quarter. We divide the result by the annualized subscription and support revenue in the same quarter of the prior year for all base customers.
Our subscription and support revenue retention rate was 95.0% as of December 31, 2020, up slightly from 94.7% as of December 31, 2019. We believe that our success in maintaining a high rate of revenue retention is attributable primarily to our robust technology platform and strong customer service. Customers whose securities were deregistered due to merger or acquisition, or financial distress accounted for just over half of our revenue attrition in the latest quarter.
Subscription and support revenue retention rate including add-ons. Add-on revenue includes the change in both solutions and pricing for existing customers. We calculate our subscription and support revenue retention rate including add-ons by annualizing the subscription and support revenue recorded in the current quarter for our base customers that were active at the end of the current quarter. We divide the result by the annualized subscription and support revenue in the same quarter of the prior year for all base customers.
Our subscription and support revenue retention rate including add-ons was 109.5% as of the quarter ended December 31, 2020, down from 113.0% as of December 31, 2019. The decline reflects the winding down of the conversion of customer contracts to solution-based licensing, as well as COVID-related impact on both price increases and solution churn.
In 2019, we began calculating revenue retention rates using quarterly ASC 606 revenue instead of our prior method using monthly ASC 605 revenue. We expect quarterly measurements will be less variable than the single month measurements we previously reported.
Annual contract value. Our annual contract value (ACV) for each customer is calculated by annualizing the subscription and support revenue recognized during each quarter. We believe the increase in the number of larger contracts shows our progress in expanding our customers’ adoption of our platform.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate revenue through the sale of subscriptions to our cloud-based software and the delivery of professional services. We serve a wide range of customers in many industries, and our revenue is not concentrated with any single customer or small group of customers. For each of the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, no single customer represented more than 1% of our revenue, and our largest 10 customers accounted for less than 5% of our revenue in the aggregate.
We generate sales directly through our sales force and partners. We also identify some sales opportunities with existing customers through our customer success and professional services teams.
Our customer contracts typically range in length from twelve to 36 months. We typically invoice our customers for subscription fees annually in advance. For contracts with a two or three year term, customers sometimes elect to pay the entire multi-year subscription term in advance. Our arrangements do not contain general rights of return.
Subscription and Support Revenue. We recognize subscription and support revenue on a ratable basis over the contract term beginning on the date that our service is made available to the customer. Amounts that are invoiced are initially recorded as deferred revenue.
Professional Services Revenue. We believe our professional services facilitate the sale of our subscription service to certain customers. To date, most of our professional services have consisted of document set up, XBRL tagging, and consulting to help our customers with business processes and best practices for using our platform. Our professional services are not required for customers to utilize our solution. We recognize revenue for document set ups when the service is complete and control has transferred to the customer. Revenues from XBRL tagging and consulting services are recognized as the services are performed.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of personnel and related costs directly associated with our professional services, customer success teams and training personnel, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, and stock-based compensation; the costs of contracted third-party vendors; the costs of server usage by our customers; information technology costs; and facility costs. Costs of server usage are comprised primarily of fees paid to Amazon Web Services and Google Cloud Platform.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel and related costs, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, commissions, travel, and stock-based compensation. Other costs included in this expense are marketing and promotional events, our annual user conference, online marketing, product marketing, information technology costs, and facility costs. We pay sales commissions for initial contracts and expansions of existing customer contracts. When the relevant amortization period is one year or less, we expense sales commissions as incurred. All other sales commissions are considered incremental costs of obtaining a contract with a customer and are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis over a period of benefit that we have determined to be three years.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel and related costs, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, and stock-based compensation; costs of server usage by our developers; information technology costs; and facility costs.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel and related costs for our executive, finance and accounting, legal, human resources, and administrative personnel, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, and stock-based compensation; legal, accounting, and other professional service fees; other corporate expenses; information technology costs; and facility costs.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth selected consolidated statement of operations data for each of the periods indicated:
(1) Stock-based compensation expense included in these line items was as follows:
The following table sets forth our consolidated statement of operations data as a percentage of revenue for each of the periods indicated:
Revenue
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Total revenue increased $53.7 million in 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to the increase in subscription and support revenue of $50.1 million. Growth in subscription and support revenue in 2020 was attributable mainly to strong demand and better pricing for a broad range of use cases, including SEC reporting, integrated risk, global statutory reporting, and management and performance reporting. The total number of our customers increased 6.1% from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. Professional services revenue increased $3.6 million due primarily to higher setup and consulting revenue.
Cost of Revenue
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Cost of revenue increased $5.2 million in 2020 compared to 2019. Subscription and support cost of revenue increased $6.6 million due primarily to $6.4 million in higher cash-based compensation and benefits due to increased headcount as well as a $1.6 million increase in software expense which were partially offset by a $1 million reduction in cloud infrastructure costs and a $1.3 million reduction in travel costs due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in cash-based compensation and benefits and software resulted from our continued investment in and support of our new platform and solutions. The reduction in cloud infrastructure costs primarily resulted from upgrading our customers to our new platform. Professional services cost of revenue decreased $1.5 million due primarily to a reduction in travel and office expenses as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating Expenses
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased $4.9 million in 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to higher cash-based compensation and benefits costs of $5.8 million and a $2.0 million increase in the cost of software and cloud infrastructure services. The increases were partially offset by a $2.3 million reduction in travel costs due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The increases in compensation, software and cloud infrastructure services reflect continued investment in and support of our platform and solutions.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased $24.4 million in 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to $30.4 million in higher cash-based compensation and benefits, an additional $2.3 million in stock-based compensation, $0.5 million in professional services and $1.1 million in software expense. These increases were partially offset by $7.3 million in savings from reduced travel by our sales and marketing employees due to the COVID-19 pandemic and a $2.8 million reduction in marketing expense due to transitioning our annual user conference to a virtual format. The increases in compensation were due to increased headcount. The increases in professional service fees and software expense supported our investment in expanding our international sales force.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $11.6 million in 2020 compared to 2019, due primarily to $4.8 million in higher cash-based compensation and benefits, an additional $7.2 million in stock-based compensation as well as $0.6 million in cancellation fees paid for events that were cancelled due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. These increases were partially offset by a $1.4 million reduction in travel costs due to the COVID-19 pandemic. During 2020, we recorded an additional $1.5 million and $5.5 million of cash-based and equity-based compensation, respectively, pursuant to certain separation agreements with former executives and managers. The remaining increase in personnel-related costs was driven primarily by an increase in employee headcount.
Non-Operating Income (Expenses)
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Interest Income, Interest Expense and Other (Expense) Income, Net
Interest income fell $1.4 million in 2020 compared to 2019 due to decreased interest rates in our investment accounts. Interest expense increased $7.9 million in 2020 compared to 2019 due to interest incurred on our senior convertible notes. Other expense decreased $0.4 million in 2020 compared to 2019 due primarily to reduced losses on foreign currency transactions.
Results of Operations for Fiscal 2019 Compared to 2018
For a comparison of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 20, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, our principal sources of liquidity were cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities totaling $530.0 million, which were held for working capital purposes. We have financed our operations primarily through the proceeds of offerings of equity, convertible debt, and cash from operating activities. We have generated significant operating losses and negative cash flows from operating activities as reflected in our accumulated deficit and consolidated statements of cash flows. While we expect to continue to incur operating losses and may incur negative cash flows from operations in the future, we believe that current cash and cash equivalents and cash flows from operating activities will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next twelve months from the date of the issuance of the audited consolidated financial statements.
In August 2019, we issued $345.0 million aggregate principal amount of 1.125% convertible senior notes due 2026, including the exercise in full by the initial purchasers of their option to purchase an additional $45.0 million principal amount (Notes). The Notes are senior, unsecured obligations and bear interest at a fixed rate of 1.125% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on February 15 and August 15 of each year, commencing on February 15, 2020. Proceeds from the issuance of the Notes totaled $335.9 million, net of initial purchaser discounts and issuance costs.
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by operating activities was $33.2 million. The primary factors affecting our operating cash flows during the period were our net loss of $48.4 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $4.3 million for depreciation and amortization of our property and equipment and intangible assets, $45.8 million of stock-based compensation, $8.9 million for the amortization of our debt discount and issuance costs and a $22.2 million net change in operating assets and liabilities. The primary drivers of the changes in operating assets and liabilities were a $16.0 million increase in deferred contract costs, an $8.0 million increase in accounts receivable, a $2.5 million increase in prepaid expenses and other, and a $4.1 million decrease in accounts payable, offset by a $37.5 million increase in deferred revenue and a $16.8 million increase in accrued expenses and other liabilities. Customer growth and contract renewals for longer terms accounted for most of the increase in deferred revenue. We offer limited incentives for customers to enter into contract terms for more than one year. The decrease in accounts payable and increases in accounts receivable and accrued expenses and other liabilities were attributable primarily to the timing of our billings, cash collections, and cash payments. The increase in prepaid expenses was attributable primarily to the timing of annual contracts. The increase in deferred contract costs was primarily due to additional payments made to our sales force related to the direct and incremental costs of obtaining a customer contract.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by operating activities was $30.9 million. The primary factors affecting our operating cash flows during the period were our net loss of $47.5 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $3.8 million for depreciation and amortization of our property and equipment and intangible assets, $35.8 million of stock-based compensation, $3.3 million for the amortization of our debt discount and issuance costs and a $35.7 million net change in operating assets and liabilities. The primary drivers of the changes in operating assets and liabilities were a $10.3 million increase in deferred costs, a $1.3 million increase in other receivables, a $2.1 million increase in prepaid expenses and a $1.9 million increase in other assets, offset by a $5.2 million decrease in accounts receivable, a $2.2 million increase in accounts payable, a $32.0 million increase in deferred revenue, and a $12.2 million increase in accrued expenses and other liabilities. Customer growth and contract renewals for longer terms accounted for most of the increase in deferred revenue. We offer limited incentives for customers to enter into contract terms for more than one year. The increase in other receivables was due to higher interest receivable as a result of an overall increase in our marketable securities. The increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other liabilities and decrease in accounts receivable were attributable primarily to the timing of our billings, cash collections, and cash payments. The increase in other assets and prepaid expenses was attributable primarily to timing of payments relating to cloud infrastructure services. The increase in deferred costs was primarily due to additional payments made to our sales force related to the direct and incremental costs of obtaining a customer contract.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities of $103.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due primarily to $175.9 million for the purchase of marketable securities and $1.9 million of capital expenditures, partially offset by $62.9 million from the maturities of marketable securities and $11.4 million from the sale of marketable securities. Our capital expenditures were associated primarily with computer equipment in support of expanding our infrastructure and work force.
Cash used in investing activities of $90.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was due primarily to $112.6 million for the purchase of marketable securities and $3.1 million of capital expenditures, partially offset by $26.8 million from the maturities of marketable securities. Our capital expenditures were associated primarily with computer equipment in support of expanding our infrastructure and work force.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities of $11.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due primarily to $19.2 million in proceeds from option exercises and $7.2 million in proceeds from shares issued in connection with our employee stock purchase plan, partially offset by $13.7 million in taxes withheld related to net share settlement of our stock-based compensation awards and an aggregate $1.6 million in payments on finance lease obligations.
Cash provided by financing activities of $363.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 was due primarily to $335.9 million in proceeds from the issuance of our senior convertible notes, $24.2 million in proceeds from option exercises and $4.9 million in proceeds from shares issued in connection with our employee stock purchase plan, partially offset by an aggregate $1.6 million in payments on finance lease obligations.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table represents our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020, aggregated by type:
Total future payments related to our Convertible Senior Notes due 2026 shown in the table above includes $345.0 million principal amount and future interest payments of $23.3 million. For more information on our convertible senior notes, refer to Note 8 of our accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We have entered into a lease agreement for land and an office building in Ames, Iowa, which was constructed in two phases. The lease term includes an initial 15-year term and three five-year extensions at our option because renewal was determined to be reasonably assured at the inception of the lease. The lease contains purchase options to acquire the landlord’s interest in the land lease and building at any time beginning three years from June 2014 (the commencement date of the second phase of the lease). In addition, the lease requires us to purchase the building from the landlord upon certain events, such as a change in control.
We enter into certain non-cancelable agreements with third-party providers in the ordinary course of business. Under these agreements, we are committed to purchase $14.0 million for cloud infrastructure services and $8.6 million primarily for cloud services. These amounts are included in the table above under “other contractual commitments”.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, provision for income taxes and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe that of our significant accounting policies, which are described in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements, the following accounting policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of our operations.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue through the sale of our cloud-based software and the delivery of professional services. Revenues are recognized when control of these services is transferred to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services.
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
•Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer
•Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
•Determination of the transaction price
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
•Recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation
Subscription and Support Revenue
We recognize subscription and support revenue on a ratable basis over the contract term beginning on the date that our service is made available to the customer. Our subscription contracts are generally twelve to 36 months in duration, are billed either annually or in advance and are non-cancelable. We consider the access to our platform and related support services in a customer contract to be a series of distinct services which comprise a single performance obligation because they are substantially the same and have the same pattern of transfer.
Professional Services Revenue and Customer Options
Professional services revenues primarily consist of fees for document set up, XBRL tagging, and consulting with our customers on business processes and best practices for using our platform. We have determined that an agreement to purchase these professional services constitutes an option to purchase services in accordance with ASC 606 rather than an agreement that creates enforceable rights and obligations because of the customer’s contractual right to cancel services that have not yet been used. In the limited case of agreements where we determined that the option provides the customer with a material right, we allocate a portion of the transaction price to the material right based upon the relative standalone selling price. Professional service agreements that do not contain a material right are accounted for when the customer exercises its option to purchase additional services.
Revenue is recognized for document set ups when the service is complete and control has transferred to the customer. Revenues from XBRL tagging and consulting services are recognized as the services are performed.
Our professional services revenue is higher in the first calendar quarter because many of our customers employ our professional services just before they file their Form 10-K.
Contracts with Multiple Performance Obligations
Some of our contracts with customers contain multiple performance obligations. For these contracts, we account for the individual performance obligations separately if they are distinct. The transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price basis. We determine the standalone selling prices based on our overall pricing objectives, taking into consideration market conditions and entity-specific factors, including the value of our arrangements, length of term, customer demographics and the numbers and types of users within our arrangements.
While changes in assumptions or judgments or changes to the elements of the arrangement could cause an increase or decrease in the amount of revenue that we report in a particular period, these changes have not historically been significant because our recurring revenue is primarily subscription and support revenue.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 of the notes to consolidated financial statements for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements.