ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion provides the reader a narrative from the perspective of management and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this annual report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a Delaware corporation that commenced operations in May 2012. We operate and elected to be taxed as a REIT, commencing with our taxable year ended December 31, 2012. Our portfolio is mainly comprised of Residential Whole Loans and Commercial Loans, Non-Agency CMBS, Non-Agency RMBS, and to a lesser extent Agency RMBS, Residential Bridge Loans, GSE Risk Sharing Securities and ABS investments secured by a portfolio of private student loans. In addition, our holdings include two securitized commercial loans from the two consolidated third-party sponsored CMBS VIEs.
We use leverage as part of our business strategy in order to increase potential returns to our stockholders. We accomplish this by borrowing against existing investments primarily through repurchase agreements. We may also change our financing strategy and leverage without the consent of our stockholders.
We also intend to operate our business in a manner that will permit us to maintain our exemption from registration under the 1940 Act.
Factors Impacting Our Operating Results
Our results of operations are affected by a number of factors and primarily depend on, among other things, the level of the interest income from target assets, the market value of our assets and the supply of, and demand for residential and commercial whole loans, Non-Agency CMBS, Non- Agency RMBS, and other real estate-related investments in which we invest, and the financing and other costs associated with our business. Interest income and borrowing costs may vary as a result of changes in interest rates and the availability of financing, each of which could impact the net interest income we receive on our investments. Our operating results may also be impacted by conditions in the financial markets, such as, unanticipated credit events experienced by our investment portfolio.
Changes in market interest rates. With respect to our business operations, increases in interest rates, in general, may over time cause: (i) the interest expense associated with variable rate borrowings to increase; (ii) the value of certain of our assets to decline; (iii) to the extent applicable under the terms of our investments, prepayments on our investments to slow, and (iv) to the extent that we enter into interest rate swap agreements as part of our hedging strategy, the value of these agreements to increase.
Conversely, decreases in interest rates, in general, may over time cause: (i) the interest expense associated with variable rate borrowings to decrease; (ii) the value of certain of our investments to increase; (iii) to the extent applicable under the terms of our investments, prepayments on our investments to increase, and (iv) to the extent that we enter into interest rate swap agreements as part of our hedging strategy, the value of these agreements to decrease.
Credit risk. One of our strategic focuses is acquiring assets which are believed to be of high credit quality. Management believes this strategy will generally keep credit losses and financing costs low. However, we are subject to varying degrees of credit risk in connection with our target assets. Our Manager seeks to mitigate this risk by seeking to acquire high quality assets, at appropriate prices given anticipated and unanticipated losses and by deploying a value-driven approach to underwriting and diligence, consistent with our Manager’s historical investment strategy. However, unanticipated credit losses could occur which could adversely impact operating results.
Size of portfolio. The size of our portfolio of assets is a key revenue driver. Generally, as the size of our portfolio grows, the amount of interest income earned increases, and conversely as the size of our portfolio declines, the amount of interest income earned will decline.
Market conditions. During the first quarter of 2020, the outbreak of COVID-19, which the World Health Organization designated a pandemic, has created extensive disruptions to the global economy and the lives of individuals throughout the world. Governments, businesses, and the public have taken and are continuing to take unprecedented actions to contain the spread of COVID-19 and to mitigate its effects, including quarantines, travel bans, shelter-in-place orders, closures of businesses and schools, fiscal stimulus, and legislation designed to deliver monetary aid and other relief. The scope, duration, and full effects of COVID-19 are still not fully known. The pandemic and related efforts to contain the COVID-19 have disrupted global economic activity, impacted interest rates, increased economic and market uncertainty, disrupted trade and supply chains, and created unprecedented financial market conditions and disruptions. This rapid disruption in the fixed income
markets specifically in mortgage markets had an adverse impact on our book value, liquidity, results of operations, and financial position.
While there is hope on the horizon with the development of a vaccine, our Manager's view is the road ahead will be a long and difficult path. The full impact of COVID-19 on our results of operations, financial position and cost of capital is still uncertain as it depends on several factors beyond our control. Our Manager outlook is that (i) COVID-19 related growth setbacks have meaningful reduced global and U.S. growth, (ii) the medical battle will take time and prolonged efforts but recent developments are encouraging, (iii) second half of 2021 should should see meaning pick up in growth as the economy reopens (iv) U.S. and global inflation are expected to be very subdued, (v) Fiscal policy and monetary policy will remain supportive, and (vi) Central banks are expected to keep rates low for long. We continue to operate with a defensive stance to preserve liquidity, reduce our exposure to short-term repurchase agreement financings, and reduce expenses.
See Item 1A. "Risk Factors" of this annual report on Form 10-K additional factors that may impact our operating results. Also, please see "Liquidity and Capital Resources" section of this annual report on Form 10-K for additional discussion surrounding the ongoing impact we expect COVID-19 will have on our liquidity and capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies
The consolidated financial statements include our accounts, those of our consolidated wholly-owned TRS and certain variable interest entities (“VIEs”) in which we are the primary beneficiary. All intercompany amounts have been eliminated in consolidation. In accordance with GAAP, our consolidated financial statements require the use of estimates and assumptions that involve the exercise of judgment and use of assumptions as to future uncertainties. In accordance with SEC guidance, the following discussion addresses the accounting policies that we currently apply. Our most critical accounting policies will involve decisions and assessments that could affect our reported assets and liabilities, as well as our reported revenues and expenses. We believe that all of the decisions and assessments upon which our consolidated financial statements have been based were reasonable at the time made and based upon information available to us at that time. For a review of recent accounting pronouncements that may impact our results of operations, refer Note 2 - “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” contained in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Valuation of Financial Instruments
We disclose the fair value of our financial instruments according to a fair value hierarchy (Levels I, II, and III, as defined below). ASC 820 "Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures" establishes a framework for measuring fair value and expands financial statement disclosure requirements for fair value measurements. ASC 820 further specifies a hierarchy of valuation techniques, which is based on whether the inputs into the valuation technique are observable or unobservable. The hierarchy is as follows:
Level I - Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level II - Quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active; and model-derived valuations whose inputs are observable or whose significant value drivers are observable.
Level III - Prices are determined using significant unobservable inputs. In situations where quoted prices or observable inputs are unavailable, for example, when there is little or no market activity for an investment at the end of the period, unobservable inputs may be used.
The level in the fair value hierarchy within which a fair value measurement in its entirety falls is based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement in its entirety. Transfers between levels are determined by us at the end of the reporting period.
Mortgage-Backed Securities and Other Securities
Our mortgage-backed securities and other securities portfolio primarily consists of Agency RMBS, Non-Agency RMBS, Agency CMBS, Non-Agency CMBS, ABS and other real estate related assets. These investments are recorded in accordance with ASC 320, “Investments - Debt and Equity Securities,” ASC 325-40, “Beneficial Interests in Securitized Financial Assets” or ASC 310-30, “Loans and Debt Securities Acquired with Deteriorated Credit Quality.” We have chosen to make a fair value election pursuant to ASC 825, “Financial Instruments” for our mortgage-backed securities and other securities
portfolio. Electing the fair value option allows us to record changes in fair value in the Consolidated Statements of Operations as a component of “Unrealized gain (loss), net.”
As of January 1, 2020, we adopted ASU 2016-13, “Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments or CECL in the first quarter of 2020. The standard significantly changes how entities measure credit losses for most financial assets and certain other instruments that are not measured at fair value through the income statement. The standard replaced the current "incurred loss" approach with an "expected loss" model for instruments measured at amortized cost. Since we elected the Fair Value Option for our mortgage-backed securities and other securities, we we do not apply the expected loss model instead we record changes in fair value of these investment in the Consolidated Statements of Operations as a component of "Unrealized gain (loss), net."
If we purchase securities with evidence of credit deterioration, we will analyze to determine if the guidance in ASU 2016-13, "Financial Instruments - Credit Losses, is applicable.
Residential Whole Loans
Investments in Residential Whole Loans are recorded in accordance with ASC 310-20, "Nonrefundable Fees and Other Costs." We have chosen to make the fair value election pursuant to ASC 825 for our entire Residential Whole-Loan portfolio. Residential Whole Loans are recorded at fair value with periodic changes in fair market value being recorded in earnings as a component of "Unrealized gain (loss), net." All other costs incurred in connection with acquiring Residential Whole Loans or committing to purchase these loans are charged to expense as incurred.
On a quarterly basis, we evaluate the collectability of both interest and principal of each loan, if circumstances warrant, to determine whether such loan is impaired. A loan is impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect all amounts due according to the existing contractual terms. We do not record an allowance for credit losses under ASU 2016-13 as we have elected the fair value option.
Residential Bridge Loans
For the Bridge Loans acquired prior to October 25, 2017, we did not elect the fair value option pursuant to ASC 825 and accordingly these loans are recorded at their principal amount outstanding, net of any premium or discount in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Commencing with purchases subsequent to October 25, 2017, we decided to elect the fair value option pursuant to ASC 825 to be consistent with the accounting of our other investments, which are all carried at fair value. These loans are recorded at fair value with periodic changes in fair market value being recorded in earnings as a component of "Unrealized gain (loss), net". All other costs incurred in connection with acquiring the Residential Bridge Loans or committing to purchase these loans are charged to expense as incurred.
A loan is impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect all amounts due according to the existing contractual terms. We evaluate each of Residential Bridge Loans on a quarterly basis. These loans are individually specific as they relate to the borrower, collateral type, interest rate, LTV and term as well as geographic location. We evaluate the collectability of both principal and interest of each loan. When a loan is impaired, the impairment is then measured based on fair value of the collateral, since these loans are collateral dependent. Upon measurement of impairment, we record an allowance for credit losses to reduce the carrying value of the loan with a corresponding charge to net income for those loans that we did not elect the fair value option. Significant judgments are required in determining impairment, including assumptions regarding the value of the loan, the value of the underlying collateral and other provisions such as guarantees. We do not record an allowance for credit losses for the Residential Bridge Loans under ASU 2016-13 that we elected the fair value option.
Securitized Commercial Loans
Securitized commercial loans are comprised of commercial loans of consolidated variable interest entities which were sponsored by third parties. These loans are recorded in accordance with ASC 310-20, "Nonrefundable Fees and Other Costs." We have chosen to make the fair value election pursuant to ASC 825. Accordingly, these loans are recorded at fair value with periodic changes in fair value being recorded in earnings as a component of "Unrealized gain (loss), net."
The securitized commercial loans are typically collateralized by commercial real estate. As a result, we regularly evaluate the extent and impact of any credit migration associated with the performance and/or value of the underlying collateral property as well as the financial and operating capability of the borrower on a loan by loan basis. On a quarterly basis, we evaluate the collectability of both interest and principal of each loan, if circumstances warrant, to determine whether such loan
is impaired. A loan is impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect all amounts due according to the existing contractual terms. We do not record an allowance for credit losses under ASU 2016-13 as we have elected the fair value option.
Commercial Loans
Investments in Commercial Loans, which are comprised of commercial mortgage loans and commercial mezzanine loans, are recorded in accordance with ASC 310-20, "Nonrefundable Fees and Other Costs." We have chosen to make the fair value election pursuant to ASC 825 for our Commercial Loan portfolio. Accordingly, these loans are recorded at fair value with periodic changes in fair value being recorded in earnings as a component of "Unrealized gain (loss), net." All other costs incurred in connection with acquiring the Commercial Loans or committing to purchase these loans are charged to expense as incurred.
Our loans are typically collateralized by commercial real estate. As a result, we regularly evaluate the extent and impact of any credit migration associated with the performance and or value of the underlying collateral property as well as the financial and operating capability of the borrower on a loan by loan basis. On a quarterly basis, we evaluate the collectability of both interest and principal of each loan, if circumstances warrant, to determine whether such loan is impaired. A loan is impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect all amounts due according to the existing contractual terms. We do not record an allowance for credit losses under ASU 2016-13 because we have elected the fair value option.
Interest Income Recognition
Agency MBS, Non-Agency MBS and other securities, excluding Interest-Only Strips, rated AA and higher at the time of purchase
Interest income on mortgage-backed and other securities is accrued based on the respective outstanding principal balances and corresponding contractual terms. We record interest income in accordance with ASC subtopic 835-30 "Imputation of Interest," using the effective interest method. As such premiums and discounts associated with Agency MBS, Non-Agency MBS and other securities, excluding Interest-Only Strips, are amortized into interest income over the estimated life of such securities. Adjustments to premium and discount amortization are made for actual prepayment activity. We estimate prepayments at least quarterly for our securities and, as a result, if the projected prepayment speed increases, we will accelerate the rate of amortization on premiums or discounts and make a retrospective adjustment to historical amortization. Alternatively, if projected prepayment speeds decrease, we will reduce the rate of amortization on the premiums or discounts and make a retrospective adjustment to historical amortization.
Non-Agency MBS and other securities that are rated below AA at the time of purchase and Interest-Only Strips that are not classified as derivatives
Interest income on Non-Agency MBS and other securities that are rated below AA at the time of purchase and Interest-Only Strips that are not classified as derivatives are also recognized in accordance with ASC 835, using the effective yield method. The effective yield on these securities is based on the projected cash flows from each security, which is estimated based on our observation of the then current information and events, where applicable, and will include assumptions related to interest rates, prepayment rates and the timing and amount of credit losses. On at least a quarterly basis, we review and, if appropriate, make adjustments to our cash flow projections based on input and analysis received from external sources, internal models, and our judgment about interest rates, prepayment rates, the timing and amount of credit losses, and other factors. Changes in cash flows from those originally projected, or from those estimated at the last evaluation, may result in a prospective change in the yield/interest income recognized on such securities. Actual maturities of the securities are affected by the contractual lives of the underlying collateral, periodic payments of scheduled principal, and prepayments of principal. Therefore, actual maturities of the securities will generally be shorter than stated contractual maturities.
We adopted ASU 2016-13 beginning January 1, 2020. The ASU requires a company to measure credit loss using an expected credit loss model. We elected the fair value option for our investments and as such does not apply the expected loss model instead we record changes in fair value of these investment in the Consolidated Statements of Operations as a component of "Unrealized gain (loss), net." For the purposes of calculating interest income, to ensure that a projected credit loss of a security does not impact the effective yield and interest income we maintain a “shadow allowance” account. We use the shadow allowance to create a management basis. The management basis which is the difference between the net present value of projected cash flows less shadow allowance amount. The shadow allowance and the management basis are operational accounts that are used solely for the purposes of determining and calculating accretable yield and accretable book value and are
not recorded in the consolidated financial statements. The management basis is limited to a fair market value of the investment. Actual realized loss on a security is recorded as a reduction in both the management basis and the amortized cost basis. Interest income is computed using the amortized basis as the reference amount and applying the yield calculated using management basis.
Loan Portfolio
Interest income on our residential loan portfolio and commercial loan portfolio is recorded using the effective interest method based on the contractual payment terms of the loan. Any premium amortization or discount accretion will be reflected as a component of "Interest income" in our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Income recognition is suspended for loans at the earlier of the date at which payments become 90-days past due or when, in the opinion of management, a full recovery of income and principal becomes doubtful. When the ultimate collectability of the principal of an impaired loan is in doubt, all payments are applied to principal under the cost recovery method. When the ultimate collectability of the principal of an impaired loan is not in doubt, contractual interest is recorded as interest income when received, under the cash basis method until an accrual is resumed when the loan becomes contractually current and performance is demonstrated.
Variable Interest Entities (“VIEs”)
VIEs are defined as entities that by design either lack sufficient equity for the entity to finance its activities without additional subordinated financial support or are unable to direct the entity’s activities or are not exposed to the entity’s losses or entitled to its residual returns. We evaluate all of our interests in VIEs for consolidation. When the interests are determined to be variable interests, we assess whether we are deemed the primary beneficiary. The primary beneficiary of a VIE is determined to be the party that has both the power to direct the activities of a VIE that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance and the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits of the VIE that could potentially be significant to the VIE.
To assess whether we have the power to direct the activities of a VIE that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance, we consider all facts and circumstances, including our role in establishing the VIE and our ongoing rights and responsibilities. This assessment includes first, identifying the activities that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance; and second, identifying which party, if any, has power over those activities. In general, the parties that make the most significant decisions affecting the VIE or have the right to unilaterally remove those decision makers is deemed to have the power to direct the activities of a VIE.
To assess whether we have the obligation to absorb losses of the VIE or the right to receive benefits from the VIE that could potentially be significant to the VIE, we consider all of our economic interests. This assessment requires that we apply judgment in determining whether these interests, in the aggregate, are considered potentially significant to the VIE. Factors considered in assessing significance include: the design of the VIE, including its capitalization structure; subordination of interests; payment priority; relative share of interests held across various classes within the VIE’s capital structure; and the reasons why the interests are held by us.
In instances where we and our related parties have variable interests in a VIE, we consider whether there is a single party in the related party group that meets both the power and losses or benefits criteria on its own as though no related party relationship existed. If one party within the related party group meets both these criteria, such reporting entity is the primary beneficiary of the VIE and no further analysis is needed. If no party within the related party group on its own meets both the power and losses or benefits criteria, but the related party group as a whole meets these two criteria, the determination of primary beneficiary within the related party group requires significant judgment. The analysis is based upon qualitative as well as quantitative factors, such as the relationship of the VIE to each of the members of the related-party group, as well as the significance of the VIE's activities to those members, with the objective of determining which party is most closely associated with the VIE.
Ongoing assessments of whether an enterprise is the primary beneficiary of a VIE is required.
Derivatives and Hedging Activities
Subject to maintaining our qualification as a REIT for U.S. federal income tax purposes, as part of our hedging strategy, we may enter into interest rate swaps, including forward starting swaps, interest rate swaptions, U.S. Treasury options, futures contracts, TBAs, Agency and Non-Agency interest only strips total return swaps, credit default swaps and foreign
current swaps and forwards. Derivatives, subject to REIT requirements, are used for hedging purposes rather than speculation. We determine the fair value of our derivative positions and obtain quotations from third parties, including the Chicago Mercantile Exchange or CME, to facilitate the process of determining such fair values. If our hedging activities do not achieve the desired results, reported earnings may be adversely affected.
GAAP requires an entity to recognize all derivatives as either assets or liabilities on the balance sheet and to measure those instruments at fair value. The accounting for changes in the fair value of derivatives depends on the intended use of the derivative. The fair value adjustment will affect either other comprehensive income in stockholders' equity until the hedged item is recognized in earnings or net income depending on whether the derivative instrument is designated and qualifies as a for hedge for accounting purposes and if so, the nature of the hedging activity. We have elected not to apply hedge accounting for our derivative instruments. Accordingly, we record the change in fair value of our derivative instruments, which includes net interest rate swap payments/receipts (including accrued amounts) and net currency payments/receipts (including accrued amounts) related to interest rate swaps and currency swaps, respectively in "Gain (loss) on derivative instruments, net" in our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Proceeds and payments on settlement of swaptions, mortgage put options, futures contracts credit default swaps and TBAs are included in cash flows from investing activities. Proceeds and payments on settlement of forward contracts are reflected in cash flows from financing activities in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. For Agency and Non-Agency Interest-Only Strips accounted for as derivatives, the purchase, sale and recovery of basis activity is included with MBS and other securities under cash flows from investing activities in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
We evaluate the terms and conditions of our holdings of Agency and Non-Agency Interest-Only Strips, interest rate swaptions, currency forwards, futures contracts and TBAs to determine if these instruments have the characteristics of an investment or should be considered a derivative under GAAP. In determining the classification of our holdings of Interest-Only Strips, we evaluate the securities to determine if the nature of the cash flows has been altered from that of the underlying mortgage collateral. Interest-Only Strips, for which the underlying mortgage collateral has been included into a structured security that alters the cash flows from the underlying mortgage collateral, are accounted for as derivatives. The carrying value of our Agency and Non-Agency Interest-Only Strips, accounted for as derivatives, is included in "Mortgage-backed securities and other securities, at fair value" in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. The carrying value of interest rate swaptions, currency forwards, futures contracts and TBAs is included in "Derivative assets, at fair value" or "Derivative liability, at fair value" in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Interest earned or paid along with the change in fair value of these instruments accounted for as derivatives is recorded in "Gain (loss) on derivative instruments, net" in our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
We evaluate all of our financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. An embedded derivative is separated from the host contact and accounted for separately when all of the guidance criteria are met. Hybrid instruments that are remeasured at fair value through earnings, including the fair value option, are not bifurcated. Derivative instruments, including derivative instruments accounted for as liabilities are recorded at fair value and are re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value together with interest earned or paid (including accrued amounts) reported in "Gain (loss) on derivative instruments, net" in our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
2020 Activity
Investment Activity
The COVID-19 pandemic has created unprecedented market disruption and dislocation. The extreme lack of liquidity in mortgage markets combined with forced selling led to swift and dramatic price declines. During the first quarter of 2020 and the early part of the second quarter, the significant decline in asset values resulted in us having to sell assets in order to meet margin calls by our repurchase agreement counterparties. In the second half of 2020, the equity and credit markets rallied, driven by improved liquidity. As a result our portfolio has experienced improved valuations and we did not have significant asset sales or margin calls during the second half of 2020.
The following table presents our investing activity for the year ended December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
(1) Other securities include $42.2 million of GSE CRTs and $6.5 million of ABS at December 31, 2020.
Portfolio Characteristics
Our Agency Portfolio
The following table summarizes our Agency portfolio by investment category as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
(1)IOs and IIOs have no principal balances and bear interest based on a notional balance. The notional balance is used solely to determine interest distributions on the interest-only class of securities.
Credit Sensitive Portfolio
Non-Agency RMBS
The following table presents the fair value and weighted average purchase price for each of our Non-agency RMBS categories, including IOs accounted for as derivatives, together with certain of their respective underlying loan collateral attributes and current performance metrics as of December 31, 2020 (fair value dollars in thousands):
Non-Agency CMBS
The following table presents certain characteristics of our Non-Agency CMBS portfolio as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
Residential Whole Loans
The Residential Whole Loans have low LTV's and are comprised of 2,489 Non-QM adjustable rate mortgages and eight investor fixed rate mortgages. The following table presents certain information about our Residential Whole-Loans investment portfolio as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
(1)The original FICO score is not available for 236 loans with a principal balance of approximately $75.2 million at December 31, 2020. We have excluded these loans from the weighted average computations.
Residential Bridge Loans
Our Residential Bridge Loans are comprised of short-term fixed rate mortgages secured by non-owner occupied single and multi-family residences with low LTVs, generally up to 85%. The following table presents certain information about our Residential Bridge Loans investment portfolio at December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
(1) Non-performing loans that are past their maturity date are excluded from the calculation of the weighted average contractual maturity. The weighted average contractual maturity for these loans is zero.
Non-performing Residential Loans
The following table presents the aging of the Residential Whole Loans and Bridge Loans as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
(1) Includes $124 thousand loans carried at amortized cost.
(2) Includes 7 loans in forbearance with unpaid principal balance of approximately $2.4 million and 142 loans that were previously in forbearance but are currently performing under the repayment phase following forbearance period with unpaid principal balance of approximately $59.0 million.
COVID-19 has materially disrupted business operations, resulting in significantly higher levels of unemployment or underemployment. As a result, some of its Residential Whole Loan borrowers have experienced financial hardship, making it difficult to meet their payment obligations to us, leading to requests for forbearance and higher levels of delinquency and potentially defaults. We maintain a strong relationship with our servicers and have utilized these relationships to manage the impacts of COVID-19 pandemic on our Non-QM loans. As of December 31, 2020, we had 7 Non-QM loans in forbearance and 142 Non-QM loans in the repayment phase following forbearance. Under the forbearance agreement, the borrower can generally elect to defer the principal and interest payments for 3 months. At the end of the forbearance period, the borrower can either request an extension for payment deferral, repay the deferred principal and interest in full or over the next 9 months or capitalize the deferred principal and interest to the loan balance and calculate a new amortization payment. Loans under a forbearance agreement are treated as "Current" in the above table. These loans are carried at fair value and had an unpaid principal balance of approximately $2.4 million, a fair value of $2.4 million, a weighted average original LTV of 65.3% and represent approximately 0.2% of the total outstanding principal balance of our Residential Whole Loans.
As of December 31, 2020, there were 26 Non-QM loans carried at fair value in non-accrual status with an unpaid principal balance of approximately $15.3 million and a fair value of approximately $14.7 million. These nonperforming loans represent approximately 1.6% of the total outstanding principal balance. No allowance or provision for credit losses was recorded as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020 since the valuation adjustment, if any, would be reflected in the fair value of these loans. We stopped accruing interest income for these loan when they became contractually 90 days delinquent.
As of December 31, 2020, there was 1 Residential Bridge Loan carried at amortized cost in non-accrual status with an unpaid principal balance of approximately $123.8 thousand and 20 Residential Bridge Loans carried at fair value in non-accrual status with an unpaid principal balance of approximately $9.9 million and a fair value of $8.9 million. These nonperforming Residential Bridge Loans represent approximately 66.0% of the total outstanding principal balance. No allowance and provision for credit losses was recorded for loans carried at fair value as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020 since valuation adjustments, if any, would be reflected in the fair value of these loans. We stopped accruing interest income for these loans when they became contractually 90 days delinquent.
As of December 31, 2020, we had three real estate owned ("REO") properties with an aggregate carrying value of $1.1 million related to foreclosed Bridge Loans. The REO properties are held for sale and accordingly carried at the lower of cost or fair value less cost to sell. The REO properties are classified in "Other assets" in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Commercial Real Estate Investments
Securitized Commercial Loans
In November 2015, we acquired a $14.0 million variable interest in CMSC Trust, which is a VIE that we were required to consolidate. In June 2020, the variable interest we acquired was paid off and accordingly, the CSMC Trust is no longer consolidated.
RETL 2018-RVP was refinanced with a new securitization RETL 2019-RVP ("RETL 2019 Trust") in March 2019. We acquired a $65.3 million variable interest in the trust certificates issued by RETL 2019 Trust, including $45.3 million which represents the 5% eligible risk retention certificate. Please refer to Note 6 - "Commercial Real Estate Investments" for details. The RETL 2019 Trust holds a commercial loan collateralized by first mortgages, deeds of trusts and interests in commercial real estate located throughout the United States and Puerto Rico. The outstanding principal balance on this commercial loan is $354.2 million as of December 31, 2020. The commercial loan served as collateral for the $354.2 million securitized debt issued by RETL 2019 Trust and the securitized debt is non-recourse to us. Refer to Note 7 - "Financings" for details on the associated securitized debt.
In December 2019, we acquired a $161.4 million interest in the trust certificates issued by the MRCD 2019-PRKC Mortgage Trust (MRCD Trust"), including $10.5 million HRR certificates, which represents the initial controlling class. We determined that MRCD Trust was a VIE and that we were also the primary beneficiary because the Manager was involved in certain aspects of the design of the trust and we own the controlling class. As the primary beneficiary, we consolidated MRCD Trust and our investment in the trust certificates (HRR class and a portion of the A class) of MRCD Trust were eliminated in the consolidation.
In March 2020, we sold our investments in the A Class certificates of MRCD Trust, and shortly after the sale, we entered into an agreement to assign our controlling rights and appoint one of the buyers as the new Directing Holder. As a result, the assets and liabilities of MRCD Trust were unconsolidated since we no longer have the power to direct the activities that significantly impact the economic performance of the MRCD Trust.
MRCD qualified as a CFE under GAAP and we measured both the financial assets and financial liabilities using the fair value of the financial liabilities, since it was more observable. We recognized an unrealized loss of $43.7 million in earnings, related to the periodic change in fair value of MRCD's assets and liabilities in March 2020 and prior to deconsolidation. Also, we retained the HRR certificates, which were measured at fair value at the date of deconsolidation and is included in the "Non-Agency mortgage-backed securities, at fair value" in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
On August 1, 2020 we consolidated CSMC USA as a result of our ongoing reassessment of our CMBS VIE holdings for potential consolidation of the securitized trust. Our $14.9 million or 8.8% interest in the trust certificate of CSMC USA (F Class) was eliminated in the consolidation. Please refer to Note 6 - "Commercial Real Estate Investments" for details. The CSMC USA holds a commercial loan secured by a first mortgage lien on the borrowers’ fee and leasehold interests in a portion of a super-regional mall. The outstanding principal balance on this commercial loan is $1.4 billion as of December 31, 2020. The loan's stated maturity date is September 11, 2025 and bears a fixed interest rate of 4.38%. The commercial loan served as collateral for the $1.4 billion securitized debt issued by CMSC USA and the securitized debt is non-recourse to us. Refer to Note 7 - "Financings" for details on the associated securitized debt.
In December 2020, the commercial loan held by CSMC USA was amended to an interest only payment through maturity. Cash Management Forbearance Agreement previously entered into by Special Servicer and the borrower that required both increased reporting requirements and monthly net cash remittance continues to be in effect.
Non-Performing Commercial Loans
The impact of COVID-19 pandemic has adversely impacted a broad range of industries in which our commercial loan borrowers operate and could impair their ability to fulfill their financial obligations to us, most significantly hospitality assets. We believe our CRE loan sponsors are well capitalized and generally committed to supporting the assets collateralizing our
loans. Our portfolio’s low average LTV of 65.5% as of December 31, 2020 reflects significant equity value that our sponsors are motivated to protect through the COVID-19 disruption.
As of December 31, 2020, we commenced foreclosure procedures for our delinquent commercial loan with an outstanding principal balance of $30.0 million, secured by a hotel. However, on February 24, 2021, the borrower filed for bankruptcy protection. We expect to move forward with the foreclosure subject to the bankruptcy process and believe there is a reasonable likelihood that the outstanding principal balance of $30.0 million, will be recovered, although there is no assurance.
We hold a junior mezzanine loan ("CRE 3" loan) with an outstanding principal balance of $90 million secured by a retail facility. The CRE 3 loan has an initial maturity on June 29, 2021. The CRE 3 loan is currently receiving interest payments from a reserve that will become exhausted at maturity of the loan. We expect that the CRE 3 loan will become non performing upon depletion of such reserve.
The following table presents the aging of the Commercial Loans as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
Commercial Loan Trust
Geographic Concentration
The mortgages underlying our Non-Agency RMBS and Non-Agency CMBS are located in various states across the United States and other countries. The following table presents the five largest concentrations by location for the mortgages collateralizing our Non-Agency RMBS and Non-Agency CMBS as of December 31, 2020, based on fair value (dollars in thousands):
The following table presents the various states across the United States in which the collateral securing our Residential Whole Loans and Residential Bridge Loans at December 31, 2020, based on principal balance, is located (dollars in thousands):
Financing Activity
The market disruptions surrounding COVID-19 resulted in the decline of our asset values making it more difficult to obtain repurchase agreement financing with favorable terms or at all. Our repurchase agreement counterparties have increased borrowing rates and increased haircuts. We will continue to expand and diversify our financing sources, especially those sources that provide an alternative to short term repurchase agreements with daily margin requirements. Our amended Residential Whole Loan facility and supplemented Non-Agency CMBS and RMBS facility has significantly reducing our exposure to margin volatility.
Repurchase Agreements
Residential Whole Loan Facility
On April 21, 2020, we entered into amendments with respect to certain of our loan warehouse facilities. These amendments mainly served to convert an existing residential whole loan facility into a term facility by removing any mark to market margin requirements, and to consolidate our Non-Qualified Mortgage loans onto a single facility, which were previously financed by three separate, unaffiliated counterparties.
The target advance rate under the amended and restated facility is approximately 84% of the aggregate unpaid principal balance of the loans. The original maturity date for the facility was October 20, 2021. All principal payments and income generated by the loans during the term of the facility will be used to pay principal and interest on the facility. Upon the securitization or sale by us of any whole loan subject to this amended and restated facility, the counterparty is entitled to receive a recapture premium fee of 30% of all realized value on any whole loans above such counterparty’s amortized basis as well as an exit fee of 0.50% of the loan amount in circumstances where the counterparty was involved in the disposition of the loans. The financing cost of this facility was reflective of the challenging market conditions, at such time, when we entered into the agreement.
Initially, the aggregate borrowings under this facility with respect to its Residential Whole Loans was approximately $385.0 million and the market value of such loans was approximately $430.0 million. On June 29, 2020, we securitized approximately $355.8 million of the Residential Whole Loans and paid down the facility by approximately $339.4 million (see "Securitized Debt" below for additional details). As noted above as part of the financing arrangements we agreed to pay the lender a fee of 30% of all realized value on the Residential Whole Loans above the counterparty's amortized basis upon securitization or sale. As a result of refinancing the Residential Whole Loans through a securitization, we accrued a premium recapture fee of approximately $20.5 million, which was payable at the maturity of the facility, and was recorded in "Financing fees" in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. In October 2020, in connection with the amendment to the facility discussed below we paid $12.0 million of the premium recapture fee and the balance of $8.5 million is payable at the maturity of the amended facility, October 5, 2021.
On October 6, 2020 we entered into an amendment with respect to its residential loan warehouse facility. The amendment serves to convert the existing residential loan facility to a limited mark to market margin facility that bears an interest rate of LIBOR plus 2.75%, with a LIBOR floor of 0.25%. The target advance rate under the amended facility is 85% and the facility matures on October 5, 2021. As part of the amendment, the premium recapture fee was eliminated for investments financed under the amended facility.
Non-Agency CMBS and Non-Agency RMBS Facility
On May 4, 2020, we supplemented one of our existing securities repurchase facilities to consolidate most of our CMBS and RMBS assets, which were financed by multiple counterparties, into a single term facility with limited mark to market margin requirements. Pursuant to the agreement, a margin deficit will not occur until such time as the loan to value ratio surpasses a certain threshold (the “LTV Trigger”), on a weighted average basis per asset type, calculated on a portfolio level. If this threshold is reached, we may elect to provide cash margin or sell certain assets to the extent necessary to lower the ratio. The term of this facility is 12 months, subject to 12 month extensions at the counterparty’s option. All interest income generated by the assets during the term of the facility will be paid to us no less often than monthly. Interest on the facility is due from us at a rate of three-month LIBOR plus 5.00% payable quarterly in arrears. Half of all principal repayments on the underlying assets will be applied to repay the obligations owed to the counterparty, with the remainder paid to us, unless the LTV Trigger has occurred, in which case all principal payments will be applied to repay the obligations.
Certain of the repurchase agreements provide the counterparty with the right to terminate the agreement if we do not maintain certain equity, liquidity and leverage metrics, the most restrictive of which include a limit on leverage based on the composition of our portfolio. For all the repurchase agreements with outstanding borrowings, we were in compliance with the terms of such financial tests as of December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2020, we had outstanding borrowings under five of our master repurchase agreements. The following table summarizes our 2020 financing activity under our repurchase agreements for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
(1)The borrowings and collateral pledged attributed to loans owned through trust certificates. The trust certificates are eliminated upon consolidation.
(2)Includes repurchase agreement borrowings on securities eliminated upon VIE consolidation.
(3)The pledged amount relates to our non-controlling membership interest in our wholly owned subsidiary, WMC RETL LLC, which was financed under a repurchase agreement. The membership interest is eliminated in consolidation.
Certain of the financing arrangements provide the counterparty with the right to terminate the agreement if we do not maintain certain equity, liquidity and leverage metrics. With the exception of one repurchase agreement for which we received a waiver, we were in compliance with the terms of such financial tests as of December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2020, we had outstanding repurchase agreement borrowings with the following counterparties:
(1)The counterparty ratings presented above are the long-term issuer credit ratings as rated at December 31, 2020 by S&P.
(2)Includes master repurchase agreements in which the buyer includes Alpine Securitization LTD., a Credit Suisse sponsored asset-backed commercial paper conduit.
(3)Nomura Holdings, Inc., the parent company of Nomura Securities International, Inc., is rated BBB+ by S&P at December 31, 2020.
(4)Represents amount outstanding with one counterparty, which holds collateral valued less than 5% of our stockholders’ equity as security for our obligations under the applicable repurchase agreements as of December 31, 2020.
The following table presents our average repurchase agreement borrowings, excluding unamortized debt issuance costs, by type of collateral pledged for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 (dollars in thousands):
(1)Amount represents the maximum borrowings at month-end during each of the respective periods.
(2)Includes repurchase agreement borrowings on securities eliminated upon VIE consolidation.
Securitized Debt
We hold a controlling financial variable interest in RETL 2019 Trust and CSMC USA and were required to consolidate the CMBS VIEs. Refer to Note 7 - "Financings" for details.
The following table summarizes the consolidated RETL 2019 Trust's commercial mortgage pass-through certificates at December 31, 2020 which is classified in "Securitized debt, net" in the Consolidated Balance Sheets (dollars in thousands):
(1) Class X-EXT is an interest-only class with a notional balance of $308.4 million as of December 31, 2020.
The following table summarizes the consolidated 2014 CSMC USA's commercial mortgage pass-through certificates at December 31, 2020 which is classified in "Securitized debt, net" in the Consolidated Balance Sheets (dollars in thousands):
(1) Class X-1 and Class X-2 are interest-only classes with notional balances of $652.1 million and $733.5 million as of December 31, 2020, respectively.
The above table does not reflect the portion of the class F bond held by us because the bond is eliminated in consolidation. Our ownership interest in the F bonds represents a controlling financial interest, which resulted in consolidation of the trust, during the quarter. The bond had a fair market value of $9.7 million at December 31, 2020, and our exposure to loss is limited to our ownership interest in this bond.
Residential Mortgage-Backed Notes
In May 2019, we completed a residential mortgage-backed securitization comprised of a portion of our Residential Whole Loan portfolio. RMI 2015 Trust and RNR Trust collectively transferred $945.5 million of Non-QM Residential Whole Loans, to our wholly-owned subsidiary, Arroyo Mortgage Trust 2019-2 ("Arroyo Trust") and Arroyo Trust issued $919.0 million of mortgage-backed notes and we retained the subordinate Non-Offered Securities. At December 31, 2020, Residential Whole Loans, with an outstanding principal balance of approximately $615.3 million, serve as collateral for the Arroyo Trust's securitized debt.
The following table summarizes the consolidated Arroyo Trust's issued mortgage-backed notes at December 31, 2020 which is classified in "Securitized debt, net" in the Consolidated Balance Sheets (dollars in thousands):
In June 2020, we completed a residential mortgage-backed securitization comprised of a portion of our Residential Whole Loan portfolio. RMI 2015 Trust transferred $355.8 million of Non-QM Residential Whole Loans, to our wholly owned subsidiary, Arroyo Trust 2020. Arroyo Trust 2020 issued $341.7 million of mortgage-backed notes and we retained the subordinate non-offered securities. These non-offered securities with an estimated fair value of $27.7 million at December 31, 2020 were eliminated in the consolidation. At December 31, 2020, Residential Whole Loans, with an outstanding principal balance of approximately $300.0 million, serve as collateral for the Arroyo Trust 2020's securitized debt.
The following table summarizes the consolidated Arroyo Trust 2020's issued mortgage-backed notes at December 31, 2020 which is classified in "Securitized debt, net" in the Consolidated Balance Sheets (dollars in thousands):
Convertible Senior Unsecured Notes
As of December 31, 2020, we had $175.0 million of 6.75% convertible senior unsecured notes (the "2022 Notes) outstanding. The 2022 Notes mature on October 1, 2022, unless earlier converted, redeemed or repurchased by the holders pursuant to their terms, and are not redeemable by us except during the final three months prior to maturity.
On July 1, 2020, we issued an aggregate of 1,354,084 shares of our common stock in exchange for $5.0 million of our 2022 Notes pursuant to separate privately negotiated exchange agreements entered into on July 1, 2020 (collectively, the “Exchange Agreement”) between us and certain holders of the 2022 Notes. We did not receive any cash proceeds as a result of the Exchange Agreement, and the notes exchanged pursuant to the Exchange Agreement were retired and cancelled. See Note 7 - “Financings.”
In the fourth quarter of 2020, we repurchased $25.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2022 Notes at an approximate 13% discount to par value, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
Hedging Activity
In March 2020, we effectively terminated fixed-pay interest rate swaps with a notional value of approximately $3.1 billion and variable-pay interest rate with a notional value of approximately $1.9 billion to reduce hedging costs and associated market volatility. The effect of the termination is reflected in the table below for the year ended December 31, 2020 in Settlements, Terminations or Expirations.
The following tables summarize the hedging activity during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
As of December 31, 2020, we had no fixed pay rate interest rate swaps or variable pay rate interest rate swaps.
Capital Markets Activity
The following is a summary of activity during 2020:
Stock Repurchase
On December 19, 2019, our Board of Directors reauthorized the repurchase program of up to 2,700,000 shares of our common stock through December 31, 2021. In March 2020, pursuant to the repurchase plan we acquired 100,000 shares with an average price, including commission, of $5.78 per share, totaling approximately $578 thousand.
At-The-Market Program
In March 2017, we entered into an equity distribution agreement with JMP Securities LLC, which was amended on June 5, 2020, under which we may offer and sell up to $100.0 million shares of common stock in an At-The-Market equity offering. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 6,034,741 shares under this amended agreement with an average price of $3.70 per share for total net proceeds of $22.0 million.
Convertible Notes Exchange
On July 1, 2020, we issued an aggregate of 1,354,084 shares of our common stock in exchange for $5.0 million aggregate principal amount of our 2022 Notes. See Note 7 - "Financings" for information related to the convertible notes exchange.
Convertible Notes Repurchase
In the fourth quarter of 2020, we repurchased $25.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2022 Notes at an approximate 13% discount to par value, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
Dividends
To preserve liquidity, we suspended our first and second quarter of 2020 common stock dividends in light of extraordinary market volatility driven by uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic.
In the third quarter of 2020, we resumed payment of our quarterly dividend after making progress strengthening our balance sheet and improving liquidity and earnings power of our investment portfolio. For the quarters ended September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020, we declared a $0.05 and $0.06 dividend per share, respectively, generating a dividend yield of approximately 6.7% based on the stock closing price of $3.26 at December 31, 2020.
Book Value
The following chart reflects our book value per common share basic and diluted shares over five consecutive quarters:
The COVID-19 pandemic has created unprecedented market disruption and dislocation, requiring us to sell asset to meet margin calls. We have implemented measures to increase liquidity, reduce leverage, and seek alternative financing arrangements to preserve long-term shareholder value. We had improved financial results during the second half of 2020, which included significant recovery in asset valuations. The improved asset valuations resulted in the increase in book value of $0.13 to $4.20 at December 31, 2020 when compared to our September 30, 2020 book value of $4.07.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019
General
Our results of operations were adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which created unprecedented market disruption and dislocation. During the first quarter of 2020, the uncertainty surrounding the pandemic created an extreme lack of liquidity in mortgage markets and when combined with forced selling led to swift and dramatic price declines. The significant decline in value of our investment portfolio resulted in substantial margin calls from our repurchase agreement counterparties. In order to satisfy the margin calls, we sold a significant portion of our investments. We also terminated our interest rate hedges because they were ineffective in the low interest rate environment and it further reduced margin call volatility. During the second half of 2020, our portfolio experienced improved valuations and earnings, and we did not have significant asset sales or margin calls during the quarter.
The full impact of COVID-19 on our results of operations is still uncertain as it depends on several factors beyond our control including, but not limited to (i) the uncertainty around the severity and duration of the outbreak, (ii) the effectiveness of the United States public health response, (iii) the pandemic’s impact on the U.S. and global economies, (iv) the timing, scope and effectiveness of additional governmental responses to the pandemic, (v) the timing and speed of economic recovery, including the availability and effectiveness of the vaccination for COVID-19 and (vi) the negative impact on our borrowers, asset values and cost of capital.
Due to the significant amount of investment sales, resulting from the market volatility created by the COVID-19 pandemic, our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 are not comparable.
During the second half of 2020, we continued to make progress towards strengthening our balance sheet, improving liquidity, shareholders equity and the earnings power of the portfolio. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we generated a net loss of $328.3 million or $5.72 per basic and diluted weighted common share, compared to net income of $70.7 million or $1.37 per basic and diluted weighted common share for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our results of operations, for the second half of 2020, was positively impacted by improved valuations on our investment portfolio, specifically our Residential Whole Loan Investments. Our credit sensitive portfolio continued to perform in line with our expectations.
The following tables set forth certain information regarding our net interest income on our investment portfolio for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 (dollars in thousands):
(1) Average cost of funds does not include the interest expense related to our derivatives. In accordance with GAAP, such costs are included in "Gain (loss) on derivative instruments, net" in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
(2) Since we do not apply hedge accounting, our net interest margin is this table does not reflect the benefit / cost of our interest rate swaps. See Non-GAAP Financial Measure section for net investment income table that includes the benefit / cost from our interest rate swaps.
Interest Income
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, we earned interest income on our investments of approximately $178.0 million and $217.3 million, respectively. The decrease in interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was driven by the sales of a significant portion of our investment portfolio to meet margin calls. We sold $2.0 billion of investments, mainly in March and April 2020. The majority of the impact of these sales were reflected in interest income in starting in the second of 2020. Our portfolio experienced improved valuations and we did not have significant asset sales in the second half of the year.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased from $150.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $132.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was a result of the significant reduction in leverage associated with the sale of $2.4 billion of investments, mainly in March and April 2020. During the second quarter of 2020, we entered into two new financing facilities to limit our exposure to short-term mark to market financings. Also, we completed a securitization of approximately $355.8 million of our Residential Whole Loans, reducing our recourse leverage by $339.4 million or 46.0%.
Other income (loss), net
Realized gain (loss) on investments, net
Realized gain (loss) on investments represents the net gain (loss) on sales or settlements from our investment portfolio. To improve liquidity, reduce our repurchase agreement borrowing and satisfy our margin calls, we sold $2.4 billion in investments mainly in March and April 2020. These sales generated $80.6 million in net realized gains. Our portfolio experienced improved valuations and we did not have significant asset sales during the third quarter.
The following table presents the realized gains (losses) of our investments for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 (dollars in thousands):
(1)Realized gains/losses recognized on the final settlement of the loans.
(2)Realized gains/losses recognized on the transfer of Residential Bridge Loans to REO. Proceeds represent the fair value less estimated selling costs of the real estate on the date of transfer.
Unrealized gain (loss), net
Our investments, and securitized debt, for which we have elected the fair value option are recorded at fair value with the periodic changes in fair value being recorded in earnings. The change in unrealized gain (loss) is directly attributable to changes in market pricing on the underlying investments and securitized debt during the period. The extreme lack of liquidity in mortgage markets combined with forced selling led to swift and dramatic price declines in the first quarter of 2020. While we have seen price recovery on our investments investments in the second, third, and fourth quarters, there is still a lot of
uncertainty surrounding the opening and recovery of the economy. Therefore, the recovery experienced was not sufficient to significantly reduce the substantial unrealized loss from the dramatic price declines.
The following table presents the net unrealized gains (losses) we recorded on our investments and securitized debt (dollars in thousands):
Gain (loss) on derivatives, net
In March 2020, we effectively terminated all of our fixed-pay interest rate swaps and variable-pay interest rate swaps to reduce hedging costs and associated margin volatility. The effects of the termination is reflected in the table below for the December 31, 2020.
The following table presents the components of gain (loss) on derivatives for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 (dollars in thousands):
(1)Contractual interest income (expense), net on derivative instruments includes interest settlement paid or received.
Other, net
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, "Other, net" consisted of income of $339 thousand and income of $2.2 million, respectively. The balance is mainly comprised of interest on cash balances, miscellaneous net interest income (expense) on cash collateral for our repurchase agreements and derivatives and miscellaneous fees collected on residential mortgage loans.
Expenses
Management Fee Expense
We incurred management fee expense of approximately $4.5 million and $7.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Pursuant to the terms of the Management Agreement, our Manager is paid a management fee equal to 1.5% per annum of our stockholders’ equity (as defined in the Management Agreement), calculated and payable (in cash) quarterly in arrears. The decrease was mainly attributable to our Manager waiving the management fee from March 2020 to May 2020 as a result of the impact of COVID-19 and the disruption in the mortgage markets. Future waivers, if any, are at the Manager's discretion. Also, the termination of our interest rate swaps in March 2020 resulted in realized losses that reduced stockholders' equity that is used to calculate the management fee.
The management fees, expense reimbursements and the relationship between our Manager and us are discussed further in Note 10, “Related Party Transactions” to the consolidated financial statements contained in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Financing Fee
In the second quarter in order to manage the severe market conditions and the resulting large margin demands from lenders and pressure on our liquidity, we entered into a longer term financing arrangement for our Residential Whole Loans, as we sort to reduce our exposure to short-term financings with daily mark to market exposure. Under this agreement, we are required to pay the counterparty a 30% premium recapture fee of all realized value on any residential whole loans above such counterparty’s amortized basis upon the securitization or sale.
On June 29, 2020, we securitized approximately $355.8 million of the Residential Whole Loans and paid down the facility by approximately $339.4 million (see "Securitized Debt" below for additional details). As noted above, as part of the financing arrangements, we agreed to pay the lender a fee of 30% of all realized value on the Residential Whole Loans above the counterparty's amortized basis upon securitization or sale. As a result of refinancing the Residential Whole Loans through a securitization, we accrued a premium recapture fee of approximately $20.5 million, which is payable at the maturity of the facility. However, in connection with an amendment to this facility effective October 6, 2020, we paid $12.0 million of the fee with the balance of $8.5 million due on the new maturity if the facility on October 5, 2021. The amendment also eliminated the the premium recapture fee for assets financed under the amended facility.
Other Operating Expenses
We incurred other operating expenses of approximately $2.9 million and $5.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. Other operating cost is comprised of derivative transaction costs, custody, and asset management/loan servicing fees. The decrease was primarily a result of a smaller bridge loan portfolio, which were acquired servicing released, thereby decreasing the associated third party asset management/loan servicing fees. In addition we incurred lower acquisition transaction costs, due to no investment acquisitions in the second, third and fourth quarters and lower derivative commissions and fees due to no new derivative transactions since we terminated our interest rate swaps in March 2020.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 were $11.0 million and $8.1 million, respectively. The increase was mainly attributable to an increase in the cost of our D&O insurance and additional legal fees incurred.
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2018
General
Our operating results mainly depend upon the difference between the yield on our investments, the cost of our borrowings, including our hedging activities, the composition and changes in market prices of our portfolio and our expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we generated net income of $70.7 million or $1.37 per basic and diluted weighted common share, compared to net income of $26.4 million or $0.61 per basic and diluted weighted common share for the year ended December 31, 2018. Our results of operations, for the year ended December 31, 2019, was positively impacted by tighter spreads on our Agency portfolio. Our credit sensitive portfolio continued to perform well with the favorable environment in both residential and commercial real estate markets.
Net Interest Income
The following tables set forth certain information regarding our net interest income on our investment portfolio for the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 (dollars in thousands):
(1) Average cost of funds does not include the interest expense related to our derivatives. In accordance with GAAP, such costs are included in "Gain (loss) on derivative instruments, net" in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
(2) Since we do not apply hedge accounting, our net interest margin is this table does not reflect the benefit / cost of our interest rate swaps. See Non-GAAP Financial Measure section for net investment income table that includes the benefit / cost from our interest rate swaps.
Interest Income
For the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, we earned interest income on our investments of approximately $217.3 million and $209.4 million, respectively. The increase in interest income for the year ended December 31, 2019 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 was primarily the result of an overall higher yielding investment portfolio. The weighted average yield increased to 4.70% for the year ended December 31, 2019 from 4.51% for the year ended December 31, 2018. Our credit sensitive investments contributed approximately $159.2 million or 73.3% to interest income for the period. Under the current market conditions, we expect to continue to increase our investments in Residential Whole Loans, Commercial Loans, Non-Agency CMBS and opportunistically invest in Agency CMBS and Agency RMBS.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased from $138.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 to $150.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our higher borrowing costs reflect: (i) higher interest rates on our repurchase agreements in 2019 coupled with higher costs associated with financing our credit-sensitive investments, which generally have higher interest rates; (ii) the issuance of an additional $90.0 million aggregate principal amount of 6.75% convertible senior unsecured notes in 2019; and (iii) an increase in the average outstanding securitized debt of $347.3 million from the consolidation of the Arroyo Trust and MRCD Trust. Our average cost of funds on our repurchase agreements increased from 2.66% for the year ended December 31, 2018 to 3.14% for the year ended December 31, 2019. We utilize interest rate swaps to mitigate our interest rate exposure. However, since we do not apply hedge accounting the reduction in interest expense is reflected in "Gain (loss) on derivatives, net."
Other income (loss)
Realized gain (loss) on investments, net
Realized gain (loss) on investments represents the net gain (loss) on sales or settlements from our investment portfolio. Our Manager regularly reviews the characteristics of our portfolio and may make changes to our portfolio in order to adjust such portfolio characteristics in response to and/or anticipation of changing market conditions in an effort to achieve the appropriate risk reward ratio.
The following table presents the sales and realized gains (loss) of our investments for the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 (dollars in thousands):
(1)Realized gains/losses recognized on the final settlement of the loans.
(2)Realized gains/losses recognized on the transfer of Residential Bridge Loans to REO. Proceeds represent the fair value less estimated selling costs of the real estate on the date of transfer.
Unrealized gain (loss), net
Our investments and securitized debt, for which we have elected the fair value option, are recorded at fair value with the periodic changes in fair value being recorded in earnings. The change in unrealized gain (loss) is directly attributable to changes in market pricing on the underlying investments and securitized debt during the period. For the year ended December 31, 2019, unrealized gain (loss) increased to a net unrealized gain of $107.5 million from a net unrealized loss of $24.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The majority of the increase in net unrealized gain (loss) was a result of tighter credit spreads on our Agency portfolio and in 2019, which positively impacted the value of these securities, accounting for the majority of the increase in unrealized gains in the portfolio.
The following table presents the net unrealized gains (losses) we recorded on our investment and securitized debt (dollars in thousands):
Gain (loss) on derivatives, net
In order to mitigate interest rate risk resulting from our repurchase agreement borrowings, we enter into a variety of derivative and non-derivative instruments. Our primary objective for acquiring these derivatives and non-derivative instruments is to mitigate our exposure to future events that are outside our control.
The following table presents the components of gain (loss) on derivatives for the year ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 (dollars in thousands):
(1)Contractual interest income (expense), net on derivative instruments includes interest settlement paid or received.
(2)"Other Settlements /Expirations" and "Market to Market" include the effects of the April 2017 restructuring of our interest rate swaps.
Other, net
For the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, "Other, net" consisted of income of $2.2 million and loss of $189 thousand, respectively. The balance is mainly comprised of interest on cash balances, miscellaneous net interest income (expense) on cash collateral for our repurchase agreements and derivatives and miscellaneous fees collected on residential mortgage loans.
Expenses
Management Fee Expense
We incurred management fee expense of approximately $7.4 million and $8.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, respectively. Pursuant to the terms of the Management Agreement, our Manager is paid a management fee equal to 1.5% per annum of our stockholders’ equity (as defined in the Management Agreement), calculated and payable (in cash) quarterly in arrears. Although in May 2019, we completed a secondary public offering for net proceeds of approximately $49.3 million after subtracting underwriting commissions and had net realized gains on sales of investments of approximately $28.3 million, these increases were offset by the realized losses on our interest rate swaps which resulted in a decrease in the stockholders' equity that was utilized to calculate our management fee.
The management fees, expense reimbursements and the relationship between our Manager and us are discussed further in Note 10, “Related Party Transactions” to the consolidated financial statements contained in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Other Operating Expenses
We incurred other operating expenses of approximately $5.5 million and $6.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, respectively. Other operating cost is comprised of derivative transaction costs, custody, and asset management/loan servicing fees. The decrease was primarily a result of a reduction in asset management and servicing fees related to our Residential Bridge Loans, which were all acquired servicing released.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses was relatively flat year over year.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We believe that our non-GAAP measures (described below), when considered with GAAP, provide supplemental information useful to investors in evaluating the results of our operations. Our presentations of such non-GAAP measures may not be comparable to similarly-titled measures of other companies, who may use different calculations. As a result, such non-GAAP measures should not be considered as substitutes for our GAAP net income, as measures of our financial performance or any measure of our liquidity under GAAP.
Core Earnings
Core Earnings is a Non-GAAP financial measure that is used by us to approximate cash yield or income associated with our portfolio and is defined as GAAP net income (loss) as adjusted, excluding: (i) net realized gain (loss) on investments and termination of derivative contracts; (ii) net unrealized gain (loss) on investments; (iii) net unrealized gain (loss) resulting from mark-to-market adjustments on derivative contracts; (iv) other than temporary impairment; (v) provision for income taxes; (vi) non-cash stock-based compensation expense; (vii) non-cash amortization of the convertible senior unsecured notes discount; (viii) one-time charges such as acquisition costs and impairment on loans and (ix) one-time events pursuant to changes in GAAP and certain other non-cash charges after discussions between us, our Manager and our independent directors and after approval by a majority of the our independent directors.
We utilize Core Earnings as a key metric to evaluate the effective yield of the portfolio. Core Earnings allows us to reflect the net investment income of our portfolio as adjusted to reflect the net interest rate swap interest expense. Core Earnings allows us to isolate the interest expense associated with our interest rate swaps in order to monitor and project our borrowing costs and interest rate spread.
We believe that the Non-GAAP measure, when considered with GAAP, provides supplemental information useful to investors in evaluating the results of our operations. Our presentation of Core Earnings may not be comparable to similarly-titled measures of other companies, who may use different calculations. As a result, Core Earnings should not be considered as a substitute for our GAAP net income, as a measure of our financial performance or any measure of our liquidity under GAAP.
In March and April 2020, we sold $2.4 billion of investments. The majority of the impact of these sales were reflected in net income in the first half of 2020. Due to the significant amount of investment sales, resulting from the market volatility created by the COVID-19 pandemic, our core earnings for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 are not comparable.
The table below reconciles Net Income to Core Earnings for the years ended December 31, 2020, December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018:
Alternatively, our Core Earnings can also be derived as presented in the table below by starting with Adjusted net interest income, which includes interest income on Interest-Only Strips accounted for as derivatives and other derivatives, and net interest expense incurred on interest rate swaps and foreign currency swaps and forwards (a Non-GAAP financial measure) subtracting Total expenses, adding Non-cash stock based compensation, adding one-time transaction costs, adding amortization of discount on convertible senior notes, and adding interest income on cash balances and other income (loss), net:
Reconciliation of GAAP Book Value to Non-GAAP Economic Book Value
"Economic book value" is a non-GAAP financial measure of our financial position on an unconsolidated basis. We own certain securities that represent a controlling variable interest, which under GAAP requires consolidation; however, our economic exposure to these variable interests is limited to the fair value of the individual investments. Economic book value is calculated by taking the GAAP book value and 1) adding the fair value of the retained interest or acquired security of the VIEs held by us and 2) removing the asset and liabilities associated with each of consolidated trusts (RETL 2019, CSMC USA, Arroyo 2019-2 and Arroyo 2020-1). Management considers that Economic book value provides investors with a useful supplemental measure to evaluate our financial position as it reflects the actual financial interest of these investments irrespective of the variable interest consolidation model applied for GAAP reporting purposes. Economic book value does not represent and should not be considered as a substitute for Stockholders' Equity, as determined in accordance with GAAP, and our calculation of this measure may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
The table below is a reconciliation of the GAAP Book Value to Non-GAAP Economic Book Value:
Net Interest Income and Net Interest Margin
The following tables set forth certain information regarding our net investment income for the years ended December 31, 2020, December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018 (dollars in thousands):
(1)Includes Agency and Non-Agency Interest-Only Strips accounted for as derivatives.
(2)Refer to below table for components of interest income.
(3)Includes the net amount paid, including accrued amounts and premium amortization for MAC interest rate swaps during the periods included in gain/loss on derivative instruments for GAAP.
(4)Includes only the third-party sponsored securitized debt from RETL Trust, CMSC Trust, MRCD Trust and CMSC USA.
The following table reconciles total interest income to adjusted interest income, which includes interest income on Agency and Non-Agency Interest-Only Strips classified as derivatives (Non-GAAP financial measure) for the years ended December 31, 2020, December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018:
(1)Reported in "Gain (loss) on derivative instruments, net" in our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Effective Cost of Funds includes the net interest component related to our interest rate swaps, as well as the impact of our foreign currency swaps and forwards. While we have not elected hedge accounting for these instruments, such derivative instruments are viewed by us as an economic hedge against increases in future market interest rates on our liabilities and changes in foreign currency exchange rates on our assets and liabilities and are characterized as hedges for purposes of satisfying the REIT requirements and therefore the Effective Cost of Funds reflects interest expense adjusted to include the realized gain/loss (i.e., the interest income/expense component) for all of our interest rate swaps and the impact of our foreign currency swaps and forwards.
The following table reconciles the Effective Cost of Funds (Non-GAAP financial measure) with interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2020, December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
Liquidity is a measure of our ability to meet potential cash requirements, including ongoing commitments to repay borrowings, fund and maintain our assets and operations, make distributions to our stockholders, and other general business needs. To maintain our REIT qualifications under the Internal Revenue Code, we must distribute annually at least 90% of our taxable income, excluding capital gains and, such distributions requirements limit our ability to retain earnings and increase capital for operations. As of December 31, 2020, we had $ 175.0 million of senior unsecured convertible notes and $356.9 million of asset specific financings. Our convertible senior unsecured notes are not due until October 2022. As of December 31, 2020, we had $31.6 million in cash and cash equivalents. In response to the unprecedented market conditions, we implemented measures to increase liquidity, reduce leverage, and seek alternative financing arrangements. We made further progress towards strengthening our balance sheet by reducing debt and leverage, while improving liquidity, shareholders equity and the earnings power of the portfolio.
As the duration and severity of COVID-19 remain unknown, so does the impact it will have on our borrowers, lenders, and the economy as a whole. We will continue to closely monitor developments related to COVID-19 as it relates to our liquidity position and financial obligations. At this time we believe we have sufficient liquidity and access to additional liquidity to meet financial obligations for at least the next 12 months.
Debt to Equity Ratio
(1) Total debt excludes the securitized debt which is non-recourse to us.
Financing Arrangements
On April 21, 2020, we entered into amendments with respect to certain of our residential loan warehouse facilities. These amendments mainly served to convert an existing residential whole loan facility into a term facility by removing any mark to market margin requirements, and to consolidate our Non-Qualified Mortgage loans, which were previously financed by three separate, unaffiliated counterparties, into a single facility. See "Note 7 - Financings" for details.
On October 6, 2020 we entered into an amendment with respect to its residential loan warehouse facility. The amendment serves to convert the existing residential loan facility to a limited mark to market margin facility that bears an
interest rate of LIBOR plus 2.75%, with a LIBOR floor of 0.25%. The target advance rate under the amended facility is 85% and the facility matures on October 5, 2021. The premium recapture fee was eliminated for holdings that had not yet been sold or otherwise disposed of. See "Note 7 - Financings " for details.
On May 4, 2020, we supplemented one of our existing securities repurchase facilities to confirm terms pursuant to which we will consolidate most of our CMBS and RMBS assets, which are currently financed by multiple counterparties, into a single term facility with limited mark to market margin requirements. See "Note 7 - Financings " for details.
Sources of Liquidity
Our primary sources of liquidity are as follows:
Cash Generated from Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was approximately $147.6 million. This was primarily attributable to the net loss on our investments net of adjustments pertaining to the amortization/accretion of premiums and discounts and other non-cash items less operating expenses, general and administrative and margin settlements on our interest rate swaps. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in operating activities was approximately $52.2 million. This was primarily attributable to the net income we earned on our investments net of adjustments pertaining to the amortization/accretion of premiums and discounts and other non-cash items less operating expenses, general and administrative and margin settlements on our interest rate swaps. For the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash provided by operating activities was by approximately $107.1 million. This was primarily attributable to the net income we earned on our investments net of adjustments pertaining to the amortization/accretion of premiums and discounts and other non-cash items less operating expenses, general and administrative and margin settlements on our interest rate swaps.
Cash Provided by and Used in Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by investing activities was approximately $2.7 billion. This was primarily attributable to proceeds from sales and receipts of principal payments on our investments, which was partially offset by our investment acquisitions. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was approximately $478.5 million. This was primarily attributable to our investment acquisitions, including an investment from a consolidated CMBS VIEs, which was partially offset by proceeds from sales and receipts of principal payments on our investments. For the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash used in investing activities was approximately $716.9 million. This was primarily attributable to our investment acquisitions, including an investment from a consolidated CMBS VIE, which was partially offset by proceeds from sales of MBS and other securities and by our receipt of principal payments on MBS and other securities.
Cash Provided by and Used in Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in financing activities was approximately $2.5 billion. This was primarily attributable to net repayments of our repurchase agreement borrowings. For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activity was approximately $537.2 million. This was primarily attributable to net proceeds from financings during the year and a secondary public offering. Our net cash provided by financing activities was partially offset by dividends paid on our common stock. For the year ended December 31, 2018, net cash provided by financing activity was approximately 639.6 million. This was primarily attributable to net proceeds from financings during the year and a secondary public offering. Our net cash provided by financing activities was partially offset by dividends paid on our common stock.
Repurchase Agreements
As of December 31, 2020, we had 37 master repurchase agreements with our counterparties. We had borrowings under five of the 37 master repurchase agreements of approximately $358.8 million at December 31, 2020. The following table presents our repurchase agreement borrowings, by type of collateral pledged, as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, and the respective effective cost of funds (Non-GAAP financial measure) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. See "Non-GAAP Financial Measures" (dollars in thousands):
(1)The effective cost of funds for the period presented is calculated on an annualized basis and includes interest expense for the period and net periodic interest payments on interest rate swaps, net of premium amortization on MAC swaps, of approximately $1.1 million received and $9.5 million received for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. While interest rate swaps are not accounted for using hedge accounting, such instruments are viewed by us as an economic hedge against increases in interest rates on our liabilities and are treated as hedges for purposes of satisfying the REIT requirements. See "Non-GAAP Financial Measures."
(2)Includes repurchase agreement borrowings on securities eliminated upon VIE consolidation.
(3)Repurchase agreement borrowings collateralized by Whole Loans, Bridge Loans and securitized commercial loans owned through trust certificates. The trust certificates are eliminated upon consolidation.
(4)The pledged amount relates to our non-controlling membership interest in our wholly owned subsidiary, WMC RETL LLC, which was financed under a repurchase agreement. The membership interest is eliminated in consolidation.
At-The-Market Program
In March 2017, we entered into an equity distribution agreement with JMP Securities LLC, or "JMP", which was amended on June 5, 2020, under which we may offer and sell up to $100.0 million shares of common stock in an At-The-Market equity offering from time to time through JMP. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 6,034,741 shares under this amended agreement with an average price of $3.70 per share for total net proceeds of $22.0 million.
Securitized Debt
In June 2020, we completed a residential mortgage-backed securitization comprised of a portion of our Residential Whole Loan portfolio. RMI 2015 Trust transferred $355.8 million of Non-QM Residential Whole Loans, to our wholly owned subsidiary, Arroyo Trust 2020. Arroyo Trust 2020 issued $341.7 million of mortgage-backed notes and we retained the subordinate Non-Offered Securities. These Non-Offered securities with an estimated fair value of $27.7 million at December 31, 2020 were eliminated in the consolidation. At December 31, 2020, Residential Whole Loans, with an outstanding principal balance of approximately $300.0 million, serve as collateral for the Arroyo Trust 2020's securitized debt.
The following table summarizes the consolidated Arroyo Trust 2020's issued mortgage-backed notes at December 31, 2020 which is classified in "Securitized debt, net" in the Consolidated Balance Sheets (dollars in thousands):
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 are as follows (dollars in thousands):
(1)The table above does not include amounts due under the Management Agreement (as defined herein) with our Manager, as those obligations do not have fixed and determinable payments.
(2)The securitized debt is non-recourse to us and can only be settled with the loans that serve as collateral. The collateral for the securitized debt has a principal balance of $2.7 billion. Assumes entire outstanding principal balance at December 31, 2020 is paid at maturity.
(3)For variable rate debt, the one month LIBOR rate as of December 31, 2020 of 0.2% was used to calculate the contractual interest.
Management Agreement
On May 9, 2012, we entered into a management agreement (the "Management Agreement") with our Manager which describes the services to be provided by our Manager and compensation for such services. Our Manager is responsible for managing our operations, including: (i) performing all of our day-to-day functions; (ii) determining investment criteria in conjunction with our Board of Directors; (iii) sourcing, analyzing and executing investments, asset sales and financings; (iv) performing asset management duties; and (v) performing financial and accounting management, subject to the direction and oversight of our Board of Directors. Pursuant to the terms of the Management Agreement, our Manager is paid a management
fee equal to 1.50% per annum of our stockholders' equity, (as defined in the Management Agreement), calculated and payable (in cash) quarterly in arrears. The Manager waived the management fee for March 2020 through May 2020 because of the unprecedented market disruption and dislocation across fixed income markets surrounding the uncertainty related to COVID-19 pandemic. Future waivers, if any, are at the Manager's discretion. Refer to Note 10 - "Related Party Transactions" to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 included in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any relationships with any entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured investment vehicles, or special purpose or variable interest entities, established to facilitate off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Further, other than guaranteeing certain obligations of our wholly-owned taxable REIT subsidiary or TRS and the obligations of our wholly-owned subsidiary, WMC CRE LLC, we have not guaranteed any obligations of any entities or entered into any commitment to provide additional funding to any such entities.
Dividends
To preserve liquidity, we suspended our first and second quarter common stock dividends given extraordinary market volatility driven by uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic. Starting in the third quarter of 2020, we resumed paying a quarterly dividend after making progress strengthening its balance sheet and improving liquidity and earnings power of its investment portfolio. We will continue to evaluate each subsequent quarter to determine our ability to pay dividends to our stockholders based on our net taxable income if and to the extent authorized by our Board of Directors. Before we pay any dividend, whether for U.S. federal income tax purposes or otherwise, we must first meet both our operating requirements and debt service payments. If our cash available for distribution is less than our net taxable income, we could be required to sell assets or borrow funds to make cash distributions or we may make a portion of the required distribution in the form of a taxable stock distribution or distribution of debt securities.