ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-Looking Statements
Statements contained in this report that are not historical facts may constitute forward-looking statements (within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended), which involve significant risks and uncertainties. The Company intends such forward-looking statements to be covered by the safe harbor provisions for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, and is including this statement for purposes of invoking these safe harbor provisions. Forward-looking statements, which are based on certain assumptions and describe future plans, strategies and expectations of the Company, are generally identifiable by the use of the words “believe,” “expect,” “intend,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “project,” “plan,” or similar expressions. The Company’s ability to predict results or the actual effect of future plans or strategies is inherently uncertain and actual results may differ from those predicted. The Company undertakes no obligation to update these forward-looking statements in the future.
The Company cautions readers of this report that a number of important factors could cause the Company’s actual results to differ materially from those expressed in forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause actual results to differ from those predicted and could affect the future prospects of the Company include, but are not limited to: (i) general economic conditions, either nationally or in our market area, that are worse than expected; (ii) changes in the interest rate environment that reduce our interest margins, reduce the fair value of financial instruments or reduce the demand for our loan products; (iii) increased competitive pressures among financial services companies; (iv) changes in consumer spending, borrowing and savings habits; (v) changes in the quality and composition of our loan or investment portfolios; (vi) changes in real estate market values in our market area; (vii) decreased demand for loan products,
deposit flows, competition, or decreased demand for financial services in our market area; (viii) major catastrophes such as earthquakes, floods or other natural or human disasters and infectious disease outbreaks, including the current coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, the related disruption to local, regional and global economic activity and financial markets, and the impact that any of the foregoing may have on us and our customers and other constituencies; (ix) legislative or regulatory changes that adversely affect our business or changes in the monetary and fiscal policies of the U.S. government, including policies of the U.S. Treasury and the Federal Reserve Board; (x) technological changes that may be more difficult or expensive than expected; (xi) success or consummation of new business initiatives may be more difficult or expensive than expected; (xii) the inability to successfully deploy the proceeds raised in our recently completed second-step conversion offering; (xiii) adverse changes in the securities markets; (xiv) the inability of third party service providers to perform; and (xv) changes in accounting policies and practices, as may be adopted by bank regulatory agencies or the Financial Accounting Standards Board.
Overview
Our results of operations depend primarily on our net interest income. Net interest income is the difference between the interest income we earn on our interest-earning assets, consisting primarily of loans, investment securities, mortgage-backed securities and other interest-earning assets (primarily cash and cash equivalents), and the interest we pay on our interest-bearing liabilities, consisting of money market accounts, statement savings accounts, individual retirement accounts, certificates of deposit and Federal Home Loan Bank advances. Our results of operations also are affected by our provisions for loan losses, noninterest income and noninterest expense. Noninterest income currently consists primarily of service fees, service charges, earnings on bank-owned life insurance, net gains on the sale of loans and investment securities, and net gains on the sale of other real estate owned. Noninterest expense currently consists primarily of salaries and employee benefits, occupancy and equipment, data processing, merger-related expenses and professional fees. Our results of operations also may be affected significantly by general and local economic and competitive conditions, changes in market interest rates, governmental policies, and actions of regulatory authorities.
Business Strategy
Since our acquisition of Audubon Savings Bank in July 2018, and continuing with our acquisitions of Fidelity and Washington in May 2020, we have focused on serving the financial needs of consumers and businesses in our primary markets of Southeastern Pennsylvania and Southern New Jersey. Through our wholly owned bank subsidiary, William Penn Bank, we deliver a comprehensive range of traditional depository and lending products, online banking services, and cash management tools for small businesses. Our business strategy is to continue to operate and grow a profitable community-oriented financial institution. We plan to achieve this by executing our strategy of:
Continuing our transformation to a relationship-based banking business model.
Following our acquisition of Audubon Savings Bank in July 2018, our primary strategic objective has been to transform the Bank from a price-driven, transaction-based savings institution to a service-driven, relationship-based bank that emphasizes securing relationships rather than amassing accounts. We have taken an active approach toward accomplishing this transformation, a key component of which is to opportunistically hire talented individuals, or existing teams of individuals, with relationships in retail, commercial, and small business banking in furtherance of our efforts to increase our commercial lending activities. We believe the recent additions to our executive management team, including Alan Turner as Executive Vice President and Chief Lending Officer, Jeannine Cimino as Executive Vice President and Chief Retail Officer, and Amy Hannigan as Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer, provide the Company with new opportunities that will improve our financial performance and enhance the William Penn brand.
We believe that customer satisfaction is a key to sustainable growth and profitability. While continually striving to ensure that our products and services meet our customers’ needs, we also encourage our employees to focus on providing personal service and attentiveness to our customers in a proactive manner. We believe that many opportunities remain to deliver what our customers want in the form of exceptional service and convenience and we intend to continue to focus our operating strategy on taking advantage of these opportunities. Most recently, we began offering private banking services that provide high net worth clients a primary point of contact that is dedicated to their personal and business financial needs.
Maintaining our emphasis on residential portfolio lending while also increasing our commercial lending activities.
Our primary lending focus historically has been the origination of one- to four-family mortgage loans. At June 30, 2021, $173.4 million, or 37.0%, of our loan portfolio was secured by one- to four-family residential real estate loans and we intend to continue to emphasize this type of lending in the future. We believe there are opportunities to increase our residential mortgage lending in our market area, and we intend to take advantage of these opportunities through the additional lending staff we have welcomed as a result of our recent
acquisitions of Audubon Savings Bank, Fidelity and Washington, as well as by increasing our existing residential mortgage origination channels.
In addition to continuing our emphasis on one- to four-family mortgage loans, we also intend to increase our commercial lending activities, particularly with respect to commercial real estate, multi-family residential and commercial business loans, in the future. We believe the expansion of our multi-family residential and commercial real estate lending activities will further diversify our balance sheet, help to control our interest rate risk exposure and increase our presence in our market area. Most recently, we have added experienced commercial lending personnel and will continue to enhance our infrastructure in order to implement this component of our business strategy.
We believe that strong asset quality is a key to long-term financial success, and we have sought to maintain a high level of asset quality and mitigate credit risk by using conservative underwriting standards for all of our residential and commercial lending products, combined with diligent monitoring and collection efforts. We will continue to seek residential and commercial lending opportunities in our market area that will further our business strategy and that are also consistent with our conservative underwriting standards. As a result of the continued economic uncertainty due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and the significant business and operational disruptions that borrowers may face (including business closures, supply chain disruptions, and mass layoffs and furloughs) that have resulted from the pandemic, we continue to carefully scrutinize residential and commercial lending opportunities. If significant lending opportunities that meet our conservative underwriting standards do not arise as a result of the pandemic, we will not compromise our underwriting criteria and will strategically slow down our plans to increase our lending activities until economic conditions improve.
Recruiting and retaining top talent and personnel.
Our entire executive management leadership team, and a large majority of the next tier of management, either joined the Bank in connection with the acquisition of Audubon Savings Bank or have been recruited since our acquisition of Audubon Savings Bank in July 2018. We have also hired teams of relationship bankers from regional competitors and intend to continue to opportunistically hire talented individuals, or existing teams of individuals, with relationships in retail, commercial, and small business banking. As a result of the Bank’s strong capital levels and expansion strategy, we believe we have the ability to continue hiring and developing top performers for the foreseeable future.
Continuing to invest in our facilities and expand our branch network through de novo branching.
In addition to our investment in people, we have been enhancing and optimizing both our facilities and branch network in recent years. We have consolidated most of our non-branch operations into one location located in Bristol, Pennsylvania that opened in November 2019 and we have consolidated our loan origination and servicing administration operations into one location located in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania that we acquired in connection with our recent acquisition of Washington Savings Bank. Effective June 30, 2021, we consolidated three existing Bank branches into one branch based on branch deposit levels and the close geographic proximity of the three consolidating branches.
We have also improved the infrastructure of our branch footprint and intend to continue our strategy to broaden our existing branch network by expanding into new markets and broadening our geographic footprint. In June 2020, we opened a new branch office in Collingswood, New Jersey, the first de novo branch applying our strategy of entering walkable towns and suburbs with vibrant commercial corridors and main streets. In addition, we opened a new branch office in Yardley, Pennsylvania in March 2021 and we opened a new branch office in Doylestown, Pennsylvania on September 7, 2021. We also plan to continue to open additional new branches in desirable locations in attractive growth markets. New branches will feature modern design elements and will include open, collaborative spaces with room for private meetings.
Executing a multi-faceted expansion plan that involves branch acquisitions and the possible acquisition of other financial institutions and/or financial services companies.
Our expansion strategies complement our overall strategic vision. We intend to expand our franchise and reinvest our excess capital by continuing to hire talented relationship managers, opening de novo branches, and making opportunistic whole bank or branch acquisitions, with an emphasis on expanding our presence in Bucks County, Pennsylvania and Southern New Jersey, as well as entering the Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, and Central New Jersey markets. We believe significant opportunities exist, and will continue to exist, for additional expansion through acquisitions both in our current market and in other adjacent markets within the greater Delaware Valley area. Our acquisition strategy includes traditional whole bank acquisitions and complementary acquisitions of select branch banking offices.
We have completed three whole bank acquisitions since 2018, which serve as the platform for our ability to successfully integrate financial institutions, and our executive management team has a history of running and integrating highly efficient banking institutions while focusing on building a culture of expense control. As a result of these three whole bank acquisitions and our focus on continued expense control, we have increased our core deposits (consisting of checking accounts, money market accounts and savings and club accounts) from $96.8 million at June 30, 2018 to $392.8 million, or 305.7%, at June 30, 2021.
We believe that maintaining strong relationships with our regulators is an important component of our long-term strategy. We maintain an active dialogue with our regulators and we view our relationships with our regulators a long-term partnership, and we will continue to follow this philosophy as we implement our plans for future growth.
Improving our technology platform.
We are committed to building a technology platform that enables us to deliver best-in-class products and services to our customers and is also scalable to accommodate our long-term growth plans. To accomplish this objective, we have made and are continuing to make substantial investments in our information technology infrastructure, including data backup, security, accessibility, integration, business continuity, website development, online and mobile banking technologies, cash management technology and internal/external ease of use. We continue to develop new strategies for streamlining internal and external practices using technology such as online account opening, an online education center, and remote appointments.
Employing a stockholder-focused management of capital.
Maintaining a strong capital base is critical to support our long-range business plan. We intend to manage our capital position through the growth of assets, as well as the utilization of appropriate capital management tools, consistent with applicable regulations and policies, and subject to market conditions. Under current federal regulations, subject to limited exceptions, we may not repurchase shares of our common stock during the first year following the completion of our second-step conversion offering, which occurred on March 24, 2021.
The Company has historically paid an annual cash dividend to stockholders and, for the year ended June 30, 2020, declared an annual cash dividend of $0.13 per share. On July 21, 2021, the Company also declared a one-time special dividend of $0.30 per common share, payable August 18, 2021, to common shareholders of record at the close of business on August 2, 2021. As previously disclosed, the Company intends to pay regular cash dividends on a quarterly basis, but has not determined the timing of its first regular quarterly dividend. In determining the amount of any future dividends, the board of directors will take into account the Company’s financial condition and results of operations, tax considerations, capital requirements and alternative uses for capital, industry standards, and economic conditions. The Company cannot guarantee that it will pay such dividends or that, if paid, it will not reduce or eliminate dividends in the future.
Critical Accounting Policies
We consider accounting policies involving significant judgments and assumptions by management that have, or could have, a material impact on the carrying value of certain assets or on income to be critical accounting policies. We consider these accounting policies to be our critical accounting policies. The judgments and assumptions we use are based on historical experience and other factors, which we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ from these judgments and estimates under different conditions, resulting in a change that could have a material impact on the carrying values of our assets and liabilities and our results of operations.
Allowance for Loan Losses
We consider the allowance for loan and losses to be a critical accounting policy. The allowance for loan losses is determined by management based upon portfolio segments, past historical experience, evaluation of estimated losses and impairment in the loan portfolio, current economic conditions, and other pertinent factors. Management also considers risk characteristics by portfolio segments including, but not limited to, renewals and real estate valuations. The allowance for loan losses is maintained at a level that management considers adequate to provide for estimated losses and impairment based upon an evaluation of known and inherent risk in the loan portfolio. Loan impairment is evaluated based on the fair value of collateral or present value of expected cash flows. While management uses the best information available to make such evaluations, future adjustments to the allowance may be necessary if economic conditions differ substantially from the assumptions used in making the evaluations.
The allowance for loan and lease losses is established through a provision for loan losses charged to expense, which is based upon past loan loss experience and an evaluation of estimated losses in the current loan portfolio, including the evaluation of impaired loans. Determining the amount of the allowance for loan losses necessarily involves a high degree of judgment. Among the material estimates required to establish the allowance are: overall economic conditions; value of collateral; strength of guarantors; loss exposure at default; the amount and timing of future cash flows on impaired loans; and determination of loss factors to be applied to the various segments of the portfolio. All of these estimates are susceptible to significant change. Management regularly reviews the level of loss experience, current economic conditions and other factors related to the collectability of the loan portfolio. Although we believe that we use the best information available to establish the allowance for loan losses, future adjustments to the allowance may be necessary if economic conditions differ substantially from the assumptions used in making the evaluation. In addition, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Pennsylvania Department of Banking and Securities, as an integral part of their examination process, periodically review our allowance for loan losses.
Our financial results are affected by the changes in and the level of the allowance for loan losses. This process involves our analysis of complex internal and external variables, and it requires that we exercise judgment to estimate an appropriate allowance for loan losses. As a result of the uncertainty associated with this subjectivity, we cannot assure the precision of the amount reserved, should we experience sizeable loan losses in any particular period. For example, changes in the financial condition of individual borrowers, economic conditions, or the condition of various markets in which collateral may be sold could require us to significantly decrease or increase the level of the allowance for loan losses. Such an adjustment could materially affect net income as a result of the change in provision for loan losses. For example, a change in the estimate resulting in a 10% to 20% difference in the allowance would have resulted in an additional provision for loan losses of $361 thousand to $723 thousand for the year ended June 30, 2021. We also have approximately $5.4 million as of June 30, 2021 in non-performing assets consisting of non-performing loans and other real estate owned. Most of these assets are collateral dependent loans where we have incurred credit losses to write the assets down to their current appraised value less selling costs. We continue to assess the realizability of these loans and update our appraisals on these loans each year. To the extent the property values continue to decline, there could be additional losses on these non-performing loans which may be material. For example, a 10% decrease in the collateral value supporting the non-performing loans could result in additional credit losses of $538 thousand. In recent periods, we experienced strong asset quality metrics including low levels of delinquencies, net charge-offs and non-performing assets. Management considered market conditions in deriving the estimated allowance for loan losses; however, given the continued economic difficulties and uncertainties and the COVID-19 pandemic, the ultimate amount of loss could vary from that estimate.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13: Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments. Topic 326 amends guidance on reporting credit losses for assets held at amortized cost basis and available for sale debt securities. For assets held at amortized cost basis, Topic 326 eliminates the probable initial recognition threshold in current GAAP and, instead, requires an entity to reflect its current estimate of all expected credit losses. This update affects entities holding financial assets and net investment in leases that are not accounted for at fair value through net income. The amendments affect loans, debt securities, trade receivables, net investments in leases, off balance sheet credit exposures, reinsurance receivables, and any other financial assets not excluded from the scope that have the contractual right to receive cash. The amendments in this update are expected to be effective for us on July 1, 2023. We are in the process of evaluating the impact of this guidance but expect that the impact will likely be material to our consolidated financial statements.
Goodwill
The acquisition method of accounting for business combinations requires us to record assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and consideration paid at their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date. The excess of consideration paid (or the fair value of the equity of the acquiree) over the fair value of net assets acquired represents goodwill. Goodwill totaled $4.9 million at June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020. Goodwill and other indefinite lived intangible assets are not amortized on a recurring basis, but rather are subject to periodic impairment testing. The provisions of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 350 allow an entity to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is necessary to perform the two-step quantitative goodwill impairment test.
The Company performs its annual impairment evaluation on June 30 or more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that the fair value of the banking unit is less than its carrying value. During the year ended June 30, 2021, the Company included considerations of the current economic environment caused by COVID-19 in its evaluation, and determined that it is not more likely than not that the carrying value of goodwill is impaired. No goodwill impairment exists during the year ended June 30, 2021.
Income Taxes
We are subject to the income tax laws of the various jurisdictions where we conduct business and estimate income tax expense based on amounts expected to be owed to these various tax jurisdictions. The estimated income tax expense (benefit) is reported in the consolidated statements of income. The evaluation pertaining to the tax expense and related tax asset and liability balances involves a high degree of judgment and subjectivity around the ultimate measurement and resolution of these matters.
Accrued taxes represent the net estimated amount due to or to be received from tax jurisdictions either currently or in the future and are reported in other assets on our consolidated statements of financial condition. We assess the appropriate tax treatment of transactions and filing positions after considering statutes, regulations, judicial precedent and other pertinent information and maintain tax accruals consistent with our evaluation. Changes in the estimate of accrued taxes occur periodically due to changes in tax rates, interpretations of tax laws, the status of examinations by the tax authorities and newly enacted statutory, judicial and regulatory guidance that could impact the relative merits of tax positions. These changes, when they occur, impact accrued taxes and can materially affect our operating results. We regularly evaluate our uncertain tax positions and estimate the appropriate level of reserves related to each of these positions.
As of June 30, 2021 and 2020, we had net deferred tax assets totaling $3.6 million and $4.8 million, respectively. We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. If currently available information raises doubt as to the realization of the deferred tax assets, a valuation allowance is established. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. We exercise significant judgment in evaluating the amount and timing of recognition of the resulting tax assets and liabilities. These judgments require us to make projections of future taxable income. Management believes, based upon current facts, that it is more likely than not that there will be sufficient taxable income in future years to realize the deferred tax assets. The judgments and estimates we make in determining our deferred tax assets are inherently subjective and are reviewed on a continual basis as regulatory and business factors change. Any reduction in estimated future taxable income may require us to record a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets. A valuation allowance that results in additional income tax expense in the period in which it is recognized would negatively affect earnings. Our net deferred tax assets were determined based on the current enacted federal tax rate of 21%. Any possible future reduction in federal tax rates, would reduce the value of our net deferred tax assets and result in immediate write-down of the net deferred tax assets though our statement of operations, the effect of which would be material.
Balance Sheet Analysis
Comparison of Financial Condition at June 30, 2021 and 2020
Total assets increased $85.9 million, or 11.7%, to $822.4 million at June 30, 2021, from $736.5 million at June 30, 2020. The increase in total assets can primarily be attributed to an $85.8 million increase in total cash and cash equivalents, a $33.3 million increase in investment securities, and a $20.5 million increase in bank-owned life insurance, partially offset by a $47.3 million decrease in gross loans.
Cash and cash equivalents increased $85.8 million, or 103.5%, to $168.7 million at June 30, 2021, from $82.9 million at June 30, 2020. The increase in cash and cash equivalents was primarily driven by $126.4 million of gross offering proceeds received in connection with the second-step conversion offering and a $47.3 million decrease in gross loans. These increases to cash and cash equivalents were partially offset by a $33.3 million increase in investment securities, a $23.9 million decrease in advances from the Federal Home Loan Bank (“FHLB”) of Pittsburgh, a $20.5 million increase in bank-owned life insurance, and a $6.7 million decrease in deposits. The decrease in advances from the FHLB of Pittsburgh was due to the strategic prepayment of $23.2 million of higher-cost advances during the quarter ended September 30, 2020.
Investments
Our investment portfolio consists primarily of corporate bonds with maturities of five to ten years, municipal securities with maturities of five to more than ten years and mortgage-backed securities issued by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac or Ginnie Mae with stated final maturities of 30 years or less. Investments increased $33.3 million, or 37.0%, to $123.3 million at June 30, 2021, from $90.0 million at June 30, 2020. During the year ended June 30, 2021, the Company purchased $96.3 million of available-for-sale securities with the excess cash available from the acquisitions of Fidelity and Washington in May 2020 and the second-step conversion offering proceeds received in March 2021. The Company remains focused on maintaining a high-quality investment portfolio that provides a steady stream of cash flows both in the current and in rising interest rate environments.
The following table sets forth the amortized cost and fair value of investment securities at June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019. At June 30, 2020, we reclassified all of the securities in our securities portfolio as available-for-sale securities.
The following tables set forth the stated maturities and weighted average yields of investment securities at June 30, 2021. Certain securities have adjustable interest rates and will reprice monthly, quarterly, semi-annually or annually within the various maturity ranges. The table presents contractual maturities for mortgage-backed securities and does not reflect repricing or the effect of prepayments.
Loans
Our loan portfolio consists primarily of one-to four-family residential mortgage loans and one-to four-family commercial real estate investor loans. Our loan portfolio also consists of non-residential and multi-family residential real estate, commercial, construction and consumer loans. Gross loans decreased $47.3 million, or 9.2%, to $464.8 million at June 30, 2021, from $512.1 million at June 30, 2020. The COVID-19 pandemic and low interest rate environment have intensified an already highly competitive market for lending and we have experienced increased levels of one-to four-family residential mortgage loan prepayments. We maintain conservative lending practices and are focused on lending to borrowers with high credit quality located within our market footprint.
At June 30, 2021, the Bank had $1.5 million of outstanding Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loans with 44 new and existing customers. The Bank also granted eligible loan modifications in the form of payment deferral of principal and interest for $49.8 million of existing loans under the 2020 Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act. Generally, these modifications included the deferral of principal and interest payments for a period of three months, although interest income continued to accrue. The three-month deferral period has ended on a substantial portion of the loans on deferral and, as of June 30, 2021, only $366 thousand of loans remained on deferral under the CARES Act.
The following table shows the loan portfolio at the dates indicated:
The following table sets forth certain information at June 30, 2021 regarding the dollar amount of loan principal repayments becoming due during the periods indicated. The table below does not include any estimate of prepayments which significantly shorten the average life of all loans and may cause our actual repayment experience to differ from that shown below. Demand loans having no stated schedule of repayments and no stated maturity are reported as due in one year or less.
The following table sets forth all loans at June 30, 2021 that are due after June 30, 2022 and have either fixed interest rates or floating or adjustable interest rates:
Premises and equipment, net
During the year ended June 30, 2021, we sold six commercial real estate properties from premises and equipment with a total carrying value of $3.2 million and recorded a $495 thousand net gain on sale. Two of the six properties sold were former Bank branches that were consolidated into a third existing branch based on branch deposit levels and the close geographic proximity of the three consolidating branches. The remaining four non-branch properties sold were acquired as part of the acquisitions of Fidelity and Washington effective May 1, 2020.
Bank-owned life insurance
Bank-owned life insurance increased $20.5 million, or 138.7%, to $35.2 million at June 30, 2021, from $14.7 million at June 30, 2020. Management purchased $20.0 million of bank-owned life insurance during the quarter ended June 30, 2021. Management believes that bank-owned life insurance is a low-risk investment alternative with an attractive yield.
Deposits
Deposits are a major source of our funds for lending and other investment purposes, and our deposits are provided primarily by individuals within our market area. Deposits decreased $6.7 million, or 1.2%, to $553.1 million at June 30, 2021, from $559.8 million at June 30, 2020. The decrease in deposits was primarily due to a $34.2 million decrease in time deposits, partially offset by a $27.5 million increase in core deposits. The decrease in time deposits was consistent with the planned run-off associated with our re-pricing of higher-cost, non-relationship-based deposit accounts.
The following table sets forth the deposits as a percentage of total deposits for the dates indicated:
The following tables set forth the time remaining until maturity for certificates of deposit of $100,000 or more at June 30, 2021.
The following table sets forth the deposit activity for the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth all our certificates of deposit classified by interest rate as of the dates indicated:
The following table sets forth the amount and maturities of our certificates of deposit by interest rate at June 30, 2021.
The following table sets forth the average balances and weighted average rates of our deposit products for the periods indicated:
Borrowings
Borrowings decreased $23.9 million, or 36.8%, to $41.0 million at June 30, 2021, from $64.9 million at June 30, 2020. The decrease in borrowings was primarily due to the previously discussed prepayment of $23.2 million of higher-cost advances from the FHLB of Pittsburgh during the quarter ended September 30, 2020.
The following table sets forth the outstanding borrowings and weighted averages at the dates or for the periods indicated. We did not have any outstanding borrowings other than Federal Home Loan Bank advances for any of the periods presented.
Stockholders’ Equity
Stockholders’ equity increased $120.5 million, or 125.1%, to $216.9 million at June 30, 2021, from $96.4 million at June 30, 2020. The increase in stockholders’ equity was primarily due to $123.4 million of net proceeds received in connection with the second-step conversion subscription offering and net income of $3.8 million for the year ended June 30, 2021, partially offset by the purchase of 881,130 shares, or $10.1 million, of the Company’s common stock in the open market for the William Penn Bank Employee Stock Ownership Plan and $1.9 million of dividends paid to common shareholders in August 2020.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended June 30, 2021, 2020, and 2019
Summary
The following table sets forth the income summary for the periods indicated:
(1) Return on average assets (excluding merger charges and gain on bargain purchase) and return on average equity (excluding merger charges and gain on bargain purchase) are non-GAAP financial measures. For a reconciliation of these non-GAAP measures, see “Non-GAAP Financial Information.”
General
We recorded net income of $3.8 million, or $0.26 per diluted share, for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to net income of $1.3 million, or $0.10 per diluted share, for the year ended June 30, 2020 and compared to $3.8 million, or $0.94 per diluted share, for the year ended June 30, 2019. Net income for the year ended June 30, 2021 included a $495 thousand, or $0.03 per diluted share, gain on the disposition of premises and equipment primarily due to the sale of several commercial real estate properties that were acquired in connection with the acquisitions of Fidelity and Washington, which were completed on May 1, 2020. Net income for the year ended June 30, 2020 included $2.5 million, $0.19 per diluted share, of merger related expenses net of the gain on bargain purchase associated with the acquisitions of Fidelity and Washington.
Net Interest Income
For the year ended June 30, 2021, net interest income was $21.5 million, an increase of $6.7 million, or 45.6%, from the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase in net interest income was primarily due to an increase in interest-earning assets as a result of the acquisitions of Fidelity and Washington effective May 1, 2020 and a $712 thousand decrease in interest expense primarily due to the re-pricing of deposits in the current low interest rate environment and the planned run-off associated with higher-cost, non-relationship-based deposit accounts. The net interest margin measured 3.04% for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to 3.30% for the same period in 2020. The decrease in the net interest margin is consistent with the recent decrease in interest rates and current margin compression that is primarily due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and its continued impact on the economy and interest rate environment.
For the year ended June 30, 2020, we reported net interest income of $14.8 million, an increase of $569 thousand, or 4.0%, from the year ended June 30, 2019. The increase in net interest income was primarily due to an increase in interest-earning assets as a result of the acquisitions of Fidelity and Washington on May 1, 2020. Our net interest margin was 3.30% for the year ended June 30, 2020, as compared to 3.76% for 2019. The decrease in the net interest margin is consistent with the recent decrease in interest rates and current margin compression primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on the economy and interest rate environment.
Provision for Loan Losses
As a result of economic uncertainty due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we recorded a $626 thousand provision for loan losses during the year ended June 30, 2020 compared to an $88 thousand provision for loan losses during the year ended June 30, 2019. During the year ended June 30, 2021, we continued to build our reserves and recorded a $133 thousand provision for loan losses. Our allowance for loan losses totaled $3.6 million, or 1.18% of total loans, excluding acquired loans(1), compared to $3.5 million, or 1.25% of total loans, excluding acquired loans(1), as of June 30, 2020, and compared to $3.2 million, or 1.24% of total loans, excluding acquired loans(1), as of June 30, 2019, respectively. The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in highly uncertain economic conditions, including higher levels of unemployment. The increase in reserves due to the COVID-19 pandemic was limited by enhancements we made to our credit management function by adding new experienced team members and implementing more robust internal credit measurement and monitoring processes. Based on a review of the loans that were in the loan portfolio at June 30, 2021, management believes that the allowance is maintained at a level that represents its best estimate of inherent losses in the loan portfolio that were both probable and reasonably estimable at such date.
Management uses available information to establish the appropriate level of the allowance for loan losses. Future additions or reductions to the allowance may be necessary based on estimates that are susceptible to change as a result of changes in economic conditions and other factors. As a result, our allowance for loan losses may not be sufficient to cover actual loan losses, and future provisions for loan losses could materially adversely affect our operating results. In addition, various regulatory agencies, as an integral part of their examination process, periodically review our allowance for loan losses.
Non-Interest Income
The following table sets forth a summary of non-interest income for the periods indicated:
For the year ended June 30, 2021, non-interest income totaled $2.3 million, an increase of $151 thousand, or 7.0%, from the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $495 thousand net gain on the disposition of premises and equipment related to the
(1) Allowance for loan losses to total loans (excluding acquired loans) is a non-GAAP measure that represents our allowance for loan losses divided by adjusted total loans (excluding acquired loans). For a reconciliation of this non-GAAP measure, see “Non-GAAP Financial Information.”
sale of commercial real estate properties and a $206 thousand gain recorded in connection with the sale of other real estate owned. In addition, service fee income increased $216 thousand as a result of higher deposit transaction volume due primarily to the acquisitions of Fidelity and Washington effective May 1, 2020, as well as a $126 thousand increase in earnings on bank-owned life insurance. These increases to non-interest income were partially offset by a $746 thousand gain on bargain purchase recorded during the quarter ended June 30, 2020 in connection with the Bank’s acquisitions of Fidelity and Washington and a $202 thousand decrease in the net gain on sale of investment securities.
For the year ended June 30, 2020, non-interest income totaled $2.2 million, an increase of $1.0 million, or 91.7%, from the year ended June 30, 2019. The increase was primarily due to a $746 thousand gain on bargain purchase recorded in connection with the acquisitions of Fidelity and Washington. The gain on bargain purchase was primarily due to lower estimated discounted future cash flows used to calculate the estimated fair value of equity of the acquired institutions due to the uncertainty of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as a decline in public peer bank stocks pricing used to estimate change of control premium fair values when estimating the fair value of equity of the acquired institutions due to the COVID-19 pandemic. There was also an increase of $98 thousand in the gain on sale of investment securities, as well as increases in service fees resulting from operating with a larger depositor base.
Non-Interest Expense
The following table sets forth an analysis of non-interest expense for the periods indicated:
For the year ended June 30, 2021, non-interest expense totaled $19.0 million, an increase of $3.6 million, or 23.4%, from the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase in non-interest expense was primarily due to a $3.4 million increase in salaries and employee benefits due to the addition of new employees from the acquisitions of Fidelity and Washington and a $1.1 million increase in occupancy and equipment expense due to additional operating costs from new branch offices and increased depreciation expense associated with premises and equipment from the acquisitions of Fidelity and Washington. The $640 thousand increase in data processing expense and the $750 thousand increase in other non-interest expense can be attributed to operating a larger organization that has resulted from the two acquisitions by the Bank completed on May 1, 2020. The $613 thousand increase in professional fees can be attributed to an increase in legal costs and the $161 thousand of prepayment penalties is related to the prepayment of $23.2 million of higher-cost advances from the FHLB of Pittsburgh. These increases to non-interest expense were partially offset by $3.3 million of merger related expenses associated with the Fidelity and Washington acquisitions recorded during the year ended June 30, 2020.
For the year ended June 30, 2020, non-interest expense totaled $15.4 million, an increase of $4.9 million, or 47.3%, from the year ended June 30, 2019. The increase in non-interest expense was primarily due to $3.3 million of merger-related expenses associated with the acquisitions of Fidelity and Washington, as well as a $688 thousand increase in occupancy and equipment expense due to additional operating costs from new branch offices and increased depreciation expense association with premises and equipment from the acquisitions of Fidelity and Washington. The increase in data processing expense was also primarily related to a larger branch network, as well as additional enhancements to products and services offered by our larger combined company. The increase in salaries and benefits and other non-interest expense resulted from operating a larger organization that has resulted from three acquisitions by the Bank in the past two years. In addition, in 2019 there was a reduction of a contingent liability for loans previously sold based on historical evidence and maturing of that portfolio.
Income Taxes
For the year ended June 30, 2021, we recorded a provision for income taxes of $947 thousand, reflecting an effective tax rate of 20.0%, compared to an income tax benefit of $387 thousand, reflecting an effective benefit of 41.1%, for the same period in 2020. The increase in the provision for income taxes for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the same period a year ago is primarily due to higher income before income taxes and the $408 thousand effect of the previously discussed change in tax law related to the treatment of bank-owned life insurance that reduced income tax expense during the year ended June 30, 2020. The effective tax rate for the year ended June 30, 2021 compared to the same period a year ago was also impacted by the previously discussed change in tax law related to the treatment of bank-owned life insurance that reduced income tax expense during the year ended June 30, 2020.
For the year ended June 30, 2020, we recognized an income tax benefit of $387 thousand, reflecting an effective tax benefit of 41.1%, compared to a provision for income taxes of $1.1 million, reflecting an effective tax rate of 22.0%, for the year ended June 30, 2019. The decrease in the effective tax rate in the year ended June 30, 2020 compared to the same period a year ago was primarily due to the $408 thousand effect of a change in tax law related to the treatment of bank-owned life insurance acquired as part of our acquisition of Audubon Savings Bank.
Average Balances and Yields
The following tables present information regarding average balances of assets and liabilities, the total dollar amounts of interest income and dividends from average interest-earning assets, the total dollar amounts of interest expense on average interest-bearing liabilities, and the resulting annualized average yields and costs. The yields and costs for the periods indicated are derived by dividing income or expense by the average daily balances of assets or liabilities, respectively, for the periods presented. Loan fees, including prepayment fees, are included in interest income on loans and are not material. Non-accrual loans are included in the average balances only. Any adjustments necessary to present yields on a tax equivalent basis are insignificant.
(1) Includes nonaccrual loan balances and interest recognized on such loans.
(2) Includes securities available for sale and securities held to maturity.
(3) Net interest rate spread represents the difference between the yield on average interest-earning assets and the cost of average interest-bearing liabilities.
(4) Net interest-earning assets represents total interest-earning assets less total interest-bearing liabilities.
(5) Net interest margin represents net interest income divided by average total interest-earning assets.
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following table sets forth the effects of changing rates and volumes on our net interest income. The rate column shows the effects attributable to changes in rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume). The volume column shows the effects attributable to changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by current rate). The total column represents the sum of the prior columns. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume which cannot be segregated have been allocated proportionately based on the changes due to rate and volume.
Risk Management
General
Managing risk is an essential part of successfully managing a financial institution. Our most prominent risk exposures are credit risk, interest rate risk and market risk. Credit risk is the risk of not collecting the interest and/or the principal balance of a loan or investment when it is due. Interest rate risk is the potential reduction of interest income as a result of changes in interest rates. Market risk arises from fluctuations in interest rates that may result in changes in the values of financial instruments, such as available-for-sale securities that are accounted for at fair value. Other risks that we face are operational risk, liquidity risk and reputation risk. Operational risk includes risks related to fraud, regulatory compliance, processing errors, technology, and disaster recovery. Liquidity risk is the possible inability to fund obligations to depositors, lenders or borrowers. Reputation risk is the risk that negative publicity or press, whether true or not, could cause a decline in our customer base or revenue.
Management of Credit Risk
The objective of our credit risk management strategy is to quantify and manage credit risk and to limit the risk of loss resulting from an individual customer default. Our credit risk management strategy focuses on conservatism, diversification within the loan portfolio and significant levels of monitoring. Our lending practices include conservative exposure limits and underwriting, extensive documentation and collection standards. Our credit risk management strategy also emphasizes diversification on both an industry and customer level as well as regular credit examinations and management reviews of large credit exposures and credits experiencing deterioration of credit quality.
Classified Assets
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation regulations and our Asset Classification Policy provide that loans and other assets considered to be of lesser quality be classified as “substandard,” “doubtful” or “loss” assets. An asset is considered “substandard” if it is inadequately protected by the current net worth and paying capacity of the obligor or of the collateral pledged, if any. “Substandard” assets include those characterized by the “distinct possibility” that the institution will sustain “some loss” if the deficiencies are not corrected. Assets classified as “doubtful” have all of the weaknesses inherent in those classified as “substandard,” with the added characteristic that the
weaknesses present make “collection or liquidation in full,” on the basis of currently existing facts, conditions and values, “highly questionable and improbable.” Assets classified as “loss” are those considered “uncollectible” and of such little value that their continuance as assets without the establishment of a specific loss reserve is not warranted. We classify an asset as “special mention” if the asset has a potential weakness that warrants management’s escalated level of attention. While such assets are not impaired, management has concluded that if the potential weakness in the asset is not addressed, the value of the asset may deteriorate, adversely affecting the repayment of the asset. Loans classified as impaired for financial reporting purposes are generally those loans classified as substandard or doubtful for regulatory reporting purposes.
An insured institution is required to establish allowances for loan losses in an amount deemed prudent by management for loans classified as substandard or doubtful, as well as for other problem loans. General allowances represent loss allowances which have been established to recognize the inherent losses associated with lending activities, but which, unlike specific allowances, have not been allocated to particular problem assets. When an insured institution classifies problem assets as “loss,” it is required to charge off such amounts. An institution’s determination as to the classification of its assets and the amount of its valuation allowances is subject to review by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Pennsylvania Department of Banking and Securities.
The following table sets forth information with respect to our non-performing assets at the dates indicated.
During the year ended June 30, 2021, nonperforming assets increased 59.9% to $5.4 million from $3.4 million as of June 30, 2020. The increase in nonperforming assets was primarily the result of a one- to four-family residential real estate loan with an outstanding balance of $918 thousand and a commercial non-residential loan with an outstanding balance of $491 thousand becoming 90 days or more delinquent and placed on non-accrual status during the year ended June 30, 2021. Although these two loans made payments (which were treated as a reduction of principal) after being placed on non-accrual status and were fewer than 90 days past due as of June 30, 2021, we determined to keep such loans on non-accrual status as of June 30, 2021. During the year ended June 30, 2020, nonperforming assets increased 68.9% to $3.4 million from $2.0 million as of June 30, 2019. The increase in nonperforming assets was driven by an increase in nonaccrual loans primarily due to five one- to four-family residential real estate loans totaling $726 thousand becoming 90 days or more delinquent and being on non-accrual status as of June 30, 2020.
Total nonperforming loans consisted of 38 loans to 37 unrelated borrowers as of June 30, 2021, as compared to 32 loans to 32 unrelated borrowers at June 30, 2020. The increase in nonperforming loans as of June 30, 2021 compared to June 30, 2020 was primarily the result of a number of residential real estate loans moving to nonaccrual during the period. The increase in nonperforming loans as of June 30, 2020 compared to June 30, 2019 was primarily the result of loans acquired in connection with our acquisitions of Fidelity and Washington, as well as the increase in five one- to four-family residential real estate loans becoming 90 days or more delinquent. Interest income on non-performing loans would have increased by approximately $248 thousand and $91 thousand during the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, if these loans had performed in accordance with their terms during the respective periods. There were no loans greater than 90 days delinquent that remained on accrual status as of June 30, 2021. For the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, gross interest income of zero and $4 thousand, respectively, was recorded on loans greater than 90 days delinquent that remained on accrual status at the end of the period.
There are circumstances when foreclosure and liquidations are the remedy pursued. However, from time to time, as part of our loss mitigation strategy, we may renegotiate the loan terms (i.e., interest rate, structure, repayment term, etc.) based on the economic or legal reasons related to the borrower’s financial difficulties. We had no new troubled debt restructurings (“TDRs”) during the year ended June 30, 2021 and 2020. TDRs are initially considered to be nonperforming and are placed on non-accrual, except for those that have established a sufficient performance history (generally a minimum of six consecutive months of performance) under the terms of the restructured loan.
During the quarter ended June 30, 2020, we began providing customer relief programs, such as payment deferrals or interest only payments on loans. In accordance with guidance from the federal banking agencies, we do not consider a modification to be a TDR if it occurred as a result of the loan forbearance program under the CARES Act. The CARES Act indicates that a loan term modification does not automatically result in TDR status if the modification is short-term in nature (e.g., six months) and made on a good-faith basis in response to COVID-19 to borrowers who were classified as current as of December 31, 2019. During the quarter ended June 30, 2020, we modified loans with an aggregate principal balance of approximately $49.8 million to provide our customers this monetary relief. Generally, these modifications included the deferral of principal and interest payments for a period of three months, although interest income continued to accrue. The three-month deferral period has ended on a substantial portion of the loans on deferral and the Bank received payments of principal and interest and, as of June 30, 2021, only $366 thousand of loans remained on deferral under the CARES Act.
Impaired loans at June 30, 2021 and 2020 included $935 thousand and $1.4 million of performing loans whose terms have been modified in troubled debt restructurings, respectively. The amount of TDR loans included in impaired loans decreased as a result principal payments and pay-offs. These restructured loans are being monitored by management and are performing in accordance with their restructured terms.
At June 30, 2021, none of our 38 substandard loans with an aggregate balance of $5.3 million were considered TDRs and were included in nonperforming assets. At June 30, 2020, none of our 32 substandard loans with an aggregate balance of $3.4 million were considered TDRs and were included in nonperforming assets.
The following table provides information about delinquencies in our loan portfolio at the dates indicated:
The following table summarizes classified and criticized assets of all portfolio types at the dates indicated:
(1) Criticized residential real estate and consumer loans include all residential real estate and consumer loans that were on non-accrual status and all residential and consumer loans that were greater than 90 days delinquent on the dates presented.
On the basis of management’s review of its assets, at June 30, 2021 and 2020, we classified $2.4 million and $3.0 million, respectively, of our assets as special mention and $5.3 million and $3.4 million, respectively, of our assets as substandard. We classified none of our assets as doubtful or loss at June 30, 2021 or at June 30, 2020. The loan portfolio is reviewed on a regular basis to determine whether any loans require classification in accordance with applicable regulations. Not all classified assets constitute nonperforming assets.
Allowance for Loan Losses
Our allowance for loan losses is maintained at a level necessary to absorb loan losses which are both probable and reasonably estimable. Management, in determining the allowance for loan losses, considers the losses inherent in its loan portfolio and changes in the nature and volume of loan activities, along with the general economic and real estate market conditions. We utilize a two-tier approach: (1) identification of impaired loans and establishment of specific loss allowances on such loans; and (2) establishment of general valuation allowances on the remainder of our loan portfolio. We maintain a loan review system, which provides for periodic reviews of our loan portfolio, which increases the probability that we will be able to obtain the early identification of potential impaired loans. Such system takes into consideration, among other things, delinquency status, size of loans, type and market value of collateral and financial condition of the borrowers. Specific loan loss allowances are established for identified losses based on a review of such information. A loan evaluated for impairment is considered to be impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect all amounts due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. All loans identified as impaired are evaluated independently. We do not aggregate such loans for evaluation purposes. Loan impairment is measured based on the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate or, as a practical expedient, at the loan’s observable market price or the fair value of the collateral if the loan is collateral dependent. The interest on these impaired loans is accounted for on the cash-basis or cost-recovery method, until qualifying for return to accrual status. Should full collection of principle be expected, cash collected on nonaccrual loans can be recognized as interest income.
The general component consists of quantitative and qualitative factors and covers non-impaired loans. The quantitative factors are based on historical loss experience adjusted for qualitative factors. For all loans other than performing credits acquired in a business combination, the historical loss experience is determined by portfolio segment and is based on the actual loss history experienced by us or industry loss history experienced by peer banks in our market area using the most recent twelve quarters.
This actual and industry loss experience is supplemented with other qualitative factors based on the risks present for each portfolio segment. These qualitative factors include consideration of the following:
● levels of trends in delinquencies and impaired loans;
● levels of trends in charge-offs and recoveries;
● trends in volume and terms of loans;
● effects of any changes in risk selection and underwriting standards;
● other changes in lending policies, procedures and practices;
● experience, ability and depth of lending management and other relevant staff;
● national and local economic trends and conditions;
● industry conditions; and
● effects of changes in credit concentrations.
The allowance is increased through provisions charged against current earnings and offset by recoveries of previously charged-off loans. Loans which are determined to be uncollectible are charged against the allowance. Management uses available information to recognize probable and reasonably estimable loan losses, but future loss provisions may be necessary based on changing economic conditions and other factors. The allowance for loan losses as of June 30, 2021 and 2020 was maintained at a level that represents management’s best estimate of losses inherent in the loan portfolio at such dates, and such losses were both probable and reasonably estimable. In addition, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Pennsylvania Department of Banking and Securities, as an integral part of their examination process, periodically review our allowance for loan losses.
Each quarter, management evaluates the total balance of the allowance for loan losses based on several factors that are not loan specific but are reflective of the inherent losses in the loan portfolio. This process includes, but is not limited to, a periodic review of loan collectability in light of historical experience, the nature and volume of loan activity, conditions that may affect the ability of the borrower to repay, underlying value of collateral, if applicable, and economic conditions in our market areas. First, we group loans by delinquency status. All loans 90 days or more delinquent and all loans classified as substandard or doubtful are evaluated individually,
based primarily on the value of the collateral securing the loan. Specific loss allowances are established as required by this analysis. All loans for which a specific loss allowance has not been assigned are segregated by type and delinquency status and a loss allowance is established by using loss experience data and management’s judgment concerning other matters it considers relevant. The allowance is allocated to each category of loan based on the results of the above analysis.
This analysis process is inherently subjective, as it requires us to make estimates that are susceptible to revisions as more information becomes available. Although we believe that we have established the allowance at a level to absorb probable and estimable losses, additions may be necessary if economic or other conditions in the future differ from the current environment.
The following table sets forth the breakdown of the allowance for loan losses by loan category at the dates indicated:
The following table sets forth an analysis of the activity in the allowance for loan losses for the periods indicated
(1) Net of loans in process and unearned loan origination fees.
The allowance for loan losses increased $94 thousand to $3.6 million at June 30, 2021 from $3.5 million at June 30, 2020. During the year ended June 30, 2021, the changes in the provision for loan losses for each category of loan type were primarily due to fluctuations in the outstanding balance of each category of loans collectively evaluated for impairment. The overall increase in the allowance can be primarily attributed to an increase in non-accrual and delinquent loans and the corresponding qualitative adjustment.
The allowance for loan losses increased $310 thousand to $3.5 million at June 30, 2020 from $3.2 million at June 30, 2019, primarily due to increases in the general reserves for residential construction and commercial real estate land loans. The increase in reserves for these two portfolios was primarily due to management’s concern with the risk profile of these portfolios during the economic uncertainty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Management adjusted the qualitative factors for each of these loan segments based on the elevated levels of unemployment and the depressed economic conditions due to the uncertainly surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in reserves due to the COVID-19 pandemic was limited by the Bank making enhancements to its credit management function by adding new experienced team members and implementing more robust internal credit management and monitoring processes. The loan portfolio also includes an aggregate of $217.0 million of loans acquired at their fair values in the Fidelity and Washington acquisitions on May 1, 2020 and the acquisition of Audubon Savings Bank on July 1, 2019.
Impaired loans were $4.0 million and $2.4 million with no specific valuation allowance necessary at June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The $4.0 million and $2.4 million of impaired loans at June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, do not include $161 thousand
and $321 thousand, respectively, of loans acquired with deteriorated credit quality, which have been recorded at their fair value at acquisition under FASB ASC 310-30 (see note 4 to the notes to Consolidated Financial Statements).
Interest Rate Risk Management
Interest rate risk is defined as the exposure to current and future earnings and capital that arises from adverse movements in interest rates. Depending on a bank’s asset/liability structure, adverse movements in interest rates could be either rising or falling interest rates. For example, a bank with predominantly long-term fixed-rate assets and short-term liabilities could have an adverse earnings exposure to a rising rate environment. Conversely, a short-term or variable-rate asset base funded by longer term liabilities could be negatively affected by falling rates. This is referred to as re-pricing or maturity mismatch risk.
Interest rate risk also arises from changes in the slope of the yield curve (yield curve risk), from imperfect correlations in the adjustment of rates earned and paid on different instruments with otherwise similar re-pricing characteristics (basis risk), and from interest rate related options embedded in our assets and liabilities (option risk).
Our objective is to manage our interest rate risk by determining whether a given movement in interest rates affects our net interest income and the market value of our portfolio equity in a positive or negative way and to execute strategies to maintain interest rate risk within established limits. The results at June 30, 2021 indicate a level of risk within the parameters of our model. Our management believes that the June 30, 2021 results indicate a profile that reflects interest rate risk exposures in both rising and declining rate environments for both net interest income and economic value.
Model Simulation Analysis. We view interest rate risk from two different perspectives. The traditional accounting perspective, which defines and measures interest rate risk as the change in net interest income and earnings caused by a change in interest rates, provides the best view of short-term interest rate risk exposure. We also view interest rate risk from an economic perspective, which defines and measures interest rate risk as the change in the market value of portfolio equity caused by changes in the values of assets and liabilities, which fluctuate due to changes in interest rates. The market value of portfolio equity, also referred to as the economic value of equity, is defined as the present value of future cash flows from existing assets, minus the present value of future cash flows from existing liabilities.
These two perspectives give rise to income simulation and economic value simulation, each of which presents a unique picture of our risk of any movement in interest rates. Income simulation identifies the timing and magnitude of changes in income resulting from changes in prevailing interest rates over a short-term time horizon (usually one or two years). Economic value simulation reflects the interest rate sensitivity of assets and liabilities in a more comprehensive fashion, reflecting all future time periods. It can identify the quantity of interest rate risk as a function of the changes in the economic values of assets and liabilities, and the corresponding change in the economic value of equity of the Bank. Both types of simulation assist in identifying, measuring, monitoring and controlling interest rate risk and are employed by management to ensure that variations in interest rate risk exposure will be maintained within policy guidelines.
We produce these simulation reports and discuss them with our management Asset and Liability Committee and Board Risk Committee on at least a quarterly basis. The simulation reports compare baseline (no interest rate change) to the results of an interest rate shock, to illustrate the specific impact of the interest rate scenario tested on income and equity. The model, which incorporates all asset and liability rate information, simulates the effect of various interest rate movements on income and equity value. The reports identify and measure our interest rate risk exposure present in our current asset/liability structure. Management considers both a static (current position) and dynamic (forecast changes in volume) analysis as well as non-parallel and gradual changes in interest rates and the yield curve in assessing interest rate exposures.
If the results produce quantifiable interest rate risk exposure beyond our limits, then the testing will have served as a monitoring mechanism to allow us to initiate asset/liability strategies designed to reduce and therefore mitigate interest rate risk. The table below sets forth an approximation of our interest rate risk exposure. The simulation uses projected repricing of assets and liabilities at June 30, 2021. The income simulation analysis presented represents a one-year impact of the interest scenario assuming a static balance sheet. Various assumptions are made regarding the prepayment speed and optionality of loans, investment securities and deposits, which are based on analysis and market information. The assumptions regarding optionality, such as prepayments of loans and the effective lives and repricing of non-maturity deposit products, are documented periodically through evaluation of current market conditions and historical correlations to our specific asset and liability products under varying interest rate scenarios. Because the prospective effects of hypothetical interest rate changes are based on a number of assumptions, these computations should not be relied upon as indicative of actual results. While we believe such assumptions to be reasonable, assumed prepayment rates may not approximate actual future prepayment activity on mortgage-backed securities or agency issued collateralized obligations (secured by one- to four-family loans and
multifamily loans). Further, the computation does not reflect any actions that management may undertake in response to changes in interest rates and assumes a constant asset base. Management periodically reviews the rate assumptions based on existing and projected economic conditions and consults with industry experts to validate our model and simulation results.
The table below sets forth, as of June 30, 2021, the Bank’s net portfolio value, the estimated changes in our net portfolio value and net interest income that would result from the designated instantaneous parallel changes in market interest rates.
As of June 30, 2021, based on the scenarios above, net interest income would increase by approximately 2.28% to 5.07%, over a one-year time horizon in a rising interest rate environment. One-year net interest income would decrease by approximately 0.18% in a declining interest rate environment over the same period.
Economic value at risk would be negatively impacted by a rise in interest rates. We have established an interest rate floor of zero percent for measuring interest rate risk. The difference between the two results reflects the relatively long terms of a portion of our assets which is captured by the economic value at risk but has less impact on the one-year net interest income sensitivity.
Overall, our June 30, 2021 results indicate that we are adequately positioned with an acceptable net interest income and economic value at risk and that all interest rate risk results continue to be within our policy guidelines.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We maintain liquid assets at levels we believe are adequate to meet our liquidity needs. The Bank’s liquidity ratio was 44.3% as of June 30, 2021 compared to 27.3% as of June 30, 2020. We adjust our liquidity levels to fund deposit outflows, pay real estate taxes on mortgage loans, repay our borrowings, and to fund loan commitments. We also adjust liquidity as appropriate to meet asset and liability management objectives. Our liquidity ratio is calculated as the sum of total cash and cash equivalents and unencumbered investments securities divided by the sum of total deposits and advances from the FHLB of Pittsburgh and other liabilities. The Bank maintains a liquidity ratio policy that requires this metric to be above 10.0% to provide for the effective management of extension risk and other interest rate risks.
Our primary sources of liquidity are deposits, amortization and prepayment of loans and mortgage-backed securities, maturities of investment securities, other short-term investments, earnings, and funds provided from operations. While scheduled principal repayments on loans and mortgage-backed securities are a relatively predictable source of funds, deposit flows and loan prepayments are greatly influenced by market interest rates, economic conditions, and rates offered by our competition. We set the interest rates on our deposits to maintain a desired level of total deposits. In addition, we invest excess funds in short-term interest-earning assets, which provide liquidity to meet lending requirements.
Our cash flows are derived from operating activities, investing activities and financing activities as reported in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows included with the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Our primary investing activities are the origination and purchase of one- to four-family, non-residential and multi-family real estate and other loans, including loans originated for sale, and the purchase of investment securities. For the year ended June 30, 2021, our net loan run-off (principal payments and payoffs in excess of originations) totaled $49.3 million compared to a net increase in loans (originations in excess of principal payments and payoffs) of $5.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. For the year ended June 30, 2021, we did not purchase any loans as compared to $14.0 million of loan purchases during the year ended June 30, 2020. We sold one loan for $150 thousand during the year ended June 30, 2021. We did not sell any loans during the year ended June 30, 2020. Cash received from the sales, calls, maturities and pay-downs on securities totaled $61.5 million and $33.3 million for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We purchased $96.3 million and $98.9 million of securities during the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Deposit flows are generally affected by the level of interest rates we offer, the interest rates and products offered by local competitors, and other factors. Total deposits decreased $6.7 million during the year ended June 30, 2021 primarily due to the intentional runoff of high-cost non-relationship based certificates of deposit, partially offset by organic core deposit growth. Deposits increased $278.0 million at June 30, 2020 primarily due to an aggregate of $202.0 million of deposits assumed in connection with the acquisitions of Fidelity and Washington on May 1, 2020. Excluding the impact of the acquired deposits in fiscal 2020, deposits increased $76.6 million for the year ended June 30, 2020.
Liquidity management is both a daily and long-term function of business management. If we require funds beyond our ability to generate them internally, borrowing agreements exist with the Federal Home Loan Bank of Pittsburgh to provide advances. As a member of the Federal Home Loan Bank of Pittsburgh, we are required to own capital stock in the Federal Home Loan Bank of Pittsburgh and are authorized to apply for advances on the security of such stock and certain of our mortgage loans and other assets (principally securities which are obligations of, or guaranteed by, the United States), provided certain standards related to credit-worthiness have been met. We had an available borrowing limit of $280.8 million and $223.0 million from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Pittsburgh as of June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. There were $41.0 million and $64.9 million, respectively, of Federal Home Loan Bank advances outstanding at June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
At June 30, 2021, we had outstanding commitments to originate loans of $35.3 million, unfunded commitments under lines of credit of $50.6 million and $2.0 million of standby letters of credit. At June 30, 2021, certificates of deposit scheduled to mature in less than one year totaled $87.9 million. Based on prior experience, management believes that a significant portion of such deposits will remain with us, although there can be no assurance that this will be the case. In the event a significant portion of our deposits are not retained by us, we will have to utilize other funding sources, such as Federal Home Loan Bank advances, in order to maintain our level of assets. Alternatively, we could reduce our level of liquid assets, such as our cash and cash equivalents. In addition, the cost of such deposits may be significantly higher if market interest rates are higher at the time of renewal.
The following tables present certain of our contractual obligations at June 30, 2021:
The Company is a separate legal entity from the Bank and must provide for its own liquidity. In addition to its operating expenses, the Company is responsible for paying any dividends declared to its stockholders, and interest and principal on outstanding debt, if any. The Company’s primary source of income is dividends received from the Bank. At June 30, 2021, the Company had liquid assets of $58.0 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
For the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, we did not engage in any off-balance sheet transactions reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations or cash-flows.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of the impact of recent accounting pronouncements, see note 2 to the notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements of the Company.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
The consolidated financial statements and related notes of the Company have been prepared in accordance with GAAP, which generally requires the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without consideration for changes in
the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. The impact of inflation is reflected in the increased cost of our operations. Unlike industrial companies, our assets and liabilities are primarily monetary in nature. As a result, changes in market interest rates have a greater impact on performance than the effects of inflation.
Non-GAAP Financial Information
We prepare our financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP. To supplement our financial information presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we provide the non-GAAP financial measures discussed below which are used to evaluate our performance and exclude the effects of certain transactions and one-time events that we believe are unrelated to our core business and not necessarily indicative of our current performance or financial position. Management believes excluding these items facilitates greater visibility into our core businesses and underlying trends that may, to some extent, be obscured by inclusion of such items.
With respect to each of the non-GAAP financial measures discussed below, (i) merger charges and gain on bargain purchase for the years ended June 30, 2020 and 2019 relate to our acquisitions of Fidelity and Washington in May 2020 and (ii) merger charges for the year ended June 30, 2018 relate to our acquisition of Audubon Savings Bank in July 2018.
Return on Average Assets (Excluding Merger Charges and Gain on Bargain Purchase)
Return on average assets (excluding merger charges and gain on bargain purchase) represents our adjusted net income (adjusted by the exclusion of the foregoing items) divided by average assets. Management believes that the presentation of this non-GAAP measure assists investors in understanding the impact of non-recurring items on our return on average assets ratio. The following table provides a reconciliation of our return on average assets ratio (excluding merger charges and gain on bargain purchase) for each of the periods where this non-GAAP measure is presented:
Return on Average Equity (Excluding Merger Charges and Gain on Bargain Purchase)
Return on average equity (excluding merger charges and gain on bargain purchase) represents our adjusted net income (adjusted by the exclusion of the foregoing items) divided by average equity. Management believes that the presentation of this non-GAAP measure assists investors in understanding the impact of non-recurring items on our return on average equity ratio. The following table provides a reconciliation of our return on average equity ratio (excluding merger charges and gain on bargain purchase) for each of the periods where this non-GAAP measure is presented:
Efficiency Ratio (Excluding Merger Charges and Gain on Bargain Purchase)
Efficiency ratio (excluding merger charges and gain on bargain purchase) represents our adjusted non-interest expense (adjusted by the exclusion of the foregoing items) divided by the sum of net interest income and adjusted non-interest expense. Management believes that the presentation of this non-GAAP measure assists investors in understanding the impact of non-recurring items on our efficiency ratio. The following table provides a reconciliation of our efficiency ratio (excluding merger charges and gain on bargain purchase) for each of the periods where this non-GAAP measure is presented:
Allowance for Loan Losses to Total Loans (Excluding Acquired Loans)
Allowance for loan losses to total loans (excluding acquired loans) represents our allowance for loan losses divided by our adjusted loan balance (adjusted by the exclusion of acquired loans). Management believes that the presentation of this non-GAAP measure assists investors in understanding the impact of acquired loans on our allowance for loan losses to total loans ratio. The following table provides a reconciliation of our allowance for loan losses to total loans ratio (excluding acquired loans) for each of the periods where this non-GAAP measure is presented: