Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Our fiscal year begins on April 1 and ends on March 31. Unless otherwise noted, references to “year” pertain to our fiscal year. For example, 2021 refers to fiscal 2021, which is the period from April 1, 2020 to March 31, 2021.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of our operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based on the beliefs of our management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below, and those discussed in the sections titled “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Statement About Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Please read the following discussion together with the sections titled “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and our consolidated financial statements, including the related notes, included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are the leading manufacturer of high performance thermoplastic corrugated pipe, providing a comprehensive suite of water management products and superior drainage solutions for use in the underground construction and infrastructure marketplace. Our innovative products are used across a broad range of end markets and applications, including non-residential, residential, agriculture and infrastructure applications. We have established a leading position in many of these end markets by leveraging our national sales and distribution platform, our overall product breadth and scale and our manufacturing excellence. In the United States, our national footprint combined with our strong local presence and broad product offering make us the leader in an otherwise highly fragmented sector comprised of many smaller competitors. With the acquisition of Infiltrator in the second quarter of fiscal 2020, we are now a leading provider of plastic leachfield chambers, septic tanks and accessories for use primarily in residential applications.
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization categorized the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) as a pandemic, and it continues to spread throughout the United States and globally. The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted, and is likely to continue to result, in significant economic disruptions and may have an adverse effect on our business. Significant uncertainty exists concerning the magnitude of the impact and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic.
In efforts to maintain a safe work environment and help contain the spread of COVID-19, we have transitioned to a work-from-home policy for those that are able and suspended all nonessential employee travel and events. We have also proactively implemented further safety and risk mitigation practices, including:
•
Educating associates on COVID-19 related symptoms and encouraging vaccination;
•
Regularly assessing deliveries and orders in virus “hot zones” and higher-risk geographic regions;
•
Employing strict social distancing practices across all departments and divisions; and
•
Instituting additional health screenings such as temperature checks at facilities, which currently all remain open.
Importantly, we are following all guidelines and directives from governmental and regulatory agencies across manufacturing facilities, distribution centers, and delivery fleets in order to continue operating safely and responsibly, while meeting the needs of customers.
Advanced Drainage Systems, Inc.
Factors deriving from the COVID-19 response that may negatively impact sales and operating profit in the future include, but are not limited to: limitations on our ability to procure raw materials, declines in product demand, limitations on our ability to meet delivery requirements and commitments, limitations on the ability of our employees to perform their work due to illness caused by the pandemic or local, state, or federal orders requiring employees to remain at home and limitations on the ability of our customers to pay us on a timely basis.
While we may experience unfavorable impacts to our business, given the dynamic nature of these circumstances, the full extent of the COVID-19 pandemic on our ongoing business, results of operations and overall financial performance is difficult to forecast at this time. Also, we have deferred payment of the Company’s share of Social Security payroll taxes as permitted under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), which allows for the deferral of these payments through the end of 2020 and requires repayment of the deferred amounts in 2021 and 2022.
Key Factors Affecting Our Results of Operations
Product Demand - There are numerous factors that influence demand for our products. Our businesses are cyclical in nature and sensitive to general economic conditions, primarily in the United States, Canada, Mexico and South America. The non-residential, residential, agricultural and infrastructure markets we serve are affected by the availability of credit, lending practices, interest rates and unemployment rates. Demand for new homes, farm income, commercial development and highway infrastructure spending have a direct impact on our financial condition and results of operations. Accordingly, the following factors may have a direct impact on our business in the markets in which our products are sold:
•
the strength of the economy;
•
the amount and type of non-residential and residential construction;
•
funding for infrastructure spending;
•
farm income and agricultural land values;
•
inventory of improved housing lots;
•
changes in raw material prices;
•
the availability and cost of credit;
•
non-residential occupancy rates;
•
commodity prices; and
•
demographic factors such as population growth and household formation.
Product Pricing - The price of our products is impacted by competitive pricing dynamics in our industry as well as by raw material input costs. Our industry is highly competitive and the sales prices for our products may vary based on the sales policies of our competitors. Raw material costs represent a significant portion of the cost of goods sold for our products. We aim to increase our product selling prices in order to cover raw material price increases, but the inability to do so could impact our profitability. Movements in raw material, logistics or other overhead costs and resulting changes in the selling prices may also impact changes in period-to-period comparisons of net sales.
Material Conversion - Our HDPE and PP pipe, plastic leachfield chambers, septic tanks and related water management product lines compete with other manufacturers of corrugated polyethylene pipe as well as manufacturers of alternative products made with traditional materials, such as concrete, steel and PVC. Our net sales are driven by market trends, including the continued increase in adoption of thermoplastic corrugated pipe products as a replacement for traditional materials. Thermoplastic corrugated pipe is generally lighter, more durable, more cost effective and easier to install than comparable products made from traditional materials. We believe customers will continue to acknowledge the superior attributes and compelling value proposition of our thermoplastic products and expanded regulatory approvals allow for their use in new markets and geographies. In addition, we believe that PP pipe products will also help accelerate conversion given the additional applications for which our PP pipe products can be used.
Advanced Drainage Systems, Inc.
We believe the adoption of HDPE and PP pipe outside of the United States is still in its early stages and represents a significant opportunity for us to continue to increase the conversion to our products from traditional products in these markets, including Canada, Mexico and South America where we operate.
Growth in Allied Products & Other - Our Allied Products & Other include storm and septic chambers, PVC drainage structures, fittings, stormwater filters and water separators. These products complement our pipe product lines and allow us to offer a comprehensive water management solution to our customers and drive organic growth. Our leading market position in pipe products allows us to cross-sell Allied Products & Other effectively. Our comprehensive offering of Allied Products & Other also helps us increase pipe sales in certain markets. Our Allied Products & Other are less sensitive to increases in resin prices since resin prices represent a smaller percentage of the cost for Allied Products & Other.
Our leading position in the pipe market has allowed us to increase organic growth of our Allied Products & Other. We also expect to expand our Allied Product offerings through acquisitions.
Raw Material Costs - Our raw material cost and product selling prices fluctuate with changes in the price of resins utilized in production. We actively manage our resin purchases and pass fluctuations in the cost of resin through to our customers, where possible, in order to maintain our profitability. Fluctuations in the price of crude oil and natural gas prices may impact the cost of resin. In addition, changes in and disruptions to existing ethylene or polyethylene capacities could also significantly increase resin prices, often within a short period of time, even if crude oil and natural gas prices remain low. Our ability to pass through raw material price increases to our customers may, in some cases, lag the increase in our costs of goods sold. Sharp rises in raw material prices over a short period of time have historically occurred with a significant supply disruption (hurricanes or fires at petrochemical facilities), which may increase prices to levels that cannot be fully passed through to customers due to pricing of competing products made from different raw materials or the anticipated length of time the raw material pricing will stay elevated. For more information regarding risks relating to our raw material costs, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors - Risks Relating to Our Business.”
We currently purchase in excess of 1,100 million pounds of virgin and recycled resin annually from over 450 suppliers in North America. As a high-volume buyer of resin, we are able to achieve economies of scale to negotiate favorable terms and pricing. Our purchasing strategies differ based on the material (virgin resin versus recycled material) ordered for delivery to our production locations. The price movements of the different materials also vary, resulting in the need to use a number of strategies to reduce volatility.
In order to reduce the volatility of raw material costs in the future, our raw material strategies for managing our costs include the following:
•
increasing the use of less price-volatile recycled HDPE resin in our pipe products in place of virgin resin while meeting or exceeding industry standards;
•
internally processing an increasing percentage of our recycled HDPE resin in order to closely monitor quality and minimize costs (approximately 70% of our recycled HDPE resin was internally processed (enhanced) in fiscal 2021);
•
managing a resin price risk program that may entail both physical fixed price and volume contracts; and
•
maintaining supply agreements with our major resin suppliers that provide multi-year terms and volumes that are in excess of our projected consumption.
We also consume a large amount of energy and other petroleum products in our operations, including the electricity we use in our manufacturing process as well as the diesel fuel consumed in delivering a significant volume of products to our customers through our in-house fleet. As a result, our operating profit also depends upon our ability to manage the cost of the energy and fuel we require, as well as our ability to pass through increased prices or surcharges to our customers.
Seasonality - Our operating results are impacted by seasonality. Historically, sales of our products have been higher in the first and second quarters of each fiscal year due to favorable weather and longer daylight conditions
Advanced Drainage Systems, Inc.
accelerating construction project activity during these periods while fourth quarter results are impacted by the timing of spring in the northern United States and Canada. Seasonal variations in operating results may also be significantly impacted by inclement weather conditions, such as cold or wet weather, which can delay projects, resulting in decreased net sales for one or more quarters, but we believe that these delayed projects generally result in increased net sales during subsequent quarters.
In the non-residential, residential and infrastructure markets in the northern United States and Canada, the construction season typically begins to gain momentum in late March and lasts through November, before winter sets in, significantly slowing the construction markets. In the southern and western United States, Mexico, Central America and South America, the construction markets are less seasonal. The agricultural drainage market is concentrated in the early spring just prior to planting and in the fall just after crops are harvested prior to freezing of the ground in winter.
Currency Exchange Rates - Although we sell and manufacture our products in many countries, our sales and production costs are primarily denominated in U.S. dollars. We have wholly-owned facilities in Canada, the Netherlands and joint venture facilities in Mexico, Chile, Brazil, Argentina, Colombia and Peru. The functional currencies in the areas in which we have wholly-owned facilities and joint venture facilities other than the U.S. dollar are the Canadian dollar, Euro, Mexican peso, Chilean peso, Brazilian real and Colombian peso. In fiscal 2019, we converted the functional currency of joint venture facilities using the Argentine peso to the Chilean peso. From time to time, we use derivatives to reduce our exposure to currency fluctuations.
Executive Summary of Our Fiscal Year 2021 Results
Fiscal Year 2021 Results
•
Net sales increased 18.5% to $2.0 billion
•
Net income increased to $226.1 million, compared to a net loss of $191.8 million in the prior year
•
Adjusted EBITDA increased 56.7% to $567.0 million
•
Cash provided by operating activities increased 47.7% to $452.2 million
•
Free cash flow increased 56.6% to $373.5 million
Net sales increased $309.0 million, or 18.5%, to $2.0 billion, as compared to $1.7 billion in the prior year. Domestic pipe sales increased $104.6 million, or 11.0%, to $1.1 billion. Domestic allied products & other sales increased $39.2 million, or 9.7%, to $442.4 million. These increases were driven by growth in both the U.S. construction and agriculture end markets. Infiltrator sales increased $186.8 million, or 88.5%, to $397.8 million, as compared to $211.0 million in the prior year.
Gross profit increased $373.6 million to $690.1 million as compared to $316.5 million in the prior year. The prior year gross profit includes $168.6 million of ESOP special dividend compensation expense. In addition, the gross profit includes an incremental benefit from a full year of results from the Infiltrator Water Technologies business, as compared to eight months of results in the prior year due to the timing of the acquisition. The remaining increase in gross profit was due to favorable pricing and material cost; increases in both pipe and allied product sales; and operational improvements offsetting inflationary costs.
Description of our Segments
We operate our business in three distinct reportable segments: “Pipe”, “International” and “Infiltrator.” “Allied Products & Other” represents our Allied Products and all other business segments.
We generate a greater proportion of our net sales and gross profit in our Pipe segment, which consists of Pipe product sales in all regions of the United States. We expect the percentage of total net sales and gross profit derived from our other segments to continue to increase in future periods as we continue to expand non-Pipe product and our
Advanced Drainage Systems, Inc.
international presence. See “Note 21. Business Segment Information,” to our audited consolidated financial statements included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K.
Pipe - Our Pipe segment manufactures and markets high performance thermoplastic corrugated pipe throughout the United States. We maintain and serve these markets through product distribution relationships with many of the largest national and independent waterworks distributors, buying groups and co-ops, major national retailers as well as an extensive network of hundreds of small to medium-sized distributors across the United States.
Infiltrator - Infiltrator is a leading national provider of plastic leachfield chambers and systems, septic tanks and accessories, primarily for use in residential applications. Infiltrator products are used in on-site septic wastewater treatment systems in the United States and Canada.
International - Our International segment manufactures and markets products in regions outside of the United States, with a strategy focused on our owned facilities in Canada and those markets serviced through our joint ventures in Mexico and South America. Pipe manufactured in these countries is primarily sold into the same region. Our joint venture strategy has provided us with local and regional access to new markets. The unconsolidated sales of the South American Joint Venture were $45.6 million, $52.5 million, and $47.6 million, in fiscal 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Allied Products & Other - Our other operating segments manufacture a range of Allied Products & Other that are complementary to our Pipe products. Our Allied Products & Other offer adjacent technologies to our core Pipe offering, presenting a complete drainage solution for our clients and customers.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2021 Compared with Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2020
The following table summarizes our operating results as a percentage of net sales that have been derived from our Consolidated Financial Statements for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020. We believe this presentation is useful to investors in comparing historical results.
Advanced Drainage Systems, Inc.
Net sales - The following table presents net sales to external customers by reportable segment for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020.
Our fiscal 2021 consolidated net sales increased by $309.0 million, or 18.5%, compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in net sales was primarily a result of growth in our domestic Pipe segment along with the impact of including a full year of Infiltrator sales as we acquired Infiltrator on July 31, 2019 and did not report sales prior to August 2019.
Our Pipe segment experienced above-market growth in the residential, agriculture and construction markets which was mainly through higher volumes and to a lesser extent improved pricing/mix of products sold. As our product offerings included in our Allied Products & Other segment are ancillary to the Pipe segment sales as part of the complete water management solution, we experienced similar growth to Pipe segment, driven mainly by higher volumes and improved price/mix of products offerings.
Cost of goods sold and Gross profit - The following table presents gross profit by reportable segment for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020.
Our fiscal 2021 consolidated Cost of goods sold decreased by $64.6 million, or 4.7%, and our consolidated Gross profit increased by $373.6 million, or 118.0%, compared to fiscal 2020. The ESOP special dividend compensation expense that occurred in fiscal 2020 of $168.6 million significantly impacted our gross margin for that year. Other factors impacting our gross margin included the increase in net sales from higher volumes and improved pricing, lower material costs, improved manufacturing costs driven from higher volume and leveraging our overhead costs, and the impact of including a full year of Infiltrator gross profit as we acquired Infiltrator on July 31, 2019 and did not report earnings prior to August 2019.
Selling, general and administrative expenses - The following table presents selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of sales for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal 2021 decreased $3.8 million from the prior year and as a percentage of sales, decreased by 2.7%. This decrease was a result of $21.5 million in transaction costs that occurred in fiscal 2020 relating to the Infiltrator acquisition which did not recur in fiscal 2021. In addition, ADS experienced
Advanced Drainage Systems, Inc.
reductions in various administrative categories as a result of COVID-19 restrictions on travel and entertainment, and as well as lower medical insurance costs. These decreases in selling, general and administrative expenses were partially offset by higher ESOP and stock-based compensation expenses.
Selling, general and administrative - ESOP special dividend compensation - In fiscal 2020, ESOP special dividend compensation expense of $78.1 million was allocated to selling, general and administrative expenses which did not recur in fiscal 2021.
Loss on disposal of assets and costs from exit and disposal activities - In the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, we recorded $4.3 million of expense related to loss on disposal of assets and costs from exit and disposal activities compared to $5.3 million in the year ended March 31, 2020. The decrease in Loss on disposal of assets and costs from exit and disposal activities is due to asset disposals in fiscal 2020. See “Note 2. Loss on Disposal of Assets and Costs from Exit and Disposal Activities” for additional discussion.
Intangible amortization - Intangible amortization increased as a percentage of net sales primarily due to the inclusion of a full year of Infiltrator intangible asset amortization as we acquired Infiltrator on July 31, 2019.
Interest expense - Interest expense decreased $47.1 million in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020. The decrease was primarily due to $33.2 million of the write-off of deferred financing costs and $4.2 million prepayment penalty related to the extinguishment of debt instruments in the fiscal 2020. The remainder of the decrease is due to decreased debt levels. See “Note 13. Debt” for additional discussion.
Derivative (gains) losses and other (income) expense, net - In the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, we recorded a $3.4 million gain on Derivative (gains) losses and other (income) expenses, net, compared to a $1.6 million loss for the same period in fiscal 2020. The change is primarily due to changes in realized and unrealized diesel hedges.
Income tax expense - The following table presents the effective tax rates for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020.
The increase in the effective tax rate was primarily due to stock appreciation from the additional ESOP shares and the Acquisition during fiscal year 2020. See “Note 18. Income Taxes” for additional information.
Equity in net (income) loss of unconsolidated affiliates - Equity in net (income) loss of unconsolidated affiliates represents our proportionate share of income or loss attributed to our unconsolidated joint venture in which we have significant influence, but not control, over operations. The equity in net (income) loss of unconsolidated affiliates decreased $1.7 million for fiscal 2021 compared for fiscal 2020. The decrease is primarily due to a decrease in the current period income at our South American Joint Venture.
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interest - Income attributable to noncontrolling interest increased by $0.5 million from net income of $1.4 million in fiscal 2020 to $1.9 million in fiscal 2021. The change is primarily attributable to fluctuations in the profitability of ADS Mexicana.
The discussion of our results of operations for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 compared with the fiscal year ended March 31, 2019 can be found in our fiscal 2020 Form 10-K. See Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Discussion and Results of Operations in our fiscal 2020 Form 10-K for further information on our prior period results of operations.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin - EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin, non-GAAP financial measures, have been presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K as supplemental measures of financial performance that are not required by, or presented in accordance with GAAP. We calculate EBITDA as net income before interest, income taxes and depreciation and amortization. We calculate
Advanced Drainage Systems, Inc.
adjusted EBITDA as net income before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation expense, non-cash charges and certain other gains and expenses. We calculate Adjusted EBITDA Margin as Adjusted EBITDA divided by net sales.
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin are included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K because they are key metrics used by management and our Board of Directors to assess our financial performance. EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin are frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate companies in our industry. In addition to covenant compliance and executive performance evaluations, we use EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin to supplement GAAP measures of performance to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies, to make budgeting decisions and to compare our performance against that of other peer companies using similar measures.
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin are not GAAP measures of our financial performance and should not be considered as alternatives to net income as measures of financial performance or cash flows from operations or any other performance measure derived in accordance with GAAP, and it should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items. EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin contain certain other limitations, including the failure to reflect our cash expenditures, cash requirements for working capital needs and cash costs to replace assets being depreciated and amortized. In evaluating EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin, you should be aware that in the future we will incur expenses that are the same as or similar to some of the adjustments in this presentation, such as stock-based compensation expense, derivative fair value adjustments, and foreign currency transaction losses. Management compensates for these limitations by relying on our GAAP results in addition to using EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin on a supplemental basis. Our measure of EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin are not necessarily comparable to other similarly titled captions of other companies due to different methods of calculation.
(a)
In the first quarter of fiscal 2020, the Company paid a special dividend of $1.00 per share. The dividend was used to pay back a portion of the ESOP loan resulting in $246.8 million in additional stock-based compensation. See “Note 19. Net Income Per Share and Stockholders’ Equity” for additional information.
(b)
Represents expenses recorded related to legal, accounting and other professional fees incurred in connection with business or asset acquisitions and dispositions.
(c)
Represents professional fees incurred in connection with our strategic growth and operational improvement initiatives, which include various market feasibility assessments and acquisition strategies, along with our operational improvement initiatives, which include evaluation of our manufacturing network and improvement initiatives.
Advanced Drainage Systems, Inc.
(d)
Includes expenses in connection with our response to the COVID-19 pandemic including pandemic pay, see “Note 16. Employee Benefit Plans” for additional information, and crisis management.
(e)
Represents expenses recorded related to legal, accounting and other professional fees incurred in connection with the restatement of our prior period financial statements. The benefit recognized in fiscal 2019 is the result of insurance proceeds received in fiscal 2019.
(f)
Includes derivative fair value adjustments, foreign currency transaction (gains) losses, the proportionate share of interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization related to the South American Joint Venture, which is accounted for under the equity method of accounting, contingent consideration remeasurement, executive retirement expense (benefit) and legal settlements. The other adjustments in fiscal 2020 also includes expenses related to the ADS Mexicana’s investigation as described in “Note 15. Commitments and Contingencies”.
The following table presents our Adjusted EBITDA for the Company prior to the Acquisition (“Legacy ADS”), which consists of the combination of the Segment Adjusted Gross Profit for Pipe, Allied Products & Other, and International plus the portion of selling, general and administrative expenses which impacts Adjusted EBITDA and Infiltrator prior to the Acquisition (“Legacy Infiltrator”), which consists of the combination of the Segment Adjusted Gross Profit for Infiltrator plus the portion of selling, general and administrative expenses which impacts Adjusted EBITDA.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Historically we have funded our operations through internally generated cash flow supplemented by debt financings, equity issuance and finance and operating leases. These sources have been sufficient historically to fund our primary liquidity requirements, including working capital, capital expenditures, debt service and dividend payments for our convertible preferred stock and common stock. From time to time, we may explore additional financing methods and other means to raise capital. There can be no assurance that any additional financing will be available to us on acceptable terms or at all.
The following table presents key liquidity metrics utilized by management. The table includes the Non-GAAP measure, Free cash flow, which is further discussed and defined below.
Advanced Drainage Systems, Inc.
The following table summarizes our available liquidity under our Revolving Credit Facility as of March 31, 2021:
In addition to the available liquidity above, we have the ability to borrow up to $1.3 billion under our Term Loan Facility, subject to leverage ratio restrictions.
As of March 31, 2021, we had $12.7 million in cash that was held by our foreign subsidiaries, including $4.8 million held by our Canadian subsidiaries. We continue to evaluate our strategy regarding foreign cash, but our earnings in foreign subsidiaries still remain indefinitely reinvested, except for Canada. See “Note 18. Income Taxes” for additional discussion of our plans to repatriate earnings from Canada.
Free Cash Flow - Free cash flow is a non-GAAP financial measure that comprises cash flow from operations less capital expenditures. Free cash flow is a measure used by management and our Board of Directors to assess our ability to generate cash. Accordingly, free cash flow has been presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K as a supplemental measure of liquidity that is not required by, or presented in accordance with GAAP, because management believes that free cash flow provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our ability to generate cash flow from operations after capital expenditures.
Free cash flow is not a GAAP measure of our liquidity and should not be considered as an alternative to cash flow from operating activities as a measure of liquidity or any other liquidity measure derived in accordance with GAAP. Our measure of free cash flow is not necessarily comparable to other similarly titled captions of other companies due to different methods of calculation.
Working Capital and Cash Flows
Our source of funds in fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by an increase in cash provided by operating activities due to increased income from continuing operations. Our use of cash in fiscal 2021 was primarily due to payments on our Term Loan Facility and Revolving Credit Facility, payments on our finance leases and dividend payments. During fiscal 2020, our net increase in cash amounted to $165.3 million compared to a net decrease of $8.7 million during fiscal 2019. Our sources of funds in fiscal 2020 were primarily driven by borrowings under the Term Loan Facility, Senior Notes and Revolving Credit Facility, proceeds from our Common Stock Offering and an increase in cash provided by operating activities. Our use of cash during fiscal 2020 was primarily related to the Acquisition and repayment of our previous debt arrangements.
As of March 31, 2021, we had $534.0 million in liquidity, including $195.0 million of cash, $339.0 million in borrowings available under our Revolving Credit Facility, excluding $11.0 million of outstanding letters of credit. We believe that our cash on hand, together with the availability of borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility and cash generated from operations, will be sufficient to meet our working capital requirements, anticipated capital expenditures, scheduled interest payments on our indebtedness and required dividend payment for our convertible preferred stock for at least the next twelve months.
As of March 31, 2021, we had consolidated indebtedness (excluding finance lease obligations) of approximately $791.3 million, a decrease of $308.5 million compared to March 31, 2020.
Advanced Drainage Systems, Inc.
Working Capital - Working capital is an indication of liquidity and potential need for short-term funding. We define working capital as current assets less current liabilities.
Working capital decreased to $424.7 million as of March 31, 2021, from $428.0 million as of March 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase in accounts payable, due to improved payment terms, offset by increased accounts receivable and inventory due to increased sales.
Working capital increased to $428.0 million as of March 31, 2020, from $260.2 million as of March 31, 2019, primarily due to an increase in cash of $165.3 million.
Operating Cash Flows - During fiscal 2021, cash provided by operating activities was $452.2 million as compared with cash provided by operating activities of $306.2 million for fiscal 2020. Cash flow from operating activities during fiscal 2021 was primarily impacted by increased income from continuing operations and improvements in payment terms on accounts payable.
During fiscal 2020, cash provided by operating activities was $306.2 million as compared with cash provided by operating activities of $151.7 million for fiscal 2019. Cash flow from operating activities during fiscal 2020 was primarily impacted by changes in working capital, including improved collections from accounts receivable, faster inventory turns and extension of terms of our accounts payable.
Investing Cash Flows - During fiscal 2021, cash used for investing activities was $77.9 million. The decrease in cash used for investing activities was primarily due to the Acquisition of Infiltrator Water in fiscal 2020. Capital expenditures was $78.8 million compared to $67.7 million in fiscal 2020. Our capital expenditures in fiscal 2021 were used primarily to support facility expansions, equipment replacements, our recycled resin and technology improvement initiatives.
During fiscal 2020, cash used for investing activities was $1,150.5 million. The decrease in cash used for investing activities was primarily due to the Acquisition of Infiltrator, net of cash acquired, in fiscal 2020. Capital expenditures was $67.7 million compared to $43.4 million in fiscal 2019. Our capital expenditures in fiscal 2020 were used primarily to support facility improvements, equipment replacements, our recycled resin and operating efficiency initiatives and technology.
During fiscal 2019, cash used for investing activities was $42.5 million, primarily due to $43.4 million for capital expenditures and additions to capitalized software. Our most significant capital expenditures were $10.8 million for increased capacity related to manufacturing facility expansion and additional production lines, as well as $4.8 million for additional processing and utilization of recycled resin.
We currently anticipate that we will make capital expenditures of approximately $130 to $150 million in fiscal 2022. Such capital expenditures are expected to be financed using funds generated by operations.
Financing Cash Flows - During fiscal 2021, cash used in financing activities was $354.5 million, due to payments on the Term Loan Facility of $207.0 million and the Revolving Credit Facility of $100.0 million. In addition, we made dividend payments of $32.1 million and $21.5 million on our finance lease obligations.
Advanced Drainage Systems, Inc.
During fiscal 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $1,011.6 million, due to the new Term Loan Facility, Senior Notes and Common Stock Offering. These cash inflows were offset by the repayment of the PNC Credit Agreement and Prudential Senior Notes, the special and quarterly dividend payments of $92.1 million and payments on our finance lease obligations of $27.1 million. The table below summarizes the cash flows from the Acquisition, and the related debt and equity transactions.
During fiscal 2019, cash used in financing activities was $117.7 million, primarily for net debt payments of $62.1 million related to the repayments of the Secured Bank Loans and Senior Notes Payable, payments on our finance lease obligations of $24.3 million, dividend payments of $26.1 million and the acquisition of all the noncontrolling interest in BaySaver for $8.8 million.
Employee Stock Ownership Plan (“ESOP”)
The Company established the Advanced Drainage Systems, Inc. ESOP (the “ESOP” or the “Plan”) effective April 1, 1993 to enable eligible employees to acquire stock ownership in ADS in the form of redeemable convertible preferred shares. The Plan was funded by an existing tax-qualified profit-sharing retirement plan, as well as a 30-year term loan from ADS. Within 30 days following the repayment of the ESOP loan, which will occur no later than March 2023, the ESOP committee can direct the shares of redeemable convertible preferred stock owned by the ESOP to be converted into shares of the Company’s common stock.
The Company is obligated to make contributions to the Plan, which, when aggregated with the Plan’s dividends, equal the amount necessary to enable the Plan to make its regularly scheduled payments of principal and interest due on its term loan to ADS. Compensation expense is recognized based upon the average annual fair value of the shares during the period which ADS receives payments on the term loan, and the number of ESOP shares allocated to participant accounts.
As disclosed in “Note 16. Employee Benefit Plans”, redeemable convertible preferred stock can convert to common stock upon retirement, disability, death, or vested terminations over the life of the Plan. As stated above, within 30 days following the repayment of the ESOP loan, all redeemable convertible preferred stock will be converted to common stock, which will be no later than March 2023.
Following the repayment of the ESOP loan discussed above, the ESOP’s conversion of redeemable convertible preferred stock into common stock will impact the Company’s net income, net income per share and common shares outstanding as follows (with the outstanding shares of common stock being approximately 24% greater after conversion):
Advanced Drainage Systems, Inc.
Impact on Net Income - Provided that the converted common stock do not qualify as participating securities, the Company will no longer be required to apply the two-class method to determine Net income per share once all of the redeemable convertible preferred stock is converted into common stock. After the preferred shares are fully allocated upon the repayment of the ESOP loan and all of the redeemable convertible preferred stock is converted into common stock, the Company will no longer incur the fair value of ESOP deferred compensation attributable to the shares of redeemable convertible preferred shares.
The impact of the ESOP on net income includes the fair value of ESOP deferred compensation attributable to the shares of redeemable convertible preferred stock allocated to employee ESOP accounts during the applicable period, which is a non-cash charge to our earnings and not deductible for income tax purposes.
Impact on Common Stock Outstanding - The impact on the number of common shares outstanding will be as shares are converted, the number of common shares outstanding will increase.
The repayment of a significant portion of the ESOP loan had an impact on the Company’s net income per share in fiscal 2020.
Debt and Capitalized Lease Obligations
See “Note 6. Leases” and “Note 13. Debt” to our consolidated financial statements included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for a discussion of the Company’s financing transactions, including the Secured Bank Loans, the Senior Notes and the Company’s finance lease obligations.
Financing Transactions
Bridge Credit Facility - On July 31, 2019, we entered into the Base Credit Agreement with Barclays Bank PLC, as administrative agent and the several lenders from time to time party thereto. The Base Credit Agreement provides for up to $1.3 billion as a Term Loan Facility, up to $350 million as a Revolving Facility, up to $50 million as an L/C Facility and up to $50 million, as a sublimit of the Revolving Facility.
On July 31, 2019, the Company borrowed under the Base Credit Agreement which was used to (i) finance the Merger Consideration paid in connection with the closing of the acquisition of Infiltrator by us which occurred on July 31, 2019 (the “Merger”), (ii) repay the total outstanding amount as of the Closing Date under its credit agreements, (iii) repay outstanding amounts of existing indebtedness incurred by Infiltrator under its outstanding credit facility in effect prior to the Acquisition, and (iv) pay certain transaction fees and expenses associated with the Acquisition and the Base Credit Agreement.
New Senior Secured Credit Facility - On September 24, 2019, the joint lead arrangers informed the Company that the parties had successfully completed a syndication of the remaining balance of the Bridge Credit Facility. The Senior Secured Credit Facility provided for a Term Loan Facility with an initial aggregate amount of $700 million, up to $350 million as a Revolving Facility, and up to $50 million as a letter of credit facility, as a sublimit of the Revolving Facility.
The Term Loan Facility has an amortization feature equal to 1% of the original $700 million balance paid in equal quarterly installments commencing on January 1, 2020 and continuing on the first day of each consecutive April, July, October and January thereafter. To the extent not previously paid, all then-outstanding amounts under the Term
Advanced Drainage Systems, Inc.
Loan Facility are due and payable on the maturity date of the Term Loan Facility, which is September 26, 2026. Borrowings under the Revolving Facility are available beginning on the Closing Date and, to the extent not previously paid, all then-outstanding amounts under the Revolving Facility are due and payable on the maturity date of the Revolving Facility, which is September 29, 2024.
The Senior Secured Credit Facility includes customary representations, warranties, covenants and events of default.
At the option of the Company, borrowings under the Term Loan Facility and under the Revolving Facility (subject to certain limitations) bear interest at either a base rate (as determined pursuant to the Senior Secured Credit Facility) or at a Eurocurrency Rate, based on LIBOR (as defined in the Senior Secured Credit Facility), plus the applicable margin as set forth therein from time to time. In the case of the Revolving Facility, the applicable margin is based on the Company’s consolidated senior secured net leverage ratio (as defined in the Senior Secured Credit Facility). All borrowings under the Term Loan Facility used to finance the Merger Consideration as described above initially bear interest at a Eurocurrency Rate (as defined in the Senior Secured Credit Facility).
The Company’s obligations under the Credit Agreement have been secured by granting a first priority lien on substantially all of the Company’s assets (subject to certain exceptions and limitations), and each of StormTech, LLC, Advanced Drainage of Ohio, Inc. and Infiltrator Water Technologies, LLC (collectively the “Guarantors”) has agreed to guarantee the obligations of the Company under the Senior Secured Credit Facility and to secure the obligations thereunder by granting a first priority lien in substantially all of such Guarantor’s assets (subject to certain exceptions and limitations).
Issuance of Senior Notes due 2027 - On September 23, 2019, the Company issued $350.0 million aggregate principal amount of its Senior Notes, pursuant to the Indenture among the Company, the Guarantors and the Trustee. The Senior Notes are guaranteed by each of the Company’s present and future direct and indirect wholly owned domestic subsidiaries that is a guarantor under the Company's Senior Secured Credit Facility. The Senior Notes were offered and sold either to persons reasonably believed to be “qualified institutional buyers” pursuant to Rule 144A under the Securities Act or to persons outside the United States under Regulation S of the Securities Act.
Interest on the Senior Notes will be payable semi-annually in cash in arrears on March 31 and September 30 of each year, commencing on March 31, 2020, at a rate of 5.000% per annum. The Senior Notes will mature on September 30, 2027. The Company used the majority of the net proceeds from the offering of the Senior Notes for the repayment of $300.0 million of its outstanding borrowings under the Company’s Bridge Credit Facility.
The Company may redeem the Senior Notes, in whole or in part, at any time on or after September 30, 2022 at established redemption prices. At any time prior to September 30, 2022, the Company may also redeem up to 40% of the Senior Notes with net cash proceeds of certain equity offerings at a redemption price equal to 105.000% of the principal amount of the Senior Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the redemption date. In addition, at any time prior to September 30, 2022, the Company may redeem the Senior Notes, in whole or in part, at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Senior Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the redemption date plus an applicable “make-whole” premium.
The Indenture contains customary events of default, including, among other things, payment default, failure to comply with covenants or agreements contained in the Indenture or the Senior Notes and certain provisions related to bankruptcy events. The Indenture also contains customary negative covenants.
Covenant Compliance
The Senior Secured Credit Facility requires, if the aggregate amount of outstanding exposure under the Revolving Facility exceeds $122.5 million at the end of any fiscal quarter, the Company to maintain a consolidated senior secured net leverage ratio (commencing with the fiscal quarter ending March 31, 2020) not to exceed 4.25 to 1.00 for any four consecutive fiscal quarter periods.
Advanced Drainage Systems, Inc.
The Senior Secured Credit Facility also includes other covenants, including negative covenants that, subject to certain exceptions, limit the Company’s and its restricted subsidiaries’ (as defined in the Credit Agreement) ability to, among other things: (i) incur additional debt, including guarantees; (ii) create liens upon any of their property; (iii) enter into any merger, consolidation or amalgamation, liquidate, wind up or dissolve, or dispose of all or substantially all of their property or business; (iv) dispose of assets; (v) pay subordinated debt; (vi) make certain investments; (vii) enter into swap agreements; (viii) engage in transactions with affiliates; (ix) engage in new lines of business; (x) modify certain material contractual obligations, organizational documents, accounting policies or fiscal year; or (xi) create or permit restrictions on the ability of any subsidiary of any Loan Party (as defined in the Senior Secured Credit Facility) to pay dividends or make distributions to the Company or any of its subsidiaries.
The Senior Secured Credit Facility also contains customary provisions requiring the following mandatory prepayments (subject to certain exceptions and limitations): (i) annual prepayments (beginning with the fiscal year ending March 31, 2021) with a percentage of excess cash flow (as defined in the Senior Secured Credit Facility); (ii) 100% of the net cash proceeds from any non-ordinary course sale of assets and certain casualty or condemnation events; and (iii) 100% of the net cash proceeds of indebtedness not permitted to be incurred under the Senior Secured Credit Facility.
For further information, see “Note 13. Debt” to the Consolidated Financial Statements. We were in compliance with our debt covenants as of March 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations as of March 31, 2021
(1)
The Secured Bank Loans mature in June 2027.
(2)
Based on applicable rates and pricing margins as of March 31, 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, with the exception of the guarantee of 50% of certain debt of our unconsolidated South American Joint Venture, as further discussed in “Note 12. Related Party Transactions” of our Consolidated Financial Statements included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Form 10-K. Our maximum potential obligation under this guarantee totals $11 million as of March 31, 2021. The maximum borrowing permitted under the South American Joint Venture’s credit agreement is $22 million. As of March 31, 2021, our South American Joint Venture had approximately $10.0 million of outstanding debt subject to our guarantee, resulting in our guarantee of 50%, or $5.0 million, of that amount. We do not believe that this guarantee will have a current or future effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes.
Certain of our accounting policies involve a higher degree of judgment and complexity in their application, and therefore, represent the critical accounting policies used in the preparation of our financial statements. If different
Advanced Drainage Systems, Inc.
assumptions or conditions were to prevail, the results could be materially different from our reported results. We believe the following accounting policies may involve a higher degree of judgment and complexity in their application and represent the critical accounting policies used in the preparation of our financial statements. For additional discussion of our significant accounting policies, see “Note 1. Background and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” included in this Form 10-K.
Policy
Judgments and Estimates
Effect if Actual Results Differ from Assumptions
Goodwill- Goodwill is reviewed annually for impairment as of March 31 or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. The fair value of goodwill is determined by considering both the income and market approach.
Determining the fair value of a reporting unit is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions.
•Estimates and assumptions including revenue growth rates and EBITDA used to calculate projected future cash flows, risk-adjusted discount rates, future economic and market conditions, and determination of appropriate market comparables.
•The fair value estimates are based on assumptions management believes to be reasonable but are inherently uncertain.
We performed our annual impairment test for goodwill as of March 31, 2021. We performed the test for all reporting units with goodwill, which include our Domestic pipe reporting unit, the International reporting units, the Infiltrator reporting unit, and the various Allied Product reporting units.
We determined for our Domestic Pipe Reporting Unit and all Allied Products and Other reporting units that it was not more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit was less than its carrying value. Based on our quantitative analysis for the Canada reporting unit and Infiltrator reporting unit, the estimated fair value of each reporting unit exceeded its carrying value.
For our Infiltrator and Canada reporting units the estimated fair value exceeded the carrying value by more than 25%. For our Infiltrator and Canada reporting units, we utilized a discount rate of 13% and 15%, respectively, in determining the discounted cash flows in our fair value analysis and a long-term growth rate of 3.0% and 2.0%, respectively.
In addition, these discounted cash flow analyses are dependent upon achieving forecasted levels of net sales and profitability. If performance were to fall below forecasted levels, or if market conditions were to decline in a material or sustained manner, impairment would be indicated at these reporting units, and potentially at our other reporting units.
Advanced Drainage Systems, Inc.
Policy
Judgments and Estimates
Effect if Actual Results Differ from Assumptions
Definite-lived intangible assets-Definite-lived intangible assets are tested for recoverability whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that carrying amounts of the asset group may not be recoverable. Asset groups are established primarily by determining the lowest level of cash flows available. If the estimated undiscounted future cash flows are less than the carrying amounts of such assets, an impairment loss is recognized to the extent the fair value of the asset less any costs of disposition is less than the carrying amount of the asset.
Indefinite-lived intangible assets-Indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment annually as of March 31 or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may be greater than fair value. Determining the fair value of these assets is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. We base our fair value estimates on assumptions we believe to be reasonable, but that are inherently uncertain. To estimate the fair value of these indefinite-lived intangible assets, we use an income approach, which utilizes a market derived rate of return to discount anticipated performance. An impairment loss is recognized when the estimated fair value of the intangible asset is less than the carrying value.
Determining the fair value of the definite-lived and indefinite-lived intangible assets is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. Future events and unanticipated changes to assumptions could require a provision for impairment in a future period.
We did not record any impairment charges for definite-lived intangible assets in fiscal 2021, 2020, or 2019. Due to the retirement of the “Hancor” trademark in fiscal 2020, we accelerated the amortization of our “Hancor” trademark recording additional amortization expense.
We performed our annual impairment test for indefinite-lived intangible assets as of March 31, 2021. We determined for our indefinite-lived intangible assets that it was not more likely than not that the fair value of the assets exceeded carrying value for fiscal years ended March 31, 2021 and 2019. Based on our quantitative analysis for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020, we determined for our indefinite-lived intangible assets that the fair value of the assets exceeded its carrying value. Accordingly, we did not incur any impairment charges for indefinite-lived intangible assets in fiscal 2021, 2020 or 2019. Future events and unanticipated changes to assumptions could require a provision for impairment in a future period.
Advanced Drainage Systems, Inc.
Policy
Judgments and Estimates
Effect if Actual Results Differ from Assumptions
Revenue Recognition- We generate revenue by selling pipe and related water management products primarily to distributors, retailers, buying groups and co-operative buying groups. Products are shipped predominately by our internal fleet, and we do not provide any additional revenue generating services after product delivery. Payment terms and conditions vary by contract.
Revenue is recognized at the point in-time obligations under the terms of a contract with a customer are satisfied, which generally occurs upon the transfer of control of the promised goods. In substantially all of our contracts with customers, control is transferred to the customer upon delivery. We recognize revenue in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services.
We estimate and allocate variable consideration, such as right of return, credits or incentives, based on numerous factors, including the customer agreements and past transaction history.
If our historical experience differs from future experience, our estimates of variable consideration could differ.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements, see “Note 1. Background and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”