ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
This discussion, which presents our results for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2021 ("fiscal 2021"), January 31, 2020 ("fiscal 2020") and January 31, 2019 ("fiscal 2019"), should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes. We intend for this discussion to provide the reader with information that will assist in understanding our financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from period to period and the primary factors that accounted for those changes. We also discuss certain performance metrics that management uses to assess the Company's performance. Additionally, the discussion provides information about the financial results of each of the three segments to provide a better understanding of how each of those segments and its results of operations affect the financial position and results of operations of the Company as a whole.
Throughout this Item 7, we discuss segment operating income, comparable store and club sales and other measures. Management measures the results of the Company's segments using each segment's operating income, including certain corporate overhead allocations, as well as other measures. From time to time, we revise the measurement of each segment's operating income and other measures as determined by the information regularly reviewed by our chief operating decision maker.
Management also measures the results of comparable store and club sales, or comparable sales, a metric that indicates the performance of our existing stores and clubs by measuring the change in sales for such stores and clubs, including eCommerce sales, for a particular period from the corresponding period in the previous year. Walmart's definition of comparable sales includes sales from stores and clubs open for the previous 12 months, including remodels, relocations, expansions and conversions, as well as eCommerce sales. We measure the eCommerce sales impact by including all sales initiated digitally, including omni-channel transactions which are fulfilled through our stores and clubs. Sales at a store that has changed in format are excluded from comparable sales when the conversion of that store is accompanied by a relocation or expansion that results in a change in the store's retail square feet of more than five percent. Sales related to divested businesses are excluded from comparable sales, and sales related to acquisitions are excluded until such acquisitions have been owned for 12 months. Comparable sales are also referred to as "same-store" sales by others within the retail industry. The method of calculating comparable sales varies across the retail industry. As a result, our calculation of comparable sales is not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
In discussing our operating results, the term currency exchange rates refers to the currency exchange rates we use to convert the operating results for countries where the functional currency is not the U.S. dollar into U.S. dollars. We calculate the effect of changes in currency exchange rates as the difference between current period activity translated using the current period’s currency exchange rates and the comparable prior year period’s currency exchange rates. Additionally, no currency exchange rate fluctuations are calculated for non-USD acquisitions until owned for 12 months. Throughout our discussion, we refer to the results of this calculation as the impact of currency exchange rate fluctuations. Volatility in currency exchange rates may impact the results, including net sales and operating income, of the Company and the Walmart International segment in the future.
Our business is seasonal to a certain extent due to calendar events and national and religious holidays, as well as weather patterns. Generally, our highest sales volume and operating income have occurred in the fiscal quarter ending January 31; however, the COVID-19 pandemic may have an impact on consumer behaviors that could result in temporary changes in the seasonal fluctuations of our business.
We have taken certain strategic actions to strengthen our Walmart International portfolio for the long-term, including the following highlights over the last three years:
•Acquisition of 81 percent of the outstanding shares, or 77 percent of the diluted shares, of Flipkart Private Limited ("Flipkart") in August 2018. Refer to Note 12 for additional information on the transaction.
•Divestiture of 80 percent of Walmart Brazil in August 2018, for which we recorded a pre-tax loss of $4.8 billion in fiscal 2019. Refer to Note 12 for additional information on the transaction.
•Divestiture of banking operations in Walmart Chile and Walmart Canada in December 2018 and April 2019, respectively.
•In October 2020, we agreed to sell Asda for net consideration of $9.4 billion and recognized an estimated non-cash loss in fiscal 2021 of $5.7 billion, after tax, which includes the loss associated with the expected derecognition of the Asda pension plan. In February 2021, we completed the sale of Asda. Refer to Note 11 and Note 12.
•In November 2020, we completed the sale of Walmart Argentina and recorded a non-cash loss of $1.0 billion, after-tax, primarily due to cumulative foreign currency translation losses. Refer to Note 12.
•In November 2020, we agreed to sell a majority stake in Seiyu for net consideration of approximately $1.2 billion and recognized an estimated non-cash loss of $1.9 billion, after-tax, in fiscal 2021. In March 2021, we completed the sale of Seiyu. Refer to Note 12.
We operate in the highly competitive omni-channel retail industry in all of the markets we serve. We face strong sales competition from other discount, department, drug, dollar, variety and specialty stores, warehouse clubs and supermarkets, as well as eCommerce businesses. Many of these competitors are national, regional or international chains or have a national or international omni-channel or eCommerce presence. We compete with a number of companies for attracting and retaining quality associates. We, along with other retail companies, are influenced by a number of factors including, but not limited to: catastrophic events, weather, global health epidemics including the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, competitive pressures, consumer disposable income, consumer debt levels and buying patterns, consumer credit availability, cost of goods, currency exchange rate fluctuations, customer preferences, deflation, inflation, fuel and energy prices, general economic conditions, insurance costs, interest rates, labor costs, tax rates, the imposition of tariffs, cybersecurity attacks and unemployment. Further information on the factors that can affect our operating results and on certain risks to our Company and an investment in its securities can be found herein under "Item 1A. Risk Factors."
COVID-19 Updates
Throughout fiscal 2021, we have operated with a clear set of priorities to guide our decision making through the COVID-19 pandemic. These priorities are:
•Supporting our associates on the front lines in terms of their physical safety, financial health and emotional well-being. We are providing extra pay and benefits, including special cash bonuses to associates and the introduction of a COVID-19 Emergency Leave Policy in the U.S.
•Serving our customers as safely as possible and keeping our supply chain operating. We reduced our store operating hours at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and have expanded store hours slightly toward the end of the year.
•Helping others which includes waiving or discounting rent for in-store tenants in April and May 2020 as well as hiring more than 500,000 new associates.
•Managing the business well both operationally and financially and driving our long-term strategy. We are maintaining our everyday low-price discipline while investing in our omni-channel offering which continues to resonate with customers around the world who are increasingly seeking convenience.
While we incurred incremental costs of $4.0 billion during fiscal 2021 associated with operating during a global health crisis, the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in overall net sales growth during fiscal 2021 with strong comparable sales in the U.S. and the majority of our international markets. Sales trends were positively affected by eCommerce growth acceleration and we also saw customers consolidate shopping trips and purchase larger baskets. For a detailed discussion on results of operations by reportable segment, refer to "Results of Operations" below.
We expect continued uncertainty in our business and the global economy due to the duration and intensity of the COVID-19 pandemic; the duration and extent of economic stimulus; timing and effectiveness of global vaccines; and volatility in employment trends and consumer confidence which may impact our results.
Company Performance Metrics
We are committed to helping customers save money and live better through everyday low prices, supported by everyday low costs. At times, we adjust our business strategies to maintain and strengthen our competitive positions in the countries in which we operate. We define our financial framework as:
•strong, efficient growth;
•consistent operating discipline; and
•strategic capital allocation.
As we execute on this financial framework, we believe our returns on capital will improve over time.
Strong, Efficient Growth
Our objective of prioritizing strong, efficient growth means we will focus on the most productive growth opportunities, increasing comparable store and club sales, accelerating eCommerce sales growth and expanding omni-channel initiatives while slowing the rate of growth of new stores and clubs. At times, we make strategic investments which are focused on the long-term growth of the Company.
Comparable sales is a metric that indicates the performance of our existing stores and clubs by measuring the change in sales for such stores and clubs, including eCommerce sales, for a particular period over the corresponding period in the previous year. The retail industry generally reports comparable sales using the retail calendar (also known as the 4-5-4 calendar). To be consistent with the retail industry, we provide comparable sales using the retail calendar in our quarterly earnings releases. However, when we discuss our comparable sales below, we are referring to our calendar comparable sales calculated using our fiscal calendar, which may result in differences when compared to comparable sales using the retail calendar.
Calendar comparable sales, including the impact of fuel, for fiscal 2021 and 2020, were as follows:
Comparable sales in the U.S., including fuel, increased 8.7% and 2.7% in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, when compared to the previous fiscal year. Walmart U.S. comparable sales increased 8.7% and 2.9% in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. For fiscal 2021, comparable sales growth was driven by growth in average ticket primarily resulting from increased demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by a decline in transactions as customers consolidated shopping trips. For fiscal 2020, comparable sales growth was driven by growth in average ticket and transactions. Walmart U.S. eCommerce sales positively contributed approximately 5.4% and 2.1% to comparable sales for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, as we continue to focus on a seamless omni-channel experience for our customers.
Sam's Club comparable sales increased 8.7% and 1.6% in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. For fiscal 2021, Sam's Club comparable sales benefited from growth in transactions and average ticket resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by both our decision to remove tobacco from certain club locations and by lower fuel sales. Sam's Club comparable sales for fiscal 2020 benefited from growth in transactions and higher fuel sales, which were partially offset by lower average ticket due to our decision to remove tobacco from certain club locations. Sam's Club eCommerce sales positively contributed approximately 2.2% and 1.8% to comparable sales for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Consistent Operating Discipline
We operate with discipline by managing expenses, optimizing the efficiency of how we work and creating an environment in which we have sustainable lowest cost to serve. We invest in technology and process improvements to increase productivity, manage inventory and reduce costs. We measure operating discipline through expense leverage, which we define as net sales growing at a faster rate than operating, selling, general and administrative ("operating") expenses.
For fiscal 2021, operating expenses as a percentage of net sales was flat when compared to the previous fiscal year. Operating expenses as a percentage of net sales benefited from strong growth in comparable sales and lapping the $0.9 billion business restructuring charges from the prior year described below. These benefits were offset by $4.0 billion of incremental costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic and a $0.4 billion business restructuring charge in the Walmart U.S. segment recorded in the second quarter of fiscal 2021.
For fiscal 2020, operating expenses as a percentage of net sales decreased 8 basis points compared to the previous fiscal year due to our focus on expense management combined with our growth in comparable store sales. These improvements were partially offset by $0.9 billion in business restructuring charges consisting primarily of non-cash impairment charges for certain trade names, acquired developed technology, and other business restructuring charges due to strategic decisions that resulted in the write down of certain assets in the Walmart U.S. and Walmart International segments.
Strategic Capital Allocation
Our strategy includes improving our customer-facing initiatives in stores and clubs and creating a seamless omni-channel experience for our customers. As such, we are allocating more capital to eCommerce, technology, supply chain, and store remodels and less to new store and club openings. Total fiscal 2021 capital expenditures decreased slightly compared to the prior year. The following table provides additional detail:
Returns
As we execute our financial framework, we believe our return on capital will improve over time. We measure return on capital with our return on assets, return on investment and free cash flow metrics. We also provide returns in the form of share repurchases and dividends, which are discussed in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section.
Return on Assets and Return on Investment
We include Return on Assets ("ROA"), the most directly comparable measure based on our financial statements presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S. ("GAAP"), and Return on Investment ("ROI") as metrics to assess returns on assets. While ROI is considered a non-GAAP financial measure, management believes ROI is a meaningful metric to share with investors because it helps investors assess how effectively Walmart is deploying its assets. Trends in ROI can fluctuate over time as management balances long-term strategic initiatives with possible short-term impacts. ROA was 5.6% and 6.7% for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in ROA was primarily due to the losses on certain international operations held for sale or sold, partially offset by the fair value change in our equity investments as well as the increase in operating income. ROI was 14.0% and 13.4% for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in ROI was primarily due to the increase in operating income.
We define ROI as adjusted operating income (operating income plus interest income, depreciation and amortization, and rent expense) for the trailing twelve months divided by average invested capital during that period. We consider average invested capital to be the average of our beginning and ending total assets, plus average accumulated depreciation and average amortization, less average accounts payable and average accrued liabilities for that period. For fiscal 2020, lease related assets and associated accumulated amortization are included in the denominator at their carrying amount as of that balance sheet date, rather than averaged, because they are not directly comparable to the prior year calculation which included rent for the trailing 12 months multiplied by a factor of 8. A two-point average was used for leased assets beginning in fiscal 2021, after one full year from the date of adoption of ASU 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) ("ASU 2016-02").
Our calculation of ROI is considered a non-GAAP financial measure because we calculate ROI using financial measures that exclude and include amounts that are included and excluded in the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure. For example, we exclude the impact of depreciation and amortization from our reported operating income in calculating the numerator of our calculation of ROI. As mentioned above, we consider ROA to be the financial measure computed in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles most directly comparable to our calculation of ROI. ROI differs from ROA (which is consolidated net income for the period divided by average total assets for the period) because ROI: adjusts operating income to exclude certain expense items and adds interest income; adjusts total assets for the impact of accumulated depreciation and amortization, accounts payable and accrued liabilities to arrive at total invested capital. Because of the adjustments mentioned above, we believe ROI more accurately measures how we are deploying our key assets and is more meaningful to investors than ROA. Although ROI is a standard financial measure, numerous methods exist for calculating a company's ROI. As a result, the method used by management to calculate our ROI may differ from the methods used by other companies to calculate their ROI.
The calculation of ROA and ROI, along with a reconciliation of ROI to the calculation of ROA, the most comparable GAAP financial measure, is as follows:
(1) The average is based on the addition of the account balance at the end of the current period to the account balance at the end of the corresponding prior period and dividing by 2. Average total assets as used in ROA includes the average impact of the adoption of ASU 2016-02.
(2) For fiscal 2020, as a result of adopting ASU 2016-02, average total assets is based on the average of total assets without leased assets, net plus leased assets, net as of January 31, 2020. Average accumulated depreciation and amortization is based on the average of accumulated depreciation and amortization, without leased assets plus accumulated amortization on leased assets as of January 31, 2020.
NP = Not provided.
Free Cash Flow
Free cash flow is considered a non-GAAP financial measure. Management believes, however, that free cash flow, which measures our ability to generate additional cash from our business operations, is an important financial measure for use in evaluating the Company’s financial performance. Free cash flow should be considered in addition to, rather than as a substitute for, consolidated net income as a measure of our performance and net cash provided by operating activities as a measure of our liquidity. See "Liquidity and Capital Resources" for discussions of GAAP metrics including net cash provided by operating activities, net cash used in investing activities and net cash used in financing activities.
We define free cash flow as net cash provided by operating activities in a period minus payments for property and equipment made in that period. We had net cash provided by operating activities of $36.1 billion, $25.3 billion and $27.8 billion for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We generated free cash flow of $25.8 billion, $14.6 billion and $17.4 billion for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net cash provided by operating activities for fiscal 2021 increased when compared to fiscal 2020 primarily due to the impact of the global health crisis which accelerated inventory sell-through, as well as the timing and payment of inventory purchases, incremental COVID-19 related expenses and certain benefit payments. Free cash flow for fiscal 2021 increased when compared to fiscal 2020 due to the same reasons as the increase in net cash provided by operating activities, as well as $0.4 billion in decreased capital expenditures. Net cash provided by operating activities for fiscal 2020 declined when compared to fiscal 2019 was primarily due to the contribution to the Asda pension plan in anticipation of its
future settlement, the inclusion of a full year of Flipkart operations, and the timing of vendor payments. Free cash flow for fiscal 2020 declined when compared to fiscal 2019 due to the same reasons as the decline in net cash provided by operating activities, as well as $0.4 billion in increased capital expenditures.
Walmart's definition of free cash flow is limited in that it does not represent residual cash flows available for discretionary expenditures due to the fact that the measure does not deduct the payments required for debt service and other contractual obligations or payments made for business acquisitions. Therefore, we believe it is important to view free cash flow as a measure that provides supplemental information to our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
Although other companies report their free cash flow, numerous methods may exist for calculating a company's free cash flow. As a result, the method used by management to calculate our free cash flow may differ from the methods used by other companies to calculate their free cash flow.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of free cash flow, a non-GAAP financial measure, to net cash provided by operating activities, which we believe to be the GAAP financial measure most directly comparable to free cash flow, as well as information regarding net cash used in investing activities and net cash used in financing activities.
(1) "Net cash used in investing activities" includes payments for property and equipment, which is also included in our computation of free cash flow.
Results of Operations
Consolidated Results of Operations
(1) Unit counts and associated retail square feet are presented for stores and clubs generally open as of period end, and includes stores associated with operations classified as held for sale as of January 31, 2021. Permanently closed locations are not included.
Our total revenues, which includes net sales and membership and other income, increased $35.2 billion or 6.7% and $9.6 billion or 1.9% for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, when compared to the previous fiscal year. These increases in revenues were due to increases in net sales, which increased $35.3 billion or 6.8% and $9.6 billion or 1.9% for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, when compared to the previous fiscal year. For fiscal 2021, the increase was primarily due to strong positive comparable sales for the Walmart U.S. and Sam's Club segments as well as positive comparable sales in the majority of our international markets resulting from increased demand stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic. Overall net sales growth was strong despite certain operating limitations in several international markets in the second quarter of fiscal 2021 due to government regulations and precautionary measures taken as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The net sales increase was partially offset by negative fluctuations in currency exchange rates of $5.0 billion. For fiscal 2020, net sales were positively impacted by overall positive comparable sales for Walmart U.S. and Sam's Club segments, along with the addition of net sales from Flipkart, which we acquired in August 2018, and positive comparable sales in the majority of our international markets. These increases were partially offset by $4.1 billion of negative impact from fluctuations in currency exchange rates in fiscal 2020 and our sale of the majority stake in Walmart Brazil in August 2018.
Our gross profit rate increased 20 basis points and decreased 40 basis points for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, when compared to the previous fiscal year. For fiscal 2021, the increase was primarily due to strategic sourcing initiatives, strong sales in higher margin categories, and fewer markdowns. This was partially offset in the Walmart U.S. segment by carryover of prior year price investment as well as the temporary closure of our Auto Care Centers and Vision Centers in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic. For fiscal 2020, the decrease was primarily due to price investment in the Walmart U.S. segment and the addition of Flipkart in the Walmart International segment, partially offset by favorable merchandise mix including strength in private brands and less pressure from transportation costs in the Walmart U.S. segment.
For fiscal 2021, operating expenses as a percentage of net sales was flat when compared to the previous fiscal year. Operating expenses as a percentage of net sales benefited from strong growth in comparable sales and lapping the $0.9 billion business restructuring charges from the prior year described below. These benefits were offset by $4.0 billion of incremental costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic and a $0.4 billion business restructuring charge in the Walmart U.S. segment recorded in the second quarter of fiscal 2021.
For fiscal 2020, operating expenses as a percentage of net sales decreased 8 basis points, when compared to the previous fiscal year, due to our focus on expense management combined with our growth in comparable store sales. These improvements were partially offset by $0.9 billion in business restructuring charges consisting primarily of non-cash impairment charges for certain trade names, acquired developed technology, and other business restructuring charges due to strategic decisions that resulted in the write down of certain assets in the Walmart U.S. and Walmart International segments.
Other gains and losses consisted of net gains of $0.2 billion and $2.0 billion for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. The gain in fiscal 2021 primarily reflects $8.7 billion in net gains associated with the fair value changes of our equity investments, partially offset by the $8.3 billion pre-tax loss related to the divestiture of certain international operations classified as held for sale or sold in fiscal 2021. The gain in fiscal 2020 was primarily the result of a $1.9 billion increase in the market value of our investment in JD.com.
Our effective income tax rate was 33.3% for fiscal 2021, 24.4% for fiscal 2020, and 37.4% for fiscal 2019. The increase in our effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 is primarily due to the loss related to the divestiture of certain international operations classified as held for or sold in fiscal 2021, which provided minimal realizable tax benefit. The decrease in our effective tax rate for fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019 was primarily due to the fiscal 2019 loss on sale of a majority stake in Walmart Brazil, which increased the previous comparative fiscal year's effective tax rate, as it provided minimal realizable tax benefit. Our effective income tax rate may also fluctuate as a result of various factors, including changes in our assessment of certain tax contingencies, valuation allowances, changes in tax law, outcomes of administrative audits, the impact of discrete items and the mix and size of earnings among our U.S. operations and international operations, which are subject to statutory rates that, beginning in fiscal 2019, are generally higher than the U.S. statutory rate. The reconciliation from the U.S. statutory rate to the effective income tax rates for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019 is presented in Note 9.
As a result of the factors discussed above, we reported $13.7 billion and $15.2 billion of consolidated net income for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, which represents a decrease of $1.5 billion and an increase of $8.0 billion for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, when compared to the previous fiscal year. Diluted net income per common share attributable to Walmart ("EPS") was $4.75, $5.19 and $2.26 for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Walmart U.S. Segment
Net sales for the Walmart U.S. segment increased $29.0 billion or 8.5% and $9.3 billion or 2.8% for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, when compared to the previous fiscal year. The increases in net sales were primarily due to increases in comparable sales of 8.7% and 2.9% for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. Comparable sales in fiscal 2021 were driven by growth in average ticket primarily resulting from meeting the increased demand due to economic conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic while transactions decreased as customers consolidated shopping trips. Comparable sales in fiscal 2020 were driven by both average ticket and transaction growth for fiscal 2020. Walmart U.S. eCommerce sales positively contributed approximately 5.4% and 2.1% to comparable sales for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, as we continue to focus on a seamless omni-channel experience for our customers.
Gross profit rate was flat and decreased 14 basis points for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, when compared to the previous fiscal year. While fiscal 2021 gross profit rate was flat, it benefited from strategic sourcing initiatives and fewer markdowns, offset by a change in merchandise mix, the carryover effect of prior year price investment and the temporary closure of our Auto Care and Vision Centers in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. For fiscal 2020, the decrease was primarily the result of continued price investments which were partially offset by better merchandise mix, including strength in private brands, and less pressure from transportation costs.
Operating expenses as a percentage of segment net sales decreased 15 and 4 basis points for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, when compared to the previous fiscal year. We leveraged operating expenses in fiscal 2021 primarily as a result of strong sales, which were partially offset by $3.2 billion of incremental costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic including special bonuses, expanded sick and emergency leave pay, costs associated with outfitting our stores and associates with masks, gloves and sanitizer, and expanded cleaning practices. Fiscal 2021 operating expenses as a percentage of net sales was also slightly aided by lapping the $0.5 billion business restructuring charges from the prior year described below, offset by a $0.4 billion business restructuring charge recorded in the second quarter of fiscal 2021 resulting from changes to Walmart U.S. support teams to better support its omni-channel strategy. The decrease in fiscal 2020 was primarily due to strong sales and productivity improvements which were mostly offset by business restructuring charges of $0.5 billion consisting primarily of non-cash impairment charges for certain trade names, acquired developed technology and other business restructuring charges due to decisions that resulted in the write down of certain eCommerce assets.
As a result of the factors discussed above, segment operating income increased $1.7 billion and decreased $6 million for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, when compared to the previous fiscal year.
Walmart International Segment
Net sales for the Walmart International segment increased $1.2 billion or 1.0% and decreased $0.7 billion or 0.6% for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, when compared to the previous fiscal year. For fiscal 2021, the increase was primarily due to positive comparable sales growth in the majority of our markets driven by changes in consumer behavior in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by negative fluctuations in currency exchange rates of $5.0 billion. The pandemic led to significant economic pressures and channel and mix shifts due to changes in consumer behavior, including accelerated growth in eCommerce in several markets. While several of our markets experienced extensive store and operational closures in the second quarter as a result of government mandates, most closed stores and warehouses had resumed operations by the third quarter.
For fiscal 2020, the decrease was primarily due to negative fluctuations in currency exchange rates of $4.1 billion as well as a reduction in sales due to our sale of the majority stake in Walmart Brazil in August 2018, offset by a full year of net sales from Flipkart and positive comparable sales growth in the majority of our markets.
Gross profit rate increased 50 basis points and decreased 136 basis points for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, when compared to the previous fiscal year. For fiscal 2021, the increase was primarily due to Flipkart's improved margin mix and reduced fuel sales in the U.K. For fiscal 2020, the decrease was primarily due to Flipkart, as well as a change in merchandise mix.
Operating expenses as a percentage of segment net sales increased 14 basis points and decreased 13 basis points for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, when compared to the previous fiscal year. The increase in operating expenses as a percentage of segment net sales for fiscal 2021 was primarily due to $0.5 billion of incremental costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by positive comparable sales in the majority of our markets and lapping the impairment charges in the prior year discussed below. Fiscal 2020 decreased primarily due to positive comparable sales in the majority of our markets as well as cost discipline across multiple markets, partially offset by $0.4 billion in impairment charges primarily due to the write-off of the carrying value of one of Flipkart's two fashion trade names, Jabong.com, as a result of a strategic decision to focus our efforts on a single fashion platform in order to simplify the business and customer proposition.
As a result of the factors discussed above, segment operating income increased $0.3 billion and decreased $1.5 billion for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, when compared to the previous fiscal year.
Sam's Club Segment
(1) We believe the "Excluding Fuel" information is useful to investors because it permits investors to understand the effect of the Sam's Club segment's fuel sales on its results of operations, which are impacted by the volatility of fuel prices. Volatility in fuel prices may continue to impact the operating results of the Sam's Club segment in the future. Management uses such information to better measure underlying operating results in the segment.
Net sales for the Sam's Club segment increased $5.1 billion or 8.7% and $1.0 billion or 1.6% for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, when compared to the previous fiscal year. Our 8.7% growth in comparable sales for fiscal 2021 benefited from growth in transactions and average ticket resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by both our decision to remove tobacco from certain club locations and by lower fuel sales. Sam's Club eCommerce sales positively contributed approximately 2.2% to comparable sales. For fiscal 2020, the increase was primarily due to comparable sales, including fuel, of 1.6%. Comparable sales benefited from growth in transactions and higher fuel sales, which were partially offset by lower ticket due to our decision to remove tobacco from certain club locations. Sam's Club eCommerce sales positively contributed approximately 1.8% to comparable sales.
Gross profit rate increased 65 basis points and decreased 11 basis points for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, when compared to the previous fiscal year. The increase in gross profit rate was due to favorable sales mix, including lower fuel and tobacco sales, and improvement in inventory losses which was partially offset by price investment and higher eCommerce fulfillment costs. For fiscal 2020, gross profit rate decreased due to price investment and higher eCommerce fulfillment costs, partially offset by reduced tobacco sales.
Membership and other income increased 6.8% and 4.7% for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, when compared to the previous fiscal year. For fiscal 2021 and 2020, the increases were primarily due to growth in total members, which benefited from higher overall renewal rates, and higher Plus Member penetration. Fiscal 2021 growth was also positively affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Fiscal 2020 was also benefited by gains on property sales and other income.
Operating expenses as a percentage of segment net sales increased 42 and decreased 19 basis points for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, when compared to the previous fiscal year. Despite increased net sales from the strong demand resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, fiscal 2021 operating expenses as a percentage of net sales increased primarily due to $0.3 billion of incremental costs related to the pandemic, which included additional costs such as special bonuses, expanded cleaning practices and security, expanded sick and emergency leave pay, and outfitting our associates with masks and gloves. Additionally, the increase in operating expense as a percentage of segment net sales was affected by reduced tobacco and fuel sales. For fiscal 2020, the decrease was primarily the result of lower labor-related costs and a charge of approximately $50 million related to lease exit costs in the prior comparable period. These benefits were partially offset by a reduction in sales of tobacco and a higher level of technology investment.
As a result of the factors discussed above, segment operating income increased $0.3 billion and $0.1 billion for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, when compared to the previous fiscal year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
The strength and stability of our operations have historically supplied us with a significant source of liquidity. Our cash flows provided by operating activities, supplemented with our long-term debt and short-term borrowings, have been sufficient to fund our operations while allowing us to invest in activities that support the long-term growth of our operations. Generally, some or all of the remaining available cash flow has been used to fund dividends on our common stock and share repurchases. We believe our sources of liquidity will continue to be adequate to fund operations, finance our global investment and expansion activities, pay dividends and fund our share repurchases for the foreseeable future.
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $36.1 billion, $25.3 billion and $27.8 billion for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net cash provided by operating activities for fiscal 2021 increased when compared to the previous fiscal year primarily due to the impact of the global health crisis which accelerated inventory sell-through, as well as the timing and payment of inventory purchases, incremental COVID-19 related expenses and certain benefit payments. The decrease in net cash provided by operating activities for fiscal 2020, when compared to the previous fiscal year, was primarily due to the contribution to our Asda pension plan in anticipation of its future settlement, the inclusion of a full year of Flipkart operations, and the timing of vendor payments.
Cash Equivalents and Working Capital Deficit
Cash and cash equivalents were $17.7 billion and $9.5 billion as of January 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We maintained more cash at January 31, 2021 compared to January 31, 2020 in order to provide us with enhanced financial flexibility due to the uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our working capital deficit, defined as total current assets less total current liabilities, was $2.6 billion and $16.0 billion as of January 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in working capital deficit as compared to the previous fiscal year is primarily driven by the increase in cash and cash equivalents as well as the increase in current assets and current liabilities due to the classification of the Company's operations in the U.K. and Japan as held for sale. We generally operate with a working capital deficit due to our efficient use of cash in funding operations, consistent access to the capital markets and returns provided to our shareholders in the form of payments of cash dividends and share repurchases.
We use intercompany financing arrangements in an effort to ensure cash can be made available in the country in which it is needed with the minimum cost possible. Additionally, from time-to-time, we repatriate earnings and related cash from jurisdictions outside of the U.S. Historically, U.S. taxes were due upon repatriation of foreign earnings. Due to the enactment of U.S. tax reform, repatriations of foreign earnings will generally be free of U.S. federal tax, but may incur other taxes such as withholding or state taxes. While we are awaiting anticipated technical guidance from the Internal Revenue Service ("IRS") and the U.S. Treasury Department, we do not expect current local laws, other existing limitations or potential taxes on anticipated future repatriations of cash amounts held outside the U.S. to have a material effect on our overall liquidity, financial position or results of operations.
As of January 31, 2021 and 2020, cash and cash equivalents of $2.8 billion and $2.3 billion, respectively, may not be freely transferable to the U.S. due to local laws or other restrictions. Of the $2.8 billion as of January 31, 2021, approximately $1.0 billion can only be accessed through dividends or intercompany financing arrangements subject to approval of the Flipkart minority shareholders; however, this cash is expected to be utilized to fund the operations of Flipkart.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $10.1 billion, $9.1 billion and $24.0 billion for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and generally consisted of payments for business acquisitions and to expand our eCommerce capabilities, invest in other technologies and supply chain, remodel existing stores and clubs and add new stores and clubs. Net cash used in investing activities increased $0.9 billion for fiscal 2021 when compared to the previous fiscal year primarily as a result of lapping the net proceeds received from the sale of our banking operations in Walmart Canada and the change in other investing activities, partially offset by decreased capital expenditures. Net cash used in investing activities decreased $14.9 billion for fiscal 2020 when compared to the previous fiscal year, primarily as a result of the $13.8 billion payment for the acquisition of Flipkart, net of cash acquired, as well as payments for other, smaller acquisitions in fiscal 2019.
Additionally, refer to the "Strategic Capital Allocation" section in our Company Performance Metrics for capital expenditure detail for fiscal 2021 and 2020.
Growth Activities
For the fiscal year ending January 31, 2022 ("fiscal 2022"), we project capital expenditures will be approximately $14 billion, with a focus on supply chain, automation, customer-facing initiatives and technology.
Net Cash Used in Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities generally consists of transactions related to our short-term and long-term debt, financing obligations, dividends paid and the repurchase of Company stock. Transactions with noncontrolling interest shareholders are also classified as cash flows from financing activities. Fiscal 2021 net cash used in financing activities increased $1.8 billion when compared to the same period in the previous fiscal year. The increase is primarily due to the timing of issuances and repayments of long-term debt, partially offset by both a reduction in cash used to pay down short-term borrowings as well as share repurchases as we manage our financial position during the current economic environment. Fiscal 2020 net cash used in financing activities increased $11.8 billion for fiscal 2020 when compared to the same period in the previous fiscal year. The increase was primarily due to the $15.9 billion of net proceeds received in fiscal 2019 from the issuance of long-term debt to fund a portion of the purchase price for Flipkart partially offset by $5.5 billion of additional long-term debt in the fiscal 2020 to fund general business operations.
Short-term Borrowings
We generally utilize the liquidity provided by short-term borrowings to provide funding for our operations, dividend payments, share repurchases, capital expenditures and other cash requirements. The following table includes additional information related to the Company's short-term borrowings for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019:
We also have $15.0 billion of various undrawn committed lines of credit in the U.S. as of January 31, 2021 that provide additional liquidity, if needed. Additionally, we maintain access to various credit facilities outside of the U.S. to further support our Walmart International segment operations, as needed.
Long-term Debt
The following table provides the changes in our long-term debt for fiscal 2021:
Dividends
Our total dividend payments were $6.1 billion, $6.0 billion and $6.1 billion for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Board of Directors approved, effective February 18, 2021, the fiscal 2022 annual dividend of $2.20 per share, an increase over the fiscal 2021 annual dividend of $2.16 per share. For fiscal 2022, the annual dividend will be paid in four quarterly installments of $0.55 per share, according to the following record and payable dates:
Company Share Repurchase Program
From time to time, the Company repurchases shares of its common stock under share repurchase programs authorized by the Company's Board of Directors. All repurchases made during fiscal 2021 were made under the $20 billion share repurchase program approved in October 2017, of which authorization for $3.0 billion of share repurchases remained as of January 31, 2021. On February 18, 2021, the Board of Directors approved a new $20.0 billion share repurchase program which, beginning February 22, 2021, replaced the previous share repurchase program. Any repurchased shares are constructively retired and returned to an unissued status.
We regularly review share repurchase activity and consider several factors in determining when to execute share repurchases, including, among other things, current cash needs, capacity for leverage, cost of borrowings, our results of operations and the market price of our common stock. We anticipate that a majority of the ongoing share repurchase program will be funded through the Company's free cash flow. The following table provides, on a settlement date basis, the number of shares repurchased, average price paid per share and total amount paid for share repurchases for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Capital Resources
We believe cash flows from operations, our current cash position and access to capital markets will continue to be sufficient to meet our anticipated operating cash needs, which include funding seasonal buildups in merchandise inventories and funding our capital expenditures, acquisitions, dividend payments and share repurchases.
We have strong commercial paper and long-term debt ratings that have enabled and should continue to enable us to refinance our debt as it becomes due at favorable rates in capital markets. As of January 31, 2021, the ratings assigned to our commercial paper and rated series of our outstanding long-term debt were as follows:
Credit rating agencies review their ratings periodically and, therefore, the credit ratings assigned to us by each agency may be subject to revision at any time. Accordingly, we are not able to predict whether our current credit ratings will remain consistent over time. Factors that could affect our credit ratings include changes in our operating performance, the general economic environment, conditions in the retail industry, our financial position, including our total debt and capitalization, and changes in our business strategy. Any downgrade of our credit ratings by a credit rating agency could increase our future borrowing costs or impair our ability to access capital and credit markets on terms commercially acceptable to us. In addition, any downgrade of our current short-term credit ratings could impair our ability to access the commercial paper markets with the same flexibility that we have experienced historically, potentially requiring us to rely more heavily on more expensive types of debt financing. The credit rating agency ratings are not recommendations to buy, sell or hold our commercial paper or debt securities. Each rating may be subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization and should be evaluated independently of any other rating. Moreover, each credit rating is specific to the security to which it applies.
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth certain information concerning our obligations to make contractual future payments, such as debt and lease agreements, and certain contingent commitments as of January 31, 2021:
(1) Includes deferred loan costs, discounts, fair value hedges, foreign-held debt and secured debt.
(2) Represents our contractual obligations to make future payments under non-cancelable operating leases and finance lease agreements, both of which are recorded on the balance sheet at their present value. Refer to Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding operating and finance leases.
(3) Finance lease obligations and other includes contractual obligations under other financing obligations of $1.3 billion.
(4) Includes obligations related to our operations in Japan and the United Kingdom which are classified as held for sale as of January 31, 2021.
Under the terms of the sale of the majority stake of Walmart Brazil, we agreed to indemnify the purchaser for certain pre-closing tax and legal contingencies and other matters for up to R$2.3 billion, adjusted for interest based on the Brazilian interbank deposit rate. As of January 31, 2021, the indemnification liability was $0.6 billion and recorded in deferred income taxes and other in the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Estimated interest payments are based on our principal amounts and expected maturities of all debt outstanding as of January 31, 2021, and assumes interest rates remain at current levels for our variable rate debt. Additionally, we have $15.0 billion of various undrawn committed lines of credit in the U.S. as of January 31, 2021.
Purchase obligations include legally binding contracts, such as firm commitments for inventory and utility purchases, as well as commitments to make capital expenditures, software acquisition and license commitments and legally binding service contracts. For the purposes of the above table, contractual obligations for the purchase of goods or services are defined as agreements that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including: fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. Contracts that specify the Company will purchase all or a portion of its requirements of a specific product or service from a supplier, but do not include a fixed or minimum quantity, are excluded from the table above. Accordingly, purchase orders for inventory are not included in the table above as purchase orders represent authorizations to purchase rather than binding agreements. Our purchase orders are based on our current inventory needs and are fulfilled by our suppliers within short time periods. We also enter into contracts for outsourced services; however, the obligations under these contracts are not significant and the contracts generally contain clauses allowing for cancellation without significant penalty.
The expected timing for payment discussed above is estimated based on current information. Timing of payments and actual amounts paid may be different depending on the timing of receipt of goods or services or changes to agreed-upon amounts for some obligations.
In addition to the amounts shown in the table above, $1.7 billion of net unrecognized tax benefits are considered uncertain tax positions and have been recorded as liabilities. The timing of the payment, if any, associated with these liabilities is uncertain. Refer to Note 9 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of unrecognized tax benefits.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of January 31, 2021, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Other Matters
We discuss our "Asda Equal Value Claims" which includes certain existing employment claims against our recently divested United Kingdom subsidiary, Asda Group Limited, including certain risks arising therefrom, under the sub-caption "Legal Proceedings" in Note 10 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. We also discuss the Opioids Litigation including certain risks arising therefrom, in "Item 1A. Risk Factors" under the caption "Legal, Tax, Regulatory, Compliance, Reputational and Other Risks" and under the sub-caption "Legal Proceedings" in Note 10 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. We also discuss various legal proceedings related to the Asda Equal Value Claims and Opioids Litigation in "Item 3. Legal Proceedings" herein under the caption "Supplemental Information." The foregoing matters and other matters described elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K represent contingencies of the Company that may or may not result in the Company incurring a material liability upon their final resolution.
Summary of Critical Accounting Estimates
Management strives to report our financial results in a clear and understandable manner, although in some cases accounting and disclosure rules are complex and require us to use technical terminology. In preparing the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements, we follow accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. These principles require us to make certain estimates and apply judgments that affect our financial position and results of operations as reflected in our financial statements. These judgments and estimates are based on past events and expectations of future outcomes. Actual results may differ from our estimates.
Management continually reviews our accounting policies, how they are applied and how they are reported and disclosed in our financial statements. Following is a summary of our critical accounting estimates and how they are applied in preparation of the financial statements.
Inventories
We value inventories at the lower of cost or market as determined primarily by the retail inventory method of accounting, using the last-in, first-out ("LIFO") method for Walmart U.S. segment's inventories. The inventory at the Sam's Club segment is valued using the weighted-average cost LIFO method. When necessary, we record a LIFO provision for the estimated annual effect of inflation, and these estimates are adjusted to actual results determined at year-end. Our LIFO provision is calculated based on inventory levels, markup rates and internally generated retail price indices. As a measure of sensitivity, a 1% increase to our retail price indices would not have resulted in a decrease to the carrying value of inventory. As of January 31, 2021 and 2020, our inventories valued at LIFO approximated those inventories as if they were valued at first-in, first-out ("FIFO").
Impairment of Assets
We evaluate long-lived assets for indicators of impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate their carrying amounts may not be recoverable. Management's judgments regarding the existence of impairment indicators are based on market conditions and financial performance. The evaluation of long-lived assets is performed at the lowest level of identifiable cash flows, which is generally at the individual store level. The variability of these factors depends on a number of conditions, including uncertainty about future events and changes in demographics. Thus, our accounting estimates may change from period to period. These factors could cause management to conclude that indicators of impairment exist and require impairment tests be performed, which could result in management determining the value of long-lived assets is impaired, resulting in a write-down of the related long-lived assets. Impairment charges on assets held and used were immaterial in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019. As a measure of sensitivity, fiscal 2021 impairment would not change materially with a 10% decrease in the undiscounted cash flows for the stores or clubs with indicators of impairment.
In fiscal 2021, the Company's operations in Argentina, Japan and the United Kingdom met the held for sale criteria. As a result, the individual disposal groups were measured at fair value, less costs to sell, which resulted in impairment charges that were included in the total estimated pre-tax loss of $8.3 billion recorded in fiscal 2021. Refer to Note 12. Fiscal 2019 included a pre-tax loss of $4.8 billion related to the sale of the majority stake in Walmart Brazil, which included full impairment of all related assets.
Business Combinations, Goodwill, and Acquired Intangible Assets
We account for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires that once control is obtained, all the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, including amounts attributable to noncontrolling interests, are recorded at their respective fair values at the date of acquisition. The determination of fair values of identifiable assets and liabilities requires estimates and the use of valuation techniques when market value is not readily available. For intangible assets acquired in a business combination, we typically use the income method. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, the amount and timing of future cash flows, growth rates, discount rates and useful lives. The excess of the purchase price over fair values of identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill.
Goodwill is assigned to the reporting unit which consolidates the acquisition. Components within the same reportable segment are aggregated and deemed a single reporting unit if the components have similar economic characteristics. As of January 31, 2021, our reporting units consisted of Walmart U.S., Walmart International and Sam's Club. Goodwill and other indefinite-lived acquired intangible assets are not amortized, but are evaluated for impairment annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the value of a certain asset may be impaired. Generally, this evaluation begins with a qualitative assessment to determine whether a quantitative impairment test is necessary. If we determine, after performing an assessment based on the qualitative factors, that the fair value of the reporting unit is more likely than not less than the carrying amount, or that a fair value of the reporting unit substantially in excess of the carrying amount cannot be assured, then a quantitative impairment test would be performed. The quantitative test for impairment requires management to make judgments relating to future cash flows, growth rates and economic and market conditions. These evaluations are based on determining the fair value of a reporting unit or asset using a valuation method such as discounted cash flow or a relative, market-based approach. Historically, our reporting units have generated sufficient returns to recover the cost of goodwill, as the fair value significantly exceeded the carrying value. Our indefinite-lived acquired intangible assets have also historically generated sufficient returns to recover their cost. Because of the nature of the factors used in these tests, if different conditions occur in future periods, future operating results could be materially impacted. Due to certain strategic restructuring decisions, we recorded approximately $0.7 billion in impairment in fiscal 2020 related to acquired trade names and acquired developed software.
Contingencies
We are involved in a number of legal proceedings. We record a liability when it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount is reasonably estimable. We also perform an assessment of the materiality of loss contingencies where a loss is either not probable or it is reasonably possible that a loss could be incurred in excess of amounts accrued. If a loss or an additional loss has at least a reasonable possibility of occurring and the impact on the financial statements would be material, we provide disclosure of the loss contingency in the footnotes to our financial statements. We review all contingencies at least quarterly to determine whether the likelihood of loss has changed and to assess whether a reasonable estimate of the loss or the range of the loss can be made. Although we are not able to predict the outcome or reasonably estimate a range of possible losses in certain matters described in Note 10 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, and have not recorded an associated accrual related to these matters, an adverse judgment or negotiated resolution in any of these matters could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Income Taxes
Income taxes have a significant effect on our net earnings. We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Accordingly, the determination of our provision for income taxes requires judgment, the use of estimates in certain cases and the interpretation and application of complex tax laws. Our effective income tax rate is affected by many factors, including changes in our assessment of certain tax contingencies, increases and decreases in valuation allowances, changes in tax law, outcomes of administrative audits, the impact of discrete items and the mix of earnings among our U.S. and international operations where the statutory rates are generally higher than the U.S. statutory rate, and may fluctuate as a result.
Our tax returns are routinely audited and settlements of issues raised in these audits sometimes affect our tax provisions. The benefits of uncertain tax positions are recorded in our financial statements only after determining a more likely than not probability that the uncertain tax positions will withstand challenge, if any, from taxing authorities. When facts and circumstances change, we reassess these probabilities and record any changes in the financial statements as appropriate. We account for uncertain tax positions by determining the minimum recognition threshold that a tax position is required to meet before being recognized in the financial statements. This determination requires the use of judgment in evaluating our tax positions and assessing the timing and amounts of deductible and taxable items.
Deferred tax assets represent amounts available to reduce income taxes payable on taxable income in future years. Such assets arise because of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, as well as from net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets are evaluated for future realization and reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent that a portion is not more likely than not to be realized. Many factors are considered when assessing whether it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized, including recent cumulative earnings, expectations of future taxable income, carryforward periods and other relevant quantitative and qualitative factors. The recoverability of the deferred tax assets is evaluated by assessing the adequacy of future expected taxable income from all sources, including reversal of taxable temporary differences, forecasted operating earnings and available tax planning strategies. This evaluation relies on estimates.
On December 22, 2017, the Tax Act was enacted and contains significant changes to U.S. income tax law. Effective beginning January 2018, the Tax Act reduced the U.S. statutory tax rate from 35% to 21% and created new taxes on foreign-sourced earnings and related-party payments. As discussed in Note 9 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, we completed our accounting for the tax effects of the Tax Act in fiscal 2019. As further guidance is issued by the U.S. Treasury Department, the IRS, and other standard-setting bodies, any resulting changes to our estimates will be treated in accordance with the relevant accounting guidance.