Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial condition and results of operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand the results of operations and financial condition of SolarWindow Technologies, Inc. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with financial statements and the accompanying notes to the financial statements included in this Form 10-K.
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Overview
We are a developer of transparent electricity-generating coatings, and methods for their application to various materials (collectively, “LiquidElectricity™ Coatings”). When applied in ultra-thin layers to rigid glass, and flexible glass and plastic surfaces our LiquidElectricity™ Coatings transform otherwise ordinary surfaces into photovoltaic devices capable of generating electricity from natural sun, artificial light, and low, shaded, or reflected light conditions while maintaining transparency.
We have overcome major technical challenges and achieved many important milestones resulting in an expansion of the potential applications of LiquidElectricity™ Coatings which span multiple industries, including architectural, automotive, agrivoltaic, aerospace, commercial transportation and marine. Our LiquidElectricity™ Coatings are under development with support from commercial contract firms and at the U.S. Department of Energy’s National Renewable Energy Laboratory, through Cooperative Research and Development Agreements.
Research and Related Agreements
We are a party to certain agreements related to the development of our technology.
Stevenson-Wydler Cooperative Research and Development Agreement with the Alliance for Sustainable Energy
On March 18, 2011, we entered into the NREL CRADA with Alliance for Sustainable Energy, the operator of the NREL under its U.S. Department of Energy contract to advance the commercial development of our technology. Under terms of the NREL CRADA, NREL researchers make use of our exclusive intellectual property (“IP”), newly developed IP, and NREL’s background IP in order to work towards specific product development goals, established by the Company. Under the terms of the NREL CRADA, we agreed to reimburse Alliance for Sustainable Energy for filing fees associated with all documented, out-of-pocket costs directly related to patent application preparation and filings, and maintenance of the patent applications.
On March 6, 2013, we entered into Phase II of our NREL CRADA. Under the terms of the agreement, researchers will additionally work towards:
· further improving our technology efficiency and transparency;
· optimizing electrical power (current and voltage) output;
· optimizing the application of the active layer coatings and application processes which make it possible for LiquidElectricity™ Coatings to generate electricity on glass surfaces;
· developing improved electricity-generating coatings by enhancing performance, processing, reliability, and durability;
· optimizing LiquidElectricity™ Coating performance on flexible substrates; and
· developing high speed and large area roll-to-roll (R2R) and sheet-to-sheet (S2S) coating application methods required for commercial-scale building integrated photovoltaic (“BIPV”) products and windows.
On December 28, 2015, we entered into another modification to the NREL CRADA (the “Modification”). Under the Modification, (i) the date of completion was extended to December 2017; and (ii) the Company and the NREL will work jointly towards achieving specific product development goals and objectives for the purpose of preparing to commercialize our OPV-based transparent electricity-generating coatings for various applications, including BIPV, glass and flexible plastics.
Over the course of our collaborative research and development efforts with the NREL under the CRADA, both parties have agreed to modifications to extend the date of completion. The Company and NREL have entered into nine such No Cost Time Extensions (“NCTE”). Under the terms of each NCTE, all terms and conditions of the NREL CRADA remain in full force and effect without change. The current NCTE was executed on September 15, 2020 and extends the date of completion to December 31, 2021. As of August 31, 2021, the Company had a capitalized asset balance of $122,332 related to deferred research and development costs for advances to Alliance for Sustainable Energy for work to be performed under the NREL CRADA.
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy’s (EERE) Advanced Manufacturing Office (AMO) Cooperative Research and Development Agreement
On March 15, 2018 the Company was awarded it’s first-ever AMM CRADA by the DOE EERE AMO. SolarWindow was awarded the AMM CRADA after submitting a proposal outlining its coating technologies and fabrication methods to the DOE’s Roll-to-Roll Advanced Materials Manufacturing Consortium, led by ORNL and partnering with ANL, LBNL, and NREL. The AMM CRADA was carried out with the DOE by SolarWindow, ANL, and NREL. Work under the AMM CRADA was completed in April
Through the developments of AMM CRADA, the Company accomplished initiatives to improve and optimize its laser patterning system and methods of fabrication for application of our electricity-generating coatings on flexible plastics. Once optimized for industry, this advancement is expected to reduce process time, improve device performance, and reduce the costs of LiquidElectricity™ Coating based plastic products. Another objective of the AMM CRADA was to develop and demonstrate a unique high-throughput process methodology for semitransparent OPV modules compatible with high process speeds for many different advanced material manufacturing systems.
Results of Operations
Year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the year ended August 31, 2020
A summary of our operating expenses for the years ended August 31, 2021 and 2020 follows:
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) costs include all expenditures incurred other than research and development related costs, including costs related to personnel, professional fees, travel and entertainment, public company costs, insurance and other office related costs. During the year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the year ended August 31, 2020, SG&A costs increased due primarily to inclusion of our South Korean operations and resulting in a $302,440 increase in personnel costs, $247,952 increase in other administrative costs and $55,671 increase in professional costs.
Research and Product Development
Research and Development (“R&D”) costs represent costs incurred to develop our SolarWindow™ technology and are incurred pursuant to our research agreements and agreements with other third-party providers and certain internal R&D cost allocations. Payments under these agreements include salaries and benefits for R&D personnel, allocated overhead, contract services and other costs. R&D costs are expensed when incurred, except for non-refundable advance payments for future research and development activities which are capitalized and recognized as expense as the related services are performed. During the year ended August 31, 2021 compared to the year ended August 31, 2020, R&D costs decreased primarily as a result of a $124,266 decrease in personnel costs, $75,703 decrease in other R&D related costs offset by an $11,252 increase in CRADA costs.
Stock Based Compensation
The Company grants stock options to its Directors, employees and consultants. Stock compensation represents the expense associated with the amortization of our stock options. Expense associated with equity-based transactions is calculated and expensed in our financial statements as required pursuant to various accounting rules and is non-cash in nature. Stock based compensation expense primarily relates to 2,500,000 stock purchase options issued to each of Mr. Jatinder S. Bhogal, CEO and Director and Mr. John Rhee, President and Director, pursuant to an Executive Consulting Agreement with each entered into in our fiscal quarter ending August 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary cash needs are for personnel, professional and R&D related fees and other administrative costs. Our principal sources of liquidity are cash and short-term investments. As of August 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had cash and short-term investments of $12,127,456 and $14,151,523, respectively. We have financed our operations primarily from the sale of equity and debt securities.
The following table presents a summary of our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
Operating activities consist of net loss adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation, stock-based compensation expense, realized gains or losses on disposal of property and equipment and the effect of working capital changes. Net cash used in operating activities increased 8.7% to $2,659,240 for the year ended August 31, 2021 as compared to $2,447,457 for the year ended August 31, 2020 mainly due to a $385,000 reduction in cash used in our US operations offset by a $597,000 increase in cash used in our Korea operations.
Investing Activities
We have used cash primarily for short-term investments, investments in property and equipment, furniture, office equipment, leasehold improvements to our Korean offices and computers and software. Net investment activities for capital expenditures were $76,338 during the year ended August 31, 2021, compared to $5,031 during the year ended August 31, 2020. During 2021, we purchased a twelve-month term deposit in the amount of $5,000,000.
Financing Activities
Cash flows from financing activities totaled $724,872 as a result of the exercise of 201,600 Series S Warrants with a strike price of $3.42 per share and the exercise of 10,000 stock options at a strike price of $3.54 per share.
Indebtedness
None.
Other Contractual Obligations
In September 2020, the Company, through its wholly owned direct and indirect subsidiaries, SolarWindow Asia (USA) Corp. and SolarWindow Asia Co., Ltd., entered a lease for office space in South Korea. The office lease expires on September 23, 2022. Monthly rent is approximately $1,200.
On February 26, 2021, SolarWindow Asia Co., Ltd. entered into an apartment lease for the purposes of housing foreign personnel. The apartment lease expires on March 7, 2022. Monthly rent is approximately $950.
During fiscal 2019 the Company made payments totaling $1,292,655 towards the purchase of manufacturing equipment with an estimated total cost of $1,803,000. The remaining $510,345 will be paid upon the completion of the equipment once the final specifications have been determined pending optimization of the Company’s product iteration specific to this equipment. For additional information, see “Note 3 - Equipment” located in the footnotes to our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
There were no off-balance sheet arrangements for the years ended August 31, 2021 and 2020.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
For more information regarding recent accounting standards and their impact to our results of operations and financial position, see “Note 2- Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our Financial Statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, and the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates based on its historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following critical accounting policies and estimates affect the preparation of our financial statements:
Stock Based Compensation
Pursuant to the provisions of the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic No. 718-10, Compensation-Stock Compensation, which establishes accounting for share-based payment transactions for acquiring goods and services from employees and nonemployees, we utilize the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of employee stock option awards at the date of grant, which requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including expected volatility and expected life. Changes in these inputs and assumptions can materially affect the measure of estimated fair value of our share-based compensation. These assumptions are subjective and generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop. When estimating fair value, some of the assumptions will be based on, or determined from, external data and other assumptions may be derived from our historical experience with stock-based payment arrangements. The appropriate weight to place on historical experience is a matter of judgment, based on relevant facts and circumstances.
Related Party Transactions
For a discussion of our Related Party Transactions, see “Note 7 - Transactions With Related Persons” to our Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.