Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The discussion and analysis below contain certain forward-looking statements about our business and operations that are subject to the risks, uncertainties, and other factors described in the section entitled “Risk Factors,” included in Part I, Item 1A, and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These risks, uncertainties, and other factors could cause our actual results to differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by, the forward-looking statements. Please read the section entitled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a beloved brand in the U.S. pet care industry with more than 55 years of service to pets and the people who love and care for them. Since our founding in 1965, we have been developing new standards in pet care, delivering comprehensive wellness solutions through our products and services, and creating communities that deepen the pet-parent bond. Over the last three years, we have transformed the business from a successful traditional retailer to a disruptive, fully integrated, digital-focused provider of pet health and wellness offerings. We revamped our leadership team and invested over $375 million to build out leading capabilities across e-commerce and digital, owned brands, data analytics, and a full suite of on-site services including veterinary care.
Our go-to-market strategy is powered by a multi-channel platform that integrates our strong digital presence with our nationwide physical network. Our data-driven digital footprint, consisting of an entirely redesigned e-commerce site and personalized mobile app, delivers an exceptional customer experience and serves as a hub for pet parents to manage their pets’ health, wellness, and merchandise needs, while enabling them to shop wherever, whenever, and however they want. By strategically leveraging our extensive physical network consisting of approximately 1,454 pet care centers located within three miles of 53 % of our customers, we are able to offer our comprehensive product and service offering in a localized manner with a meaningful last-mile advantage over our competition. Through our connected platform, we serve our customers in a differentiated manner by offering the convenience of ship-from-store, BOPUS, curbside pick-up and same day delivery. Multi-channel customers, who spend between 3x to 7x more with us compared to single-channel customers, increased by double-digits in fiscal 2020.
Through our multi-channel platform, we provide a comprehensive offering of differentiated products and services that fulfill all the needs of pet parents and their pets. Our product offering leverages our owned brand portfolio and partnerships with premium third-party brands to deliver high quality food that avoids artificial ingredients, complemented by a wide variety of premium pet care supplies. We augment this product offering with a broad suite of professional services, including grooming as well as in-store and online training. Our service offering is further enhanced by a rapidly expanding, affordable veterinary service platform, which includes full-service veterinary hospitals, Vetco clinics, and tele-veterinarian services. In addition, we are increasingly linking our offerings with subscription programs such as membership and pet health insurance that create deeper engagement with our customers, and with our Pals Rewards loyalty program members specifically, which members accounted for approximately 80% of transactions in fiscal 2020. At the end of fiscal 2020, we launched our Vital Care membership program, the industry’s first broad-scale, comprehensive membership program covering items including vaccinations, grooming, services and merchandise discounts. In addition to providing differentiated products and services, our over 23,000 knowledgeable, passionate partners provide important high-quality advice to our customers in our pet care centers.
How We Assess the Performance of Our Business
In assessing our performance, we consider a variety of performance and financial measures including the following:
Comparable Sales
Comparable sales is an important measure throughout the retail industry and includes both retail and digital sales of products and services. A new location or digital site is included in comparable sales beginning on the first day of the fiscal month following 12 full fiscal months of operation and is subsequently compared to like time periods from the previous year. Relocated pet care centers become comparable pet care centers on the first day of
operation if the original pet care center was open longer than 12 full fiscal months. If, during the period presented, a pet care center was closed, sales from that pet care center are included up to the first day of the month of closing. Additionally, our comparable sales exclude the impact of the wind-down and migration of our Drs. Foster & Smith digital site to Petco.com in fiscal 2018 and fiscal 2019. There may be variations in the way in which some of our competitors and other retailers calculate comparable sales. As a result, data in this filing regarding our comparable sales may not be comparable to similar data made available by other retailers.
Comparable sales allow us to evaluate how our overall ecosystem is performing by measuring the change in period-over-period net sales from locations and digital sites that have been open for the applicable period. We intend to improve comparable sales by continuing initiatives aimed to increase customer retention, frequency of visits, and basket size. General macroeconomic and retail business trends are a key driver of changes in comparable sales.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Management and the Board of Directors review certain non-GAAP financial measures, along with GAAP measures (as defined herein), to evaluate our operating performance, generate future operating plans and make strategic decisions regarding the allocation of capital. Our key non-GAAP financial measures are Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net income, Adjusted EPS, Free Cash Flow and Net Debt. Further explanation on our non-GAAP measures, along with reconciliations to their most comparable GAAP measures, is presented below under “Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures to GAAP Measures.”
Factors Affecting Our Business
We believe that our performance and future success depend on a number of factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in the section titled “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Pet Industry Trends
In 2020, the U.S. pet care industry served more than 72 million households with pets and represented a total addressable market of $97 billion, growing by over 3 million pets driven by heightened adoption activity through the COVID-19 pandemic. Due to its non-discretionary nature, the market has demonstrated a long-term track record of consistent growth and resilience throughout economic cycles. From 2020 to 2024, the industry is expected to grow at a 7% CAGR, driven by steady, predictable growth in the underlying pet population coupled with strong tailwinds associated with pet humanization and COVID-19.
Customer Pet Purchase Trends
Our multi-channel integrated ecosystem is designed to support our customers regardless of how customers choose to shop for their pet care needs. As we saw the major purchase trend shift and growth into areas like e-commerce, services, and veterinary care, we actively invested to build capabilities and offerings to effectively capitalize on the opportunity. Our business will be impacted by our ability to continue to understand and react to changing customer purchase trends.
Customer Acquisition, Retention, and Spend
Our business is impacted by our ability to successfully attract new customers to any one of our channels, build their loyalty to engender return visits, and expand their spend with Petco across multiple purchase channels (e.g., pet care centers, e-commerce, and services) and categories (e.g., pet food, supplies, and companion animal). This is the primary focus of all our customer engagement efforts from digital, to performance marketing campaigns, to new product introductions, and to Petco partner cross-selling activities in pet care centers. The ability to convert more of our customers to loyal, multi-channel shoppers will affect business performance.
Innovation and Transformation
Our operating results over the last two years reflect significant investments made to support innovation and business transformation strategies. These investments include: digital and e-commerce integration and expansion; data analytical capabilities; veterinary services; marketing and advertising; and our owned brands. We also have developed advanced sales reporting that provides our pet care center General Managers and field leadership teams with data to track performance across multiple dimensions, identify opportunities, and execute strategies to drive incremental sales.
Specifically, some of these investments have included:
•
Approximately $181.2 million of capital investments in fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 in our new and existing pet care center locations, including the build-out of over 85 veterinary hospitals.
•
Approximately $119.6 million of capital investments in fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 related to digital and information technology, specifically the development of integration capabilities with our pet care center locations, our Petco App, and the development and deployment of data analytical and reporting capabilities.
•
A $70.7 million increase in advertising in fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 to further adapt our advertising footprint to support the acceleration of our e-commerce and digital sales growth.
While these investments provided a key foundation and drive increased sales, ongoing performance of the business will depend on our ability to leverage our existing distribution network and pet care center locations for product delivery and fulfillment, including BOPUS, curbside pick-up, and same day delivery, and build upon and enhance these efforts.
Gross Margin and Expense Management
Our operating results are impacted by our ability to convert revenue growth into higher gross margin and operating margin. The sales mix related to consumables, supplies, and services, with services typically having lower margins, as well as customer shopping preferences, impacts our gross margin results. We focus gross margin and expense management on achieving a balance between ensuring adequate resource spend to grow sales with attention to driving increased profitability. The business has successfully implemented cost optimization initiatives in the past and will continue to find opportunities to enhance profit margins and operate more efficiently in the future.
Talent and Culture
We see our Petco partners as the core to building a purpose-driven performance culture. Our business results rely on our ability to continually: add talented partners, specifically in our scaling business areas like e-commerce, veterinary care, and grooming and training services; provide the best tools, partner training, and competitive compensation to deliver higher sales and better customer experiences; and engender a positive, collaborative, and respectful working environment. Our partners represent the strength of our brand every day and are key to ongoing growth.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted every aspect of the economy in fiscal 2020. As an essential retailer, all of our pet care centers have remained open, as we are the grocery store, pharmacy, and doctor’s office for many of our nation’s pets. Market data indicates that with more of the working population staying home, there has been an increase in pet ownership and the percentage of disposable income spent on home-related goods and services, including pet care. Overall, this macroeconomic trend has favorably impacted our business results to date, but the possible sustained spread or resurgence of the pandemic, and any government response thereto, increases the uncertainty regarding future economic conditions that could impact our business in the future.
We quickly adapted our business and operations since the start of the pandemic to ensure, first and foremost, the health and safety of our partners, the animals in our care, and the customers we serve. These adaptations include: providing additional paid-time off and five cycles of appreciation bonuses to our frontline partners; establishing a $2 million employee support fund to assist our partners and their families impacted by the pandemic; investing in sanitation, plexiglass barriers, signage, and personal protective equipment; and adopting strict safety protocols that limit direct human interactions and promote social distancing.
We were well-positioned to meet the increasing and evolving needs of pets and their parents at the onset of the pandemic. Initially, we experienced significant increases in customer pet food purchases, but as the months progressed, our sales growth shifted to our supplies category, due to an increase in pet ownership and shifts in disposable income spending toward pets. In services, we temporarily suspended our training services and vaccination clinic operations, and we reduced our grooming capacity while stay-at-home orders were in place. Although we had experienced increasing customer demand for services before the pandemic, sales attributable to such services declined significantly from March through May 2020 as a result of the suspension.
We have experienced a significant acceleration of our e-commerce business, particularly as it relates to the integrated offering with our pet care centers. Our ship-from-store capability enabled us to maintain regular shipping timelines, and we capitalized on our BOPUS capability and rolled out curbside pick-up in a matter of weeks, enabling us to get products to customers faster and at a higher margin than online retailers that incur costs to ship products to their customers. Additionally, in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, we implemented same day delivery. We have incurred additional expenses to support this business growth.
To preserve liquidity during the pandemic, we temporarily suspended capital expenditures, but as our financial results surpassed earlier expectations, we returned to our initial capital plan in the second half of fiscal 2020. In efforts to control expenses, we negotiated discounts and concessions with landlords and vendors and temporarily furloughed or implemented temporary pay cuts for non-frontline partners.
Significant Components of Results of Operations
Net Sales
Our net sales comprise gross sales of products and services, net of sales tax and certain discounts and promotions offered to our customers, including those offered under our customer loyalty programs. Net sales are driven by comparable sales, new pet center locations, and expanded offerings.
Cost of Sales and Gross Profit
Gross profit is equal to our net sales minus our cost of sales. Gross profit rate measures gross profit as a percentage of net sales.
Our cost of sales includes the following types of expenses:
•
direct costs (net of vendor rebates, allowances, and discounts for products sold) including inbound freight charges;
•
shipping and handling costs associated with sales to customers;
•
freight costs associated with moving merchandise inventories;
•
inventory shrinkage costs and write-downs;
•
payroll costs of pet groomers, trainers, veterinarians, and other direct costs of services; and
•
costs associated with operating our distribution centers including payroll, occupancy costs and depreciation.
Our digital gross profit rate tends to be lower than the gross profit rate from sales in our pet care centers due to incremental costs associated with shipping and other expenses of delivery to customers. In addition, our gross profit rate tends to be lower for services than for products.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expense
The following types of expenses are included in our selling, general, and administrative costs (“SG&A”):
•
payroll and benefit costs of pet care center employees and corporate employees;
•
occupancy and operating costs of pet care centers and corporate facilities;
•
depreciation and amortization related to pet care centers and corporate assets;
•
credit card fees;
•
store pre-opening and remodeling costs;
•
advertising costs; and
•
other administrative costs.
SG&A includes both fixed and variable costs and therefore is not directly correlated with net sales. We expect that our SG&A expenses will increase in future periods due to additional expenses we expect to incur as a result of being a public company, including stock-based compensation.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Impairment
In connection with the fiscal 2015 acquisition by our Sponsors, we recorded goodwill of approximately $3.0 billion and an indefinite-lived trade name asset of $1.1 billion. We evaluate these assets for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Please read the discussion of these assets under “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates.”
Interest Expense
Our interest expense is primarily associated with the senior secured credit facilities, the Floating Rate Senior Notes, the 3.00% Senior Notes (as defined herein), and interest rate caps. In January 2021, the Floating Rate Senior Notes and the 3.00% Senior Notes were exchanged, canceled, and/or redeemed in connection with the initial public offering, and our interest rate caps were settled in accordance with their contractual terms. Additionally, on March 4, 2021, we borrowed $1,700.0 million under a new first lien term loan facility, repaid all outstanding principal and interest on the existing term loan facility, and replaced our existing revolving credit facility with a new revolving credit facility. Please read discussion under “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Sources of Liquidity” for further information.
Income Tax Benefit
Income taxes consist of an estimate of federal and state income taxes based on enacted federal and state tax rates, as adjusted for allowable credits, deductions, and the valuation allowance against deferred tax assets, as applicable.
(Income) Loss from Equity Method Investees
Our equity method investments prior to fiscal 2019 consisted primarily of our 50% owned veterinary joint venture and our 50% owned Mexico joint venture. Beginning in fiscal 2019, the veterinary joint venture is now included in our consolidated results. Please read “Net Loss Attributable to Noncontrolling Interest” below for more information regarding our noncontrolling interests.
Net Loss Attributable to Noncontrolling Interest
The noncontrolling interest represents 50% of the net loss of our veterinary joint venture, which is a variable interest entity for which we were deemed to be the primary beneficiary beginning in fiscal 2019 due to revisions made in the joint operating agreement. Prior to fiscal 2019, the veterinary joint venture was accounted for as an equity method investment.
Executive Summary
Our business transformation initiatives, accelerated by an increase in pet ownership and a shift in customer discretionary spend on pets, have driven strong top- and bottom-line growth in our business. Comparing fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, we achieved the following results:
•
increase in net sales from $4.43 billion to $4.92 billion, representing period-over-period growth of 11.0%;
•
comparable sales growth of 11.4%;
•
increase in operating income from $110.6 million to $194.4 million, representing period-over-period growth of 75.8%;
•
a decrease in net loss attributable to Class A and B-1 common stockholders from $95.9 million to $26.5 million, representing a period-over-period improvement of 72.4%;
•
an increase in Adjusted EBITDA from $424.5 million to $484.3 million, representing period-over-period growth of 14.1%; and
•
Net cash provided by operating activities increased from $110.3 million in fiscal 2019 to $268.6 million in fiscal 2020.
For a description of our non-GAAP measures and reconciliations to their most comparable GAAP measures, please read the section below titled “Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures to GAAP Measures.”
Results of Operations
The following tables summarize our results of operations and the percent of net sales of line items included in our consolidated statements of operations (dollars in thousands):
Fiscal 2020 (52 weeks) Compared with Fiscal 2019 (52 weeks)
Net Sales and Comparable Sales
Net sales increased $485.7 million, or 11.0%, to $4.92 billion in fiscal 2020 compared to net sales of $4.43 billion in fiscal 2019, driven by a 11.4% increase in our comparable sales. With our investments in our business over the past two years, we were, and continue to be, well-positioned to meet the increasing and evolving needs of pets and their parents. Our sales growth period-over-period was a result of these investments, coupled with an increase in pet ownership and a shift in consumer spending toward the pet category as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our e-commerce and digital sales increased 103% from fiscal 2019 to fiscal 2020 driven by a change in consumer shopping preferences. With an integrated offering that includes BOPUS, curbside pick-up, ship-from-store, and same day delivery, we were able to quickly get products to customers in a safe manner regardless of their delivery or pick-up preference.
Supplies and companion animal sales increased 20.1% from fiscal 2019 to fiscal 2020 due to increases in pet ownership and shifts in disposable income toward pets. Dog and cat food sales increased 3.4% and services and other sales increased 6.1% from fiscal 2019 to fiscal 2020, respectively. The increase in services was primarily due to growth in the hospital business due to the addition of 44 new hospitals period-over-period partially offset by the temporary suspension of our training, grooming and vaccination clinic services while stay-at-home orders were in place.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Profit
Gross profit increased $200.2 million, or 10.5%, to $2.11 billion in fiscal 2020 compared to gross profit of $1.91 billion for fiscal 2019. As a percentage of sales, our gross profit rate decreased slightly at 42.8% for fiscal 2020 compared to 43.0% for fiscal 2019. The increase in gross profit was due to the overall increase in net sales. The slight decrease in gross profit rate was primarily due to a shift in sales to e-commerce, which typically carries lower margins than pet care center sales. E-commerce sales margins benefitted by the growth in BOPUS, curbside delivery, and ship-from-store, which typically carry higher margins as they reduce or eliminate shipping costs associated with online sales. Approximately 83% of Petco.com orders were fulfilled by our pet care centers during fiscal 2020.
Also contributing to the decrease in gross profit rate period-over-period were $9.6 million of COVID-19 related expenses and a lower year-over-year actuarial true-up benefit of $7.3 million. COVID-19 related expenses in fiscal 2020 included approximately $7.9 million of appreciation bonuses for our frontline services partners, including groomers, trainers and veterinarians, and distribution center partners and approximately $1.7 million of increased sanitation costs at our distribution centers and for purchases of personal protective equipment.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses increased $135.4 million, or 7.6%, to $1.91 billion for fiscal 2020 compared to $1.78 billion for fiscal 2019. As a percentage of net sales, SG&A expenses decreased from 40.1% in fiscal 2019 to 38.9% in fiscal 2020 reflecting operating leverage from net sales growth. The increase in expense period-over-period was driven by a $70.7 million increase in advertising expenses to support the acceleration of our e-commerce and digital sales growth; $18.4 million of COVID-19 related appreciation bonuses for our frontline pet care center partners; $11.7 million of COVID-19 related expenses for sanitation, safety-related costs, personal protective equipment and the establishment of our employee assistance fund; and $8.7 million of professional fees expensed in connection with the initial public offering. Depreciation expense increased $10.6 million due to increased capital spend to support e-commerce and digital initiatives.
Goodwill and Indefinite-lived Intangible Impairment
Our annual impairment test in fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019 indicated that the fair value of our single reporting unit exceeded the carrying value, and therefore no goodwill impairment charge was recorded.
The annual impairment analysis of our indefinite-lived trade name in fiscal 2020 indicated that the fair value of the asset exceeded the carrying value, and therefore no trade name impairment charge was recorded in fiscal 2020. In fiscal 2019, an impairment charge of $19.0 million was recorded driven by a combination of market conditions, increased competition from online competitors, and financial performance.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased $33.9 million, or 13.4%, to $219.1 million in fiscal 2020 compared with $253.0 million in fiscal 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by lower interest rates between the periods. In addition, interest expense decreased by approximately $3.5 million due to the redemption/cancellation of the Floating Rate Senior Notes and the 3.00% Senior Notes and repayment of a portion of the Amended Term Loan Facility in connection with the initial public offering. In March 2020, we borrowed $250.0 million on the revolving credit facility as a precautionary measure given the uncertainty of the macroeconomic environment at the start of the COVID-19 pandemic. We subsequently repaid the amount in full in the second quarter of fiscal 2020 and had no borrowings outstanding on the revolving credit facility as of January 30, 2021.
Income Tax Benefit
Our effective tax rate was 11.2% for fiscal 2020, resulting in income tax benefit of $3.3 million, compared to an effective tax rate of 27.3% and income tax benefit of $35.7 million for fiscal 2019. The decrease in effective tax rate in fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019 is driven by various factors, including the change in earnings as compared to fiscal 2019, a remeasurement of deferred tax assets related to $67.4 million of net operating losses available under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) that were carried back to fiscal years before the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act was enacted, which resulted in a benefit of $8.8 million. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in equity-based compensation resulting from the initial public offering as discussed in Note 13 of the consolidated financial statements, an increase in unrecognized tax benefits as discussed in Note 14 of the consolidated financial statements, limitations of deductibility for certain public company executive compensation in accordance with Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as amended (the “Code”), and changes to state taxes from changes in tax laws, tax rates, and apportionment of income.
Net Loss Attributable to Class A and B-1 Common Stockholders
Net loss attributable to Class A and B-1 common stockholders decreased $69.4 million to $26.5 million for fiscal 2020 compared with a net loss attributable to Class A and B-1 common stockholders of $95.9 million for fiscal 2019. The improvement period-over-period was primarily driven by higher gross margin of $200.2 million and lower interest expense of $33.9 million, offset by higher SG&A costs of $135.4 million and a lower income tax benefit of $32.3 million.
Prior Year Discussion of Results and Comparisons
For information on fiscal 2018 results and similar comparisons, please read “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our final prospectus filed with the SEC on January 15, 2021 pursuant to Rule 424(b)(4).
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures to GAAP Measures
The following information provides definitions and reconciliations of certain non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable financial measures calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. Such non-GAAP financial measures are not in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered superior to, as a substitute for or alternative to, and should be considered in conjunction with, the most comparable GAAP measures. The non-GAAP financial measures presented may differ from similarly-titled measures used by other companies.
Adjusted EBITDA
We present Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, because we believe it enhances an investor’s understanding of our financial and operational performance by excluding certain material non-cash items, unusual or non-recurring items that we do not expect to continue in the future, and certain other adjustments we believe are or are not reflective of our ongoing operations and performance. Adjusted EBITDA enables operating performance to be reviewed across reporting periods on a consistent basis. We use Adjusted EBITDA as one of the principal measures to evaluate and monitor our operating financial performance and to compare our performance to others in our industry. We also use Adjusted EBITDA in connection with establishing discretionary annual incentive compensation targets, to make budgeting decisions, to make strategic decisions regarding the allocation of capital, and to report our quarterly results as defined in our debt agreements, although under such agreements the measure is calculated differently and is used for different purposes.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net (loss) income attributable to members excluding:
•
interest expense, net and losses on debt extinguishment;
•
income tax (benefit) expense;
•
depreciation, amortization, asset impairments, and write-offs;
•
(income) loss from equity method investees;
•
goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible impairment;
•
equity-based compensation;
•
pre-opening and closing expenses;
•
non-cash occupancy-related costs;
•
severance expenses; and
•
other non-recurring costs.
We believe it is useful to exclude these items that are non-cash or non-routine in nature, as they are not components of our business operations and may not directly correlate to the underlying performance of our business. In addition, we add back 50% of EBITDA related to our 50% owned veterinary joint venture for years prior to fiscal 2019 (in fiscal 2019, we began consolidating this joint venture in our financial results) and our 50% owned Mexico joint venture for all periods. We believe it is useful to include our portion of the results of these joint ventures, as it reflects the performance of key components of our business, including veterinary services and international operations, and presents more comparable EBITDA-based financial information rather than (income) loss on a standalone basis. Our portion of the results of these joint ventures has limitations as an analytical tool, including that amounts shown on the individual line items do not necessarily represent our legal claim to the assets and liabilities, or the revenues and expenses presented. In addition, other companies may calculate such proportionate results differently, which reduces their comparability. Further, we define Adjusted EBITDA Margin as Adjusted EBITDA divided by net sales.
Adjusted EBITDA is not a substitute for net (loss) income, the most comparable GAAP measure, and is subject to a number of limitations as a financial measure, so it should be used in conjunction with GAAP financial measures and not in isolation. There can be no assurances that we will not modify the presentation of Adjusted EBITDA in the future. In addition, other companies in our industry may define Adjusted EBITDA differently, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
The table below reflects the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin, after taking into account net sales for the periods presented:
(1)
Veterinary Joint Venture EBITDA represents 50% of the entity’s operating results for years prior to fiscal 2019, when the joint venture was accounted for as an equity method investment. Beginning in fiscal 2019, this joint venture is now included in our consolidated results with the 50% portion we do not own being adjusted as a noncontrolling interest. We believe it is useful to include our portion of the results of this joint venture prior to fiscal 2019, as it best reflects the actual performance of our overall business and improves comparability of our financial information. The Veterinary Joint Venture EBITDA is aligned with the portion of such entity’s net loss that is included in (income) loss from equity method investees in the financial statements because such entity does not have similar items to those excluded in our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA.
(2)
Mexico Joint Venture EBITDA represents 50% of the entity’s operating results for all years, as adjusted to reflect the results on a basis comparable to our Adjusted EBITDA. In the financial statements, this joint venture is accounted for as an equity method investment and reported net of depreciation and income taxes. Because such a presentation would not reflect the adjustments made in our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA, we include our 50% interest in our Mexico Joint Venture on an Adjusted EBITDA basis to ensure consistency. The table below presents a reconciliation of Mexico Joint Venture net income to Mexico Joint Venture EBITDA:
(3)
Non-cash occupancy-related costs include the difference between cash and straight-line rent for all periods. Beginning in fiscal 2019, in connection with our adoption of the lease accounting standard, favorable lease rights of $125.2 million and unfavorable lease rights of $30.8 million were reclassified from intangible assets and other long-term liabilities, respectively, to right-of-use lease assets and the related amortization is now included in non-cash occupancy costs. In addition to the reclassification, the amortization period of these lease right assets has decreased to align with the terms of the underlying right-of-use lease assets, thus resulting in an acceleration of expense compared to prior years. The overall adoption of the lease accounting standard did not have an impact on our Adjusted EBITDA, as this increase in addback was completely offset in other impacted lines such as lower depreciation and amortization, asset impairments and write-offs, and store closing expenses.
(4)
Non-recurring costs include: unrealized fair market value adjustments on non-operating investments; class action settlements and related legal fees; one-time consulting and other costs associated with our strategic transformation initiatives; discontinuation and liquidation costs; and costs related to the initial public offering. While we have incurred significant costs associated with the COVID-19 pandemic during fiscal 2020, we have not classified any of these costs as non-recurring due to the uncertainty surrounding the pandemic’s length and long-term impact on the macroeconomic operating environment.
(5)
We define net margin as net loss attributable to Class A and B-1 common stockholders divided by net sales and Adjusted EBITDA margin as Adjusted EBITDA divided by net sales.
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS are considered non-GAAP financial measures because they exclude certain amounts included in net loss attributable to Class A and B-1 common stockholders and diluted loss per Class A and B-1 common share, the most directly comparable financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. Management believes that Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS are meaningful measures to share with investors because they best allow comparison of the performance with that of the comparable period. In addition, Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS afford investors a view of what management considers the Company’s earnings performance to be and the ability to make a more informed assessment of such earnings performance with that of the prior year.
The table below reflects the calculation of Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted EPS for the periods presented:
Free Cash Flow
Free Cash Flow is a non-GAAP financial measure that is calculated as net cash provided by operations less cash paid for fixed assets. Management believes that Free Cash Flow, which measures our ability to generate additional cash from our business operations, is an important financial measure for use in evaluating the company’s financial performance.
Although other companies report their free cash flow, numerous methods exist for calculating a company’s free cash flow. As a result, the method used by the Company’s management to calculate our Free Cash Flow may differ from the methods used by other companies to calculate their free cash flow.
The table below reflects the calculation of Free Cash Flow for the periods presented:
Net Debt
Net Debt is a non-GAAP financial measure that is calculated as the sum of current and non-current debt, less cash and cash equivalents. Management considers this adjustment useful because it reduces the volatility of total debt caused by fluctuations between cash paid against the company’s revolving credit facility and cash held on hand in cash and cash equivalents.
Although other companies report their net debt, numerous methods exist for calculating a company’s net debt. As a result, the method used by the Company’s management to calculate our Net Debt may differ from the methods used by other companies to calculate their net debt.
The table below reflects the calculation of net debt for the periods presented:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary sources of liquidity are funds generated by operating activities and available capacity for borrowings on our revolving credit facility. Our ability to fund our operations, to make planned capital investments, to make scheduled debt payments and to repay or refinance indebtedness depends on our future operating performance and cash flows, which are subject to prevailing economic conditions and financial, business, and other factors, some of which are beyond our control. Our liquidity as of January 30, 2021 was $499.0 million inclusive of cash and cash equivalents of $111.4 million and $387.6 million of availability on the revolving credit facility. We believe that our current resources, together with anticipated cash flows from operations and borrowing capacity under the revolving credit facility will be sufficient to finance our operations, meet our current cash requirements, and fund anticipated capital investments for the next 12 months. We may, however, seek additional financing to fund future growth or refinance our existing indebtedness through the debt capital markets, but we cannot be assured that such financing will be available on favorable terms, or at all.
We are a party to contractual obligations involving commitments to make payments to third parties. These obligations impact our short-term and long-term liquidity and capital resource needs. Certain contractual obligations are reflected on the consolidated balance sheet as of January 30, 2021, while others are considered future obligations. Our contractual obligations primarily consist of operating leases and long-term debt and related interest payments. We do also enter certain short-term lease commitments, letters of credit and purchase obligations in the normal course of business. For more information regarding our primary obligations, refer to Note 6 and Note 8 to the historical consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for amounts outstanding as of January 30, 2021 related to debt and operating leases, respectively. Also refer to further discussion on our debt refinancing transaction in sources of liquidity below.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our consolidated cash flows:
Operating Activities
Our primary source of operating cash is sales of products and services to customers, which are substantially all on a cash basis and therefore provide us with a significant source of liquidity. Our primary uses of cash in operating activities include purchases of inventory; freight and warehousing costs; employee-related expenditures; occupancy-related costs for our pet care centers, distribution centers and corporate support centers; credit card fees; interest under our debt agreements; and marketing expenses. Net cash provided by operating activities is impacted by our net loss adjusted for certain non-cash items, including: depreciation, amortization, impairments and write-offs; amortization of debt discounts and issuance costs; deferred income taxes; equity-based compensation; impairments of goodwill and intangible assets; and the effect of changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $268.6 million in fiscal 2020 compared with net cash provided by operating activities of $110.3 million in fiscal 2019. The increase was driven by stronger operating performance period-over-period resulting from our strategic investments, an increase in pet ownership and increased consumer spending in the pet category. In addition, a decrease in cash payments for interest and lower payroll taxes due to the CARES Act contributed to the increase. This was partially offset by the timing of receipts and payments on inventory, increases in advertising spend and non-recurring expenses related to COVID-19 and the initial public offering.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $110.3 million in fiscal 2019 compared with $203.2 million in fiscal 2018. This decrease was primarily driven by the timing of cash collections on trade accounts receivable, increases in cash paid for advertising to support initiatives and digital growth, and an increase net cash used in operating activities to expand our vet footprint. Increases in cash paid for interest and income taxes also contributed to the overall decrease.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities consists primarily of capital expenditures, which in fiscal 2020, fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2018 primarily supported our transformation initiatives. Net cash used in investing activities was $157.2 million, $139.0 million, and $142.7 million for fiscal 2020, 2019, and 2018 respectively. Offsetting our cash used for capital expenditures in fiscal 2019 was proceeds from the sale-leaseback of our San Antonio corporate support center, for which we received net proceeds of $18.5 million. The sale-leaseback enabled us to enhance our liquidity and fund investments to support our strategic growth and transformation initiatives.
The majority of our capital expenditures are discretionary in nature and made to expand our business. In fiscal 2021, we expect to spend approximately $185 million to $235 million in capital expenditures.
Capital expenditures by category during the periods set forth below are as follows:
Financing Activities
Financing activities in fiscal 2020, 2019 and 2018 primarily consisted of borrowings and paydowns on the revolving credit facility to support the working capital needs of the business. Principal payments on the Amended Term Loan Facility were $25.3 million per year in fiscal 2019 and 2018. In fiscal 2020, financing activities included net proceeds from our initial public offering and the subsequent use of proceeds for debt repayments. In fiscal 2020, the Company paid $745.9 million in principal payments on the Amended Term Loan Facility.
Net cash used in financing activities was $146.6 million for fiscal 2020, compared with $3.1 million used in financing activities in fiscal 2019 and $32.1 million used in financing activities in fiscal 2018. At the start of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020, we took a precautionary draw on the Amended Revolving Credit Facility of $250.0 million. As operations stabilized and financial results improved, the balance was repaid in full in the second quarter of fiscal 2020 and no amounts were outstanding as of January 30, 2021.
Net cash used in financing activities was fiscal 2020 primarily consisted of repayments of debt in connection with the initial public offering that occurred on January 19, 2021. Upon the closing of the initial public offering, the Company repaid $727.0 million of the Amended Term Loan Facility, $300.0 million in principal on the Floating Rate Senior Notes and $4.0 million on the 3.00% Senior Notes. These payments were made from net proceeds of $936 million from the initial public offering. The Company paid an additional $18.9 million of term loan principal payments in fiscal 2020. For more information regarding these activities, refer to Note 8 and Note 9 to the historical consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Net cash used in financing activities in fiscal 2019 primarily consisted of term loan principal payments of $25.3 million and net borrowings on the Amended Revolving Credit Facility of $29.0 million to support the working capital needs of the business. The outstanding balance on the Amended Revolving Credit Facility was $29.0 million as of February 1, 2020.
Net cash used in financing activities was $32.1 million in fiscal 2018 and primarily consisted of term loan principal payments of $25.3 million. No amounts were outstanding on the Amended Revolving Credit Facility as of February 2, 2019.
Sources of Liquidity
Senior Secured Credit Facilities
At January 30, 2021, the Company had $1,678.1 million outstanding on the Amended Term Loan Facility and no balance on the Amended Revolving Credit Facility, providing for senior secured financing of up to $500.0 million expiring on the earlier of 91 days prior to the maturity of the Amended Term Loan Facility (October 27, 2022 or five years from the most recent amendment), subject to a borrowing base. In connection with the closing of our initial public offering in on January 19, 2021, a $17.5 million loss on extinguishment of debt was recorded in fiscal 2020 related to partial extinguishment of the Amended Term Loan Facility and cancellation of the existing Floating Rate Senior Notes. For more information regarding this indebtedness, refer to Note 8 to the historical consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On March 4, 2021, subsequent to fiscal 2020, the Company completed a refinancing transaction and, in combination with the application of the proceeds from the Company’s initial public offering and other recapitalization transactions in connection therewith, reduced total debt by 49 percent over the prior year. The Company entered into the First Lien Term Loan and the ABL Revolving Credit Facility, which matures on March 4, 2026 and has availability of up to $500.0 million, subject to a borrowing base. Net Debt reduction and Adjusted EBITDA improvement as a result of the transaction led to a decrease of 4.2x of the Company Net Debt to Adjusted EBITDA ratio of 3.2x. Interest under the First Lien Term Loan is at the Company’s option, either a base rate or Adjusted LIBOR, subject to a 0.75% floor, payable upon maturity of the LIBOR contract, in either case plus the applicable rate. The base rate is the greater of the bank prime rate, federal funds effective rate plus 0.5% or Adjusted LIBOR plus 1.0%. The applicable rate is 2.25% per annum for a base rate loan or 3.25% per annum for an Adjusted LIBOR loan. Principal payments are $4.25 million quarterly and commence on June 30, 2021. The terms under the ABL Revolving Credit Facility are substantially similar to those of the Amended Revolving Credit Facility.
Derivative Instruments
In March 2016, the Company entered into a series of five interest rate cap agreements with four counterparties totaling $1,950.0 million to limit the maximum interest rate on a portion of the variable-rate debt and limit exposure to interest rate variability when three-month LIBOR exceeds 2.25%. The interest rate caps are accounted for as cash flow hedges, and changes in the fair value of the interest rate caps are reported as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income. The interest rate caps were settled in accordance with their contractual terms on January 29, 2021.
For more information regarding derivative instruments, refer to Note 10 to the historical consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Segment
We operate under one reportable segment and support and serve pets and their parents through our integrated ecosystem of pet care centers, services, and e-commerce.
Seasonality
Our financial performance is not significantly impacted by seasonality, as the majority of our sales are generated by pet parents caring for their pets year-round.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or “GAAP,” requires us to make assumptions and estimates about future results, and apply judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, net sales, expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience, current trends and other factors that we believe to be relevant at the time our consolidated financial statements are prepared. On an ongoing basis, we review the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates and judgments to ensure that our financial statements are presented fairly and in accordance with GAAP. However, because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such differences could be material.
We state our significant accounting policies in the notes to our annual consolidated financial statements, which are included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe that the following accounting policies and estimates described below have the greatest potential impact on our financial statements, and therefore we consider these to be critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Inventory Reserves
We value our inventory at the lower of the cost or net realizable value through the establishment of inventory valuation and shrink reserves. Cost is determined by the average cost method and includes inbound freight charges. Our valuation reserves represent the excess of the carrying value or average cost, over the amount we expect to realize from the ultimate sale of the inventory. Valuation reserves establish a new cost basis, and subsequent changes in facts or circumstances do not result in an increase in the newly established cost basis. Our valuation reserves are subject to uncertainties, as the calculation requires us to make assumptions regarding inventory aging, forecasted consumer demand and trends and the promotional environment.
Our inventory shrink reserve represents estimated physical inventory losses that have occurred since the last physical inventory date. Periodic inventory observations are performed on a regular basis at pet care center locations, and cycle counts are performed for inventory at distribution centers to ensure inventory is properly stated in our consolidated financial statements. During the period between counts at pet care center locations, we accrue for estimated shrink losses based on historical shrinkage results, taking into consideration any current trends in the business.
We have not made any material changes in our methodology used to establish our inventory valuation and shrink reserves during the past three fiscal years, and we have not had material adjustments between our estimated shrinkage percentages and actual results. A 10% difference in our actual valuation reserve at January 30, 2021 would have an insignificant effect on pre-tax loss in fiscal 2020. Additionally, we do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in future estimates or assumptions we use to calculate our shrink reserve. However, if estimates of losses are inaccurate, we may be exposed to losses or gains that could be material. A 10% difference in our actual shrink reserve at January 30, 2021 would have affected pre-tax loss by $3.8 million in fiscal 2020.
Vendor Allowances
We receive various forms of consideration from our merchandise vendors (vendor allowances). We receive vendor allowances, primarily in the form of cooperative advertising reimbursements, rebate incentives, prompt purchase discounts, and vendor compliance charges pursuant to agreements with certain vendors. Substantially all vendor allowances are initially deferred as a reduction of the cost of inventory purchased and recorded as a reduction to cost of sales in the consolidated statements of operations as the inventory is sold. Vendor rebates and allowances that are identified as specific, incremental, and identifiable costs incurred by the Company in selling the vendors’ products are classified as a reduction of selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations as the costs are incurred, as the related costs are also classified as selling, general and administrative expenses.
We establish a deferral for vendor income that is earned but not yet received and record the deferral as a reduction to merchandise inventory. The majority of the year-end vendor income deferrals are collected within the following fiscal quarter, and we do not believe there is reasonable likelihood that the assumptions used in our estimate will change significantly. Historically, adjustments to our vendor income deferral have not been material. A 10% difference in our vendor income deferred at January 30, 2021 would have affected pre-tax loss by $2.3 million in fiscal 2020.
We have not made any material changes in the accounting methodology we use to assess valuation allowances during the past three fiscal years.
Long-lived Assets
Long-lived assets, other than goodwill and intangible assets, which are separately discussed below, are tested for recoverability whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. A long-lived asset is not recoverable if its carrying amount exceeds the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from its use and eventual disposition. If a long-lived asset is not recoverable, an impairment loss is recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount of the long-lived asset (or group of assets) exceeds its fair value, with fair value determined based on the income approach.
Factors we consider important and which could trigger an impairment review include: (i) significant underperformance of a pet care center relative to expected historical or projected future operating results; (ii) significant changes in the manner of our use of assets or strategy for our overall business; (iii) significant negative industry or economic trends; or (iv) planned pet care center closings.
We have not made any material changes in the accounting methodology we use to assess impairment losses during the past three fiscal years.
Goodwill and Trade Name Intangible Assets
Goodwill
We evaluate goodwill annually in our fourth quarter or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. We have identified one reporting unit and selected our fourth fiscal quarter to perform our annual goodwill impairment testing. Goodwill impairment guidance provides entities the option to perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether further impairment testing is necessary. The qualitative assessment requires significant judgments about economic conditions, including the entity’s operating environment, its industry and other market conditions, entity-specific events related to financial performance or loss of key personnel, and other events that could impact the reporting unit. If management concludes, based on assessment of relevant events, facts, and circumstances, that it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is greater than its carrying value, no further impairment testing is required.
If management’s assessment of qualitative factors indicates that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, then a quantitative assessment is performed. We also have the option to bypass the qualitative assessment described above and proceed directly to the quantitative assessment, where we compare the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying value. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of our net assets assigned to that unit, goodwill is not considered impaired and we are not required to perform further testing. If the carrying value of net assets assigned to the reporting unit exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit, then we would record an impairment loss equal to the difference.
In cases where a quantitative test is performed, the fair value of our reporting unit is estimated using the assistance of a third-party valuation firm and quantitative impairment tests are calculated using a discounted cash flow analysis and a public company analysis. Significant assumptions inherent in these valuation methodologies are employed and include, but are not limited to, prospective financial information, growth rates, discount rates, and comparable multiples from publicly traded companies in similar industries.
We have not made any material changes in the accounting methodology we use to assess goodwill impairment losses during the past three fiscal years.
Indefinite-lived trade name
We consider the Petco trade name to be an indefinite-lived intangible asset, as we currently anticipate that this trade name will contribute cash flows to us indefinitely. We perform our annual impairment test during the fourth quarter of each year or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. Management has the option to first perform a quantitative assessment of its trade name asset to determine whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative impairment test. We also have the option to bypass the qualitative assessment described above and proceed directly to quantitative assessment.
In cases where a quantitative test is performed, the fair value of our trade name is estimated using the assistance of a third-party valuation firm using the relief from royalty valuation method, a variation of the discounted cash flow approach. Significant assumptions inherent in the valuation methodology are employed and include, but are not limited to, prospective financial information, royalty rates and discount rates. An impairment charge is recorded for the amount by which the carrying amount of the trade name exceeds its fair value.
We have not made any material changes in the accounting methodology we use to assess indefinite-lived trade name impairment during the past three fiscal years.
Self-insurance Reserves
We maintain accruals for our self-insurance of workers’ compensation, employee-related healthcare benefits and general and auto liabilities. Insurance coverage is in place above per occurrence retention limits to limit our exposure to large claims. These insurance policies have stated maximum coverage limits, after which we bear the risk of loss. When estimating our self-insurance reserves, we consider a number of factors, including historical experience, trends related to claims and payments, and information provided by our insurance brokers and actuaries. Periodically, we review our assumptions and valuations provided by our actuaries to determine the adequacy of our self-insurance reserves.
We are required to make assumptions and to apply judgments to estimate the ultimate cost to settle reported claims and claims incurred but not reported at the balance sheet date. There were no significant changes to the self-insurance reserves during the past three years other than routine current period activity. A 10% change in our self-insurance reserves at January 30, 2021 would have affected pre-tax loss by $8.4 million in fiscal 2020.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 in the historical consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements.