Item 7. - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Selected statements contained in this “Item 7. - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” constitute “forward-looking statements” as that term is used in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such forward-looking statements are based, in whole or in part, on management’s beliefs, estimates, assumptions and currently available information. For a more detailed discussion of what constitutes a forward-looking statement and of some of the factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from such forward-looking statements, please refer to the “Safe Harbor Statement” in the beginning of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and “Part I - Item 1A. - Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Unless otherwise indicated, all Note references contained in this Part II - Item 7. refer to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in “Part II - Item 8. - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (this “Form 10-K”).
Introduction
Worthington Industries, Inc. is a corporation formed under the laws of the State of Ohio (individually, the “Registrant” or “Worthington Industries” or, collectively with the subsidiaries of Worthington Industries, Inc., “we,” “our,” “Worthington” or the “Company”). Founded in 1955, Worthington is an industrial manufacturing company, focused on value-added steel processing and manufactured metal products. Our manufactured metal products include: pressure cylinders for liquefied petroleum gas (“LPG”), compressed natural gas (“CNG”), oxygen, refrigerant and other industrial gas storage; water well tanks for commercial and residential uses; hand torches and filled hand torch cylinders; propane-filled camping cylinders; helium-filled balloon kits; specialty tools; and, through our joint ventures, complete ceiling grid solutions; laser welded blanks; light gauge steel framing for commercial and residential construction; current and past model automotive service stampings; and engineered cabs and operator stations and cab components. The Company follows a people-first Philosophy with earning money for its shareholders as its first corporate goal, which we seek to accomplish by optimizing existing operations, developing and commercializing new products and applications, and pursuing strategic acquisitions and joint ventures.
As of May 31, 2021, excluding our joint ventures, we operated 21 manufacturing facilities worldwide, principally in two operating segments, which correspond with our reportable business segments: Steel Processing and Pressure Cylinders.
We also held equity positions in nine joint ventures, which operated 47 manufacturing facilities worldwide, including 28 facilities which were operated by joint ventures in which we held a controlling interest, as of May 31, 2021. Four of these joint ventures are consolidated within Steel Processing with the equity owned by the other joint venture member(s) shown as noncontrolling interests in our consolidated balance sheets, and the other joint venture member(s)’ portion of net earnings and other comprehensive income shown as net earnings or comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interests in our consolidated statements of earnings and consolidated statements of comprehensive income, respectively. The remaining five joint ventures are unconsolidated and accounted for using the equity method.
Overview
The Company generated net earnings attributable to controlling interest of $723.8 million in fiscal 2021 driven largely by pre-tax realized gains of $655.1 million related to the divestiture of the Company’s investment in Nikola Corporation (“Nikola”). This amount was partially offset by incremental expenses related to the Nikola gains of $50.6 million within operating income, as discussed further in “Note C - Investment in Nikola.” Despite the incremental expenses within operations, operating income was up $145.0 million in fiscal 2021 to $167.5 million. The increase was driven largely by improved direct spreads in our Steel Processing segment, as rising steel prices led to estimated inventory holding gains of $75.0 million in fiscal 2021 compared to estimated holding losses of $20.3 million in the prior fiscal year. Results in fiscal 2021 also benefitted from lower impairment and restructuring charges, which were down $22.9 million from the prior year. Impairment and restructuring activity in fiscal 2021 related primarily to the divestiture of underperforming assets in Pressure Cylinders, as discussed further in “Note E - Goodwill and Other Long-Lived Assets” and “Note F - Restructuring and Other Expense (Income), Net.”
Equity in net income of unconsolidated affiliates (“equity income”) increased $8.5 million. The increase was primarily driven by higher contributions from ClarkDietrich and Serviacero, where results benefited from rising steel prices, partially offset by a decline in equity income at WAVE due to a $23.1 million gain in the prior fiscal year
related to the sale of WAVE’s international operations. See additional information in “Note D - Investments in Unconsolidated Affiliates.”
The COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic, and the various governmental, industry and consumer actions related thereto, have had and could continue to have negative impacts on our business and have exacerbated and could further exacerbate conditions in our other risk factors noted below. These impacts include, without limitation: potential significant volatility or continued decreases in the demand for our products; changes in customer and consumer behavior and preferences; disruptions in or additional closures of our manufacturing operations or those of our customers and suppliers; disruptions within our supply chain; limitations on our employees’ ability to work and travel; potential financial difficulties of customers and suppliers; significant changes in economic or political conditions; and related financial and commodity volatility, including volatility in raw material and other input costs. The situation is changing rapidly and there may be additional impacts of which we are not yet aware.
It is also uncertain what the impact of various legislation and other responses being taken in the United States and other countries will have on the economy, international trade, our industries, our businesses and the businesses of our customers and suppliers. Governments around the world have implemented stringent measures to help control the spread of COVID-19, including quarantines, “shelter in place” and “stay at home” orders, travel restrictions, business curtailments, school and childcare closures, and other measures. These actions have caused, and are continuing to cause, business shutdowns or slowdowns and significant disruption in the global economy.
Despite our efforts to manage the impacts, the degree to which COVID-19 and related actions ultimately impact our business, financial position, results of operations and cash flows will depend on factors beyond our control including the duration, spread and severity of the outbreak, the actions taken to contain COVID-19 and mitigate its public health effects, the impact on the U.S. and global economies and demand for our products, and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions resume. Continued disruption to the global economy, as well as to the end markets our businesses serve, could result in material adverse effects on our business, financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
Recent Business Developments
•
On June 3, 2020, Nikola Corporation (“Nikola”) became a public company through a reverse merger with a subsidiary of VectoIQ Acquisition Corporation, a NASDAQ listed publicly-traded company. The Company owned 19,048,020 shares of Nikola common stock following the reverse merger and subsequently sold all of the Company’s shares, resulting in pre-tax gains of $655.1 million, which were comprised of $634.4 million in cash proceeds and $20.7 million in value from Nikola shares contributed to the Worthington Industries Foundation. See “Note C - Investment in Nikola” for additional information.
•
Pursuant to a leadership succession plan announced on June 24, 2020 by the Company, effective September 1, 2020, B. Andrew Rose became Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”) of Worthington Industries, in addition to continuing to serve as President, and John P. McConnell, the prior CEO, became Executive Chairman.
•
In October 2020, the Company sold its cryogenic trailer and hydrogen trailer business, including the Theodore, Alabama manufacturing site, to Chart Industries, Inc. and the cryo-science and microbulk storage unit business to IC Biomedical US, LLC. The combined sales proceeds from the two transactions was $21.2 million, resulting in a pre-tax loss of $7.1 million within restructuring and other expense, net.
•
On January 4, 2021, the Company acquired PTEC Pressure Technology GmbH, a leading independent designer and manufacturer of valves and components for high-pressure hydrogen and compressed natural gas storage, transport and onboard fueling systems. The total purchase price was approximately $10.8 million.
•
On January 29, 2021, the Company sold its oil & gas equipment business to an affiliate of Ten Oaks Group. The Company retained the real estate associated with the business and received nominal consideration at closing, resulting in a pre-tax loss of $27.7 million within restructuring and other expense, net.
•
On January 29, 2021, the Company acquired General Tools & Instruments Company LLC, a provider of feature-rich, specialized tools in various categories including environmental health & safety, precision measurement & layout, home repair & remodel, lawn & garden and specific purpose tools. The total purchase price was approximately $120.4 million, after an adjustment for final working capital.
•
On March 12, 2021, the Company sold its Structural Composites Industries, LLC business located in Pomona, California to Luxfer Holdings PLC. The Company received net proceeds of $19.1 million, resulting in a pre-tax loss of $7.2 million within restructuring and other expense, net.
•
On March 24, 2021, Worthington Industries’ Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to an additional 5,618,464 of the outstanding common shares of Worthington Industries, increasing the total number of common shares then available for purchase to 10,000,000.
•
On May 31, 2021, the Company sold its LPG fuel storage business, located in Poland, to Westport Fuel Systems, Inc. The Company received net proceeds of approximately $6.0 million, resulting in a pre-tax loss, of $11.0 million, subject to closing adjustments, within restructuring and other expense, net.
•
On June 8, 2021, the Company acquired the Shiloh Industries U.S. BlankLight® business, a provider of laser welded solutions, for cash consideration of approximately $105.0 million, subject to closing adjustments. The acquisition includes three facilities that will expand the capacity and capabilities of our TWB joint venture’s laser welded products business and an additional blanking facility that will support the Company’s core steel processing operations.
•
On June 9, 2021, the Company’s consolidated joint venture, WSP, sold the remaining assets of its Canton, Michigan, facility for cash proceeds of approximately $20.0 million. The Company will recognize a gain of approximately $12.0 million in the first quarter of fiscal 2022 related to the divestiture.
•
On June 10, 2021, the Company announced that its Pressure Cylinders segment was being divided into three new reportable segments: Consumer Products, Building Products and Sustainable Energy Solutions, effective at the start of fiscal 2022. The three new reportable segments are in addition to the Company’s Steel Processing segment.
•
On June 23, 2021, Worthington Industries’ Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.28 per share payable on September 29, 2021 to shareholders of record on September 15, 2021.
Market & Industry Overview
We sell our products and services to a diverse customer base and a broad range of end markets. The breakdown of our net sales by end market for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 is illustrated in the following chart:
The automotive industry is one of the largest consumers of flat-rolled steel, and thus the largest end market for our Steel Processing operating segment. Approximately 57% of the net sales of our Steel Processing operating segment are to the automotive market. North American vehicle production, primarily by Ford, General Motors and FCA US (the “Detroit Three automakers”), has a considerable impact on the activity within this operating segment. The majority of the net sales of three of our unconsolidated joint ventures are also to the automotive end market.
Approximately 18% of the net sales of our Steel Processing operating segment are to the construction market. The construction market is also the predominant end market for two of our unconsolidated joint ventures: WAVE and ClarkDietrich. While the market price of steel significantly impacts these businesses, there are other key indicators that are meaningful in analyzing construction market demand, including U.S. gross domestic product (“GDP”), the Dodge Index of construction contracts and, in the case of ClarkDietrich, trends in the relative price of framing lumber and steel.
Substantially all of the net sales of our Pressure Cylinders operating segment and approximately 25% of the net sales of our Steel Processing operating segment are to other markets such as agricultural, appliance, consumer products, heavy-truck, industrial products, and lawn and garden. Given the many different products that make up these net sales and the wide variety of end markets, it is very difficult to detail the key market indicators that drive this portion of our business. However, we believe that the trend in U.S. GDP growth is a good economic indicator for analyzing the demand of these end markets.
We use the following information to monitor our costs and demand in our major end markets:
2020/2019 figures based on revised actuals 2 CRU Hot-Rolled Index; period average 3 IHS Global 4 LME Zinc; period average 5 NYMEX Henry Hub Natural Gas; period average 6 Energy Information Administration; period average
U.S. GDP growth rate trends are generally indicative of the strength in demand and, in many cases, pricing for our products. A year-over-year increase in U.S. GDP growth rates is indicative of a stronger economy, which generally increases demand and pricing for our products. Conversely, decreasing U.S. GDP growth rates generally indicate a weaker economy. Changes in U.S. GDP growth rates can also signal changes in conversion costs related to production and in SG&A expenses.
The market price of hot-rolled steel is one of the most significant factors impacting our selling prices and operating results. When steel prices fall, we typically have higher-priced material flowing through cost of goods sold, while selling prices compress to what the market will bear, negatively impacting our results. On the other hand, in a rising price environment, our results are generally favorably impacted, as lower-priced material purchased in previous periods flows through cost of goods sold, while our selling prices increase at a faster pace to cover current replacement costs. Based on current steel prices, we expect to have significant inventory holding gains in the first quarter of fiscal 2022.
The following table presents the average quarterly market price per ton of hot-rolled steel during fiscal 2021, fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019:
CRU Hot-Rolled Index
Sales to one Steel Processing customer in the automotive industry represented 11.2% of our consolidated net sales during fiscal 2021. While our automotive business is largely driven by the production schedules of the Detroit Three automakers, our customer base is much broader and includes other domestic manufacturers and many of their suppliers. During fiscal 2021, vehicle production for the Detroit Three automakers and the North American vehicle production were up 6% and 11%, respectively
Certain other commodities, such as copper, zinc, natural gas and diesel fuel, represent a significant portion of our cost of goods sold, both directly through our plant operations and indirectly through transportation and freight expense.
Results of Operations
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
Consolidated Operations
The following table presents consolidated operating results for the periods indicated:
Fiscal 2021 net earnings attributable to controlling interest increased $645.0 million over fiscal 2020. Net sales and operating highlights for fiscal 2021 were as follows:
•
Net sales increased $112.3 million over fiscal 2020. The increase was driven primarily by higher direct volume and higher average direct selling prices in our Steel Processing segment, partially offset by the impact of divestitures in fiscal 2021.
•
Gross margin increased $195.7 million over fiscal 2020. The increase was driven primarily by improved direct spreads in our Steel Processing segment, which were up $152.8 million due to the favorable year-over-
year impact of inventory holding gains and losses and arbitrage opportunities in fiscal 2021. Inventory holding gains were estimated to be $75.0 million in fiscal 2021 compared to inventory holding losses of $20.3 million in fiscal 2020.
•
SG&A expense increased $23.0 million over fiscal 2020. The increase was driven primarily by higher profit sharing and bonus expense as a result of the significant increase in earnings, partially offset by lower wages due to the reduction in workforce implemented in response to COVID-19. Overall, SG&A expense was 11.1% of consolidated net sales in fiscal 2021 compared to 10.7% in fiscal 2020.
•
Impairment charges totaled $13.7 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $82.7 million in fiscal 2020. Fiscal 2021 impairment charges related primarily to divestitures within our Pressure Cylinders segment. Fiscal 2020 impairment charges related primarily to the deconsolidation of our former Engineered Cabs business and the impairment of certain long-lived assets in our former oil & gas equipment business within our Pressure Cylinders segment. For additional information regarding these impairment charges, refer to “Note E - Goodwill and Other Long-Lived Assets”.
•
Restructuring and other expense, net totaled $56.1 million and primarily resulted from losses recognized from the sale of non-core businesses with Pressure Cylinders in fiscal 2021. See “Note F - Restructuring and Other Expense (Income), Net” for additional information related to these divestitures.
•
Incremental expenses related to Nikola gains of $50.6 million in fiscal 2021 consisted of $30.0 million of increased profit sharing and bonus expenses related to the Nikola investment gains and $20.7 million for the contribution of 500,000 shares of Nikola common stock to the Worthington Industries Foundation in the first quarter of fiscal 2021. For additional information, refer to “Note C - Investment in Nikola”.
•
Miscellaneous income, net decreased $6.8 million from fiscal 2020 when the Company recognized a $6.1 million gain to remeasure its previously held equity interest in Worthington Samuel Coil Processing LLC, which was consolidated effective December 31, 2019.
•
Equity income increased $8.5 million over fiscal 2020 to $123.3 million. The increase was primarily driven by higher contributions from ClarkDietrich and Serviacero, where results benefited from rising steel prices, partially offset by a decline in equity income at WAVE due to a $23.1 million gain in fiscal 2020 related to the sale of WAVE’s international operations. We received cash distributions from our unconsolidated joint ventures of $91.0 million. For additional financial information regarding our unconsolidated affiliates, refer to “Note D - Investments in Unconsolidated Affiliates”.
•
The $655.1 million in pre-tax gains from the Nikola investment were realized as the Company sold or donated its shares in Nikola at various times throughout fiscal 2021. For additional information, refer to “Note C - Investment in Nikola”.
•
Income tax expense increased $150.0 million from fiscal 2020 due to the significant increase in pre-tax income driven by the Nikola gains partially offset by losses generated from the sale of the oil & gas equipment and Poland cylinders businesses. These losses and a favorable change in the mix of earnings were the primary reason for the decrease in the estimated annual effective tax rate to 19.6% from 25.1% in fiscal 2020. For additional information regarding the Company’s income taxes, refer to “Note N - Income Taxes”.
Segment Operations
Steel Processing
The following table presents a summary of operating results for our Steel Processing operating segment for the periods indicated:
Net sales and operating highlights for fiscal 2021 were as follows:
•
Net sales increased $199.7 million over fiscal 2020. The increase in net sales was driven by higher average direct selling prices associated with the rise in the overall market price of steel combined with higher volume, as both direct tons and toll tons processed increased over fiscal 2020, which had been negatively impacted by COVID-19. The mix of direct tons versus toll tons processed was 48% to 52% in both fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020.
•
Operating income increased $168.0 million over fiscal 2020, primarily due to improved direct spreads, which were up $152.8 million due to the favorable year-over-year impact of inventory holding gains and losses and arbitrage opportunities in fiscal 2021. Inventory holding gains were estimated to be $75.0 million in fiscal 2021 compared to inventory holding losses of $20.3 million in fiscal 2020.
Pressure Cylinders
The following table presents a summary of operating results for our Pressure Cylinders operating segment for the periods indicated:
Net sales and operating highlights for fiscal 2021 were as follows:
•
Net sales decreased $37.4 million from fiscal 2020, primarily due to the divestiture of the oil & gas equipment business on January 29, 2021, which decreased net sales by $91.0 million, partially offset by the impact of acquisitions and higher volumes in the base consumer products business.
•
Operating income decreased $29.6 million from fiscal 2020. The decrease was mainly driven by higher impairment and restructuring charges, up an aggregate of $25.4 million over fiscal 2020 as discussed further in “Note E - Goodwill and Other Long-Lived Assets” and “Note F - Restructuring and Other Expenses (Income), Net”. The remaining decrease was due to higher SG&A expense, up $5.7 million on higher allocated corporate profit sharing and bonus expense resulting from the increase in earnings.
Other
The Other category includes certain income and expense items not allocated to our operating segments, including product liability and healthcare reserves. The Other category also includes the results of the former Engineered Cabs operating segment, on a historical basis, through November 1, 2019, when substantially all of the
net assets were deconsolidated. The following table presents a summary of operating results for the Other category for the periods indicated:
Net sales and operating highlights for fiscal 2021 were as follows:
•
Net sales decreased $49.9 million from fiscal 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by the deconsolidation of Engineered Cabs effective November 1, 2019. For additional information on the deconsolidation, refer to “Note A - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”.
•
Operating income of $0.1 million in fiscal 2021 was a $57.1 million improvement over fiscal 2020. The improvement was driven by prior year impairment charges related primarily to the deconsolidation of Engineered Cabs and a lower allocation of corporate costs. For additional information on the impairment charges in fiscal 2020, refer to “Note E - Goodwill and Other Long-Lived Assets”.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019
For a comparison of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2020 and May 31, 2019, see “Part II - Item 7. - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Results of Operations - Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on July 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
During fiscal 2021, we received $634.4 million of cash proceeds from the sale of Nikola shares, generated $274.4 million of cash from operating activities, received $45.9 million in proceeds from asset sales, net of selling costs, invested $82.2 million in property, plant and equipment, and paid a combined $129.6 million to acquire GTI and PTEC. Additionally, we paid dividends of $53.0 million on Worthington Industries’ common shares and spent $192.1 million to repurchase 4,018,464 of Worthington Industries’ common shares. The following table summarizes our consolidated cash flows for each period shown:
We believe we have access to adequate resources to meet the needs of our existing businesses for normal operating costs, mandatory capital expenditures, debt redemptions, dividend payments, and working capital, to the extent not funded by cash provided by operating activities. These resources include cash and cash equivalents and unused committed lines of credit. These committed lines of credit had a total of $500.0 million of borrowing capacity available to be drawn as of July 30, 2021.
Although we do not currently anticipate a need, we believe that we could access the financial markets to be in a position to sell long-term debt or equity securities. However, COVID-19 and other economic conditions could create uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets which may impact our ability to access capital and the terms under which we can do so. As the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and our operations is fluid and evolving, we will continue to review our discretionary spending and other variable costs as well as our liquidity needs.
We routinely monitor current operational requirements, financial market conditions, and credit relationships and we may choose to seek additional capital by issuing new debt and/or equity securities to strengthen our liquidity or capital structure. However, should we seek such additional capital, there can be no assurance that we would be able to obtain such additional capital on terms acceptable to us, if at all, and such additional equity or debt financing could dilute the interests of our existing shareholders and/or increase our interest costs.
Operating Activities
Our business is cyclical and cash flows from operating activities may fluctuate during the year and from year to year due to economic and industry conditions. We rely on cash and short-term borrowings to meet cyclical increases in working capital needs. These needs generally rise during periods of increased economic activity or increasing raw material prices, requiring higher levels of inventory and accounts receivable. During economic slowdowns or periods of decreasing raw material costs, working capital needs generally decrease as a result of the reduction of inventories and accounts receivable.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $274.4 million during fiscal 2021 compared to $336.7 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease in net cash provided by operating activities was driven by a combination of lower cash adjusted operating results and an increase in working capital.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $468.5 million during fiscal 2021 compared to a net cash outflow of $116.2 million in fiscal 2020. The change from fiscal 2020 was driven in large part by $634.4 million of proceeds from the sale of Nikola shares, partially offset by $129.6 million in cash outflow related to the acquisitions of GTI and PTEC. In fiscal 2021, we also received $45.9 million in proceeds from asset sales, net of selling costs, primarily related to fiscal 2021 divestitures in Pressure Cylinders. See “Note F - Restructuring and Other Expense (Income), Net” for additional information.
Capital expenditures reflect cash used for investment in property, plant and equipment and is presented below by reportable business segment (this information excludes cash flows related to acquisition and divestiture activity):
Capital expenditures were $82.2 million in fiscal 2021. Significant capital expenditures for Steel Processing in fiscal 2021 included: $9.0 million for the addition of a new coating capability at our Spartan joint venture and $3.3 million for a new laser weld line and implementation of a new ERP system at our TWB joint venture. Some of the more significant items at Pressure Cylinders were $8.8 million for new production lines at two facilities and $3.8 million for an equipment update at our Austrian facility.
Investment activities are largely discretionary and future investment activities could be reduced significantly, or eliminated, as economic conditions warrant. We assess acquisition opportunities as they arise, and any such opportunities may require additional financing. There can be no assurance, however, that any such opportunities will arise, that any such acquisition opportunities will be consummated, or that any needed additional financing will be available on satisfactory terms if required.
Financing Activities
Net cash used by financing activities was $249.8 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $165.7 million in fiscal 2020. During fiscal 2021, we paid $192.1 million to repurchase 4,018,464 of our common shares and paid dividends of $53.0 million on our common shares. In fiscal 2020, we paid $154.0 million to redeem the $150.0 million aggregate principal amount of unsecured 6.50% senior notes that were set to mature on April 15, 2020. In fiscal 2020, we also paid $51.0 million to repurchase 1,300,000 of our common shares and paid dividends of $53.3 million on our common shares.
Long-term debt - Our senior unsecured long-term debt is rated “investment grade” by both Moody’s Investors Service, Inc. and Standard & Poor’s Ratings Group. We typically use the net proceeds from long-term debt for acquisitions, refinancing of outstanding debt, capital expenditures and general corporate purposes. As of May 31, 2021, we were in compliance with our long-term financial debt covenants. Our long-term debt agreements do not include ratings triggers or material adverse change provisions.
The issuance of euro-denominated unsecured Senior Notes was completed on August 23, 2019, when two of our European subsidiaries issued an aggregate principal amount of €91.7 million in a private placement and the proceeds were used to retire existing indebtedness of the Company. The Series A Senior Note of €36.7 million bears interest at 1.56% and has principal payments of €30.0 million due on August 23, 2029 and €6.7 million due on August 23, 2031. The Series B Senior Notes totaling €55.0 million bear interest at 1.90% and have principal payments of €23.3 million due on August 23, 2031 and €31.7 million due on August 23, 2034.
Short-term borrowings - Our short-term debt agreements do not include ratings triggers or material adverse change provisions. We were in compliance with our short-term financial debt covenants at May 31, 2021.
We maintain a $500.0 million multi-year revolving credit facility (the “Credit Facility”) with a group of lenders that matures in February 2023. Borrowings under the Credit Facility have maturities of up to one year. We have the option to borrow at rates equal to an applicable margin over the LIBOR, Prime or Overnight Bank Funding rate. The applicable margin is determined by our credit rating. There were no borrowings outstanding under the Credit Facility at May 31, 2021. As discussed in “Note H - Guarantees,” we had in place $17.4 million in outstanding letters of credit for third-party beneficiaries as of May 31, 2021. No amounts were drawn against at May 31, 2021, and the fair value of these guarantee instruments, based on premiums paid, was not material.
During fiscal 2021, fiscal 2020, and fiscal 2019, we maintained a revolving trade accounts receivable securitization facility (the “AR Facility”). On July 22, 2020, the Company elected to terminate the AR Facility.
Common shares - We declared dividends at a quarterly rate of $0.25 per common share for the first, second, and third quarters of fiscal 2021, and $0.28 for the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, compared to $0.24 per common share for each quarter of fiscal 2020. Dividends paid on our common shares totaled $53.0 million and $53.3 million during fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively. On June 23, 2021, the Worthington Industries Board declared a quarterly dividend of $0.28 per common share for the first quarter of fiscal 2022. The dividend is payable on September 29, 2021 to shareholders of record on September 15, 2021.
On September 27, 2017, the Worthington Industries Board authorized the repurchase of up to 6,828,855 outstanding common shares of Worthington Industries. On March 20, 2019, the Worthington Industries Board authorized the repurchase of up to an additional 6,600,000 of the outstanding common shares of Worthington Industries. On March 24, 2021, the Worthington Industries Board authorized the repurchase of up to an additional 5,618,464 outstanding common shares of Worthington Industries, increasing the then total number of common shares available for repurchase to 10,000,000. These common shares may be purchased from time to time, with consideration given to the market price of the common shares, the nature of other investment opportunities, cash flows from operations, general economic conditions and other relevant considerations. Repurchases may be made on the open market or through privately negotiated transactions. The total number of common shares available for repurchase at May 31, 2020 was 9,300,000.
During fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, we repurchased 4,018,464 and 1,300,000 common shares under the authorizations described above, having an aggregate cost of $192.1 million and $51.0 million, respectively.
Dividend Policy
We currently have no material contractual or regulatory restrictions on the payment of dividends. Dividends are declared at the discretion of the Worthington Industries Board. The Worthington Industries Board reviews the dividend quarterly and establishes the dividend rate based upon our financial condition, results of operations, capital requirements, current and projected cash flows, business prospects and other relevant factors. While we have paid a dividend every quarter since becoming a public company in 1968, there is no guarantee that payments of dividends will continue in the future.
Contractual Cash Obligations and Other Commercial Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual cash obligations as of May 31, 2021. Certain of these contractual obligations are reflected in our consolidated balance sheet, while others are disclosed as future obligations in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Interest expense on long-term debt is computed by using the rates of interest on each tranche of long-term debt, including impacts of the related interest rate hedges. Royalty obligations relate to a trademark license agreement executed in connection with the acquisition of the Coleman Cylinders business in fiscal 2012. Due to the uncertainty regarding the timing of future cash outflows associated with the unfunded portion of our pension benefit obligations and our unrecognized tax benefits, we are unable to make a reliable estimate of the periods of cash settlement and have not included these amounts in the contractual cash obligations table above. For additional information, refer to “Note M - Employee Pension Plans” and “Note N - Income Taxes”.
The following table summarizes our other commercial commitments as of May 31, 2021. These commercial commitments are not reflected in our consolidated balance sheet.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have guarantees or other off-balance sheet financing arrangements that we believe are reasonably likely to have a material current or future effect on our consolidated financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenue or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. However, as of May 31, 2021, we were party to an operating lease for an aircraft in which we have guaranteed a residual value at the termination of the lease. The maximum obligation under the terms of this guarantee was approximately $19.6 million at May 31, 2021. Based on current facts and circumstances, we have estimated the likelihood of payment pursuant to this guarantee is not probable and, therefore, no amount has been recognized in our consolidated financial statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
In June 2016, amended accounting guidance was issued related to the measurement of credit losses on financial instruments. The amended accounting guidance changes the impairment model for most financial assets to require measurement and recognition of expected credit losses for financial assets held. The amended accounting guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The adoption of this new accounting standard update in fiscal 2021 did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial position, results of operations, or cash flows. Additionally, there have been no changes to our significant accounting policies as disclosed in this 2021 Form 10-K as a result of the adoption of this new accounting guidance.
Environmental
We do not believe that compliance with environmental laws has or will have a material effect on our capital expenditures, future results of operations or financial position or competitive position.
Inflation
The effects of inflation on our operations were not significant during the periods presented in the consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
The discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. We continually evaluate our estimates, including those related to our valuation of receivables, inventories, intangible assets, accrued liabilities, income and other tax accruals and contingencies and litigation. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These results form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Critical accounting policies are defined as those that reflect our significant judgments and uncertainties that could potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. Although actual results historically have not deviated significantly from those determined using our estimates, as discussed below, our consolidated financial position or results of operations could be materially different if we were to report under different conditions or to use different assumptions in the application of such policies. We believe the following accounting policies are the most critical to us, as these are the primary areas where financial information is subject to our estimates, assumptions and judgment in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition: On June 1, 2018, we adopted accounting guidance that replaced most existing revenue recognition accounting guidance under U.S. GAAP, Accounting Standards Update 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) (“Topic 606”). Under this accounting guidance, we recognize revenue upon transfer of control of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive for those goods or services, including any variable consideration.
Impairment of Definite-Lived Long-Lived Assets: We review the carrying value of our long-lived assets, including intangible assets with finite useful lives, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. Impairment testing involves a comparison of the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows of the asset or asset group to its respective carrying amount. If the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows exceeds the carrying amount, then no impairment exists. If the carrying amount exceeds the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows, then a second step is performed to determine the amount of impairment, if any, to be recognized. An impairment loss is recognized to the extent that the carrying amount of the asset or asset group exceeds its fair value.
Impairment of Indefinite-Lived Long-Lived Assets: Goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite lives are not amortized, but instead are tested for impairment annually, during the fourth quarter, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that impairment may be present. Application of goodwill impairment testing involves judgment, including but not limited to, the identification of reporting units and estimation of the fair value of
each reporting unit. A reporting unit is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment. With the exception of Pressure Cylinders, we test goodwill at the operating segment level as we have determined that the characteristics of the reporting units within each operating segment are similar and allow for their aggregation in accordance with the applicable accounting guidance. For our Pressure Cylinders operating segment, the oil & gas equipment business was treated as a separate reporting unit through the date of divestiture on January 29, 2021.
For goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets, we test for impairment by first evaluating qualitative factors including macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, and overall financial performance. If there are no concerns raised from this evaluation, no further testing is performed. If, however, our qualitative analysis indicates it is more likely than not that the fair value is less than the carrying amount, a quantitative analysis is performed. The quantitative analysis compares the fair value of each reporting unit or indefinite-lived intangible asset to the respective carrying amount, and an impairment loss is recognized in our consolidated statements of earnings equivalent to the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value. Fair value is determined based on discounted cash flows or appraised values, as appropriate. Either way, our policy is to perform a quantitative analysis of each reporting unit at least every three years.
Impairment of Equity Method Investments: We review our equity method investments for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the investment might not be recoverable. Events and circumstances can include, but are not limited to: evidence we do not have the ability to recover the carrying value; the inability of the investee to sustain earnings; the current fair value of the investment is less than the carrying value; and other investors cease to provide support or reduce their financial commitment to the investee. If the fair value of the investment is less than the carrying value, and the investment will not recover in the near term, then other-than-temporary impairment may exist. When the loss in value of an investment is determined to be other-than-temporary, we recognize an impairment in the period the conclusion is made.
Strategic Investments: From time to time the Company may make investments in both privately and publicly held equity securities in which the Company does not have a controlling interest or significant influence. Investments are recorded at fair value and changes in fair value for equity securities are reported in the consolidated statement of earnings. The Company elected to record equity securities without readily determinable fair values at cost, less impairment, plus or minus subsequent adjustments for observable price changes in orderly transactions for the identical or a similar investment of the same issuer.
Income Taxes: In accordance with the authoritative accounting guidance, we account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. The asset and liability method requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for expected future tax consequences of temporary differences that currently exist between the tax basis and financial reporting basis of our assets and liabilities. We evaluate the deferred tax assets to determine whether it is more likely than not that some, or a portion, of the deferred tax assets will not be realized, and provide a valuation allowance as appropriate.
In accordance with accounting literature related to uncertainty in income taxes, tax benefits from uncertain tax positions that are recognized in the consolidated financial statements are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement.
We have reserves for income taxes and associated interest and penalties that may become payable in future years as a result of audits by taxing authorities. It is our policy to record these in income tax expense. While we believe the positions taken on previously filed tax returns are appropriate, we have established the tax and interest reserves in recognition that various taxing authorities may challenge our positions. These reserves are analyzed periodically, and adjustments are made as events occur to warrant adjustment to the reserves, such as lapsing of applicable statutes of limitations, conclusion of tax audits, additional exposure based on current calculations, identification of new issues, and release of administrative guidance or court decisions affecting a particular tax issue.
Business Combinations: We account for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires that once control is obtained, all the assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their respective fair values at the date of acquisition. The determination of fair values of identifiable assets and liabilities requires significant judgments and estimates and the use of valuation techniques when market value is not readily available. For the valuation of intangible assets acquired in a business combination, we typically use an income approach. The purchase price allocated to the intangible assets is based on unobservable assumptions, inputs and
estimates, including but not limited to, forecasted revenue growth rates, projected expenses, discount rates, customer attrition rates, royalty rates, and useful lives, among others. The excess of the purchase price over the fair values of identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. During the measurement period, which is up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
The critical accounting policies discussed herein are not intended to represent a comprehensive list of all of our accounting policies. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by U.S. GAAP, with a lesser need for our judgment in their application. There are also areas in which our judgment in selecting an available alternative would not produce a materially different result.