Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion is provided to assist in understanding our Company, operations and current business environment and should be considered a supplement to, and read in conjunction with, the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes included within Part II - Item 8 Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, as well as the discussion of our business and related risk factors in Part I - Item 1 Business and Part I - Item 1A Risk Factors, respectively.
Overview
We are a leading broadband services provider offering high-speed data (“HSD”), cable television (“Video”), and digital telephony (“Telephony”) services to residential customers and offer a full range of products and services to business customers. Our services are delivered across 19 markets via our advanced hybrid fiber-coax (“HFC”) network. Our footprint covers certain suburban areas within the states of Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Maryland, Michigan, Ohio, South Carolina and Tennessee. At December 31, 2020, our broadband networks passed 3.2 million homes and businesses and served 850,600 customers.
In early 2020, we initiated a shift in our offerings towards IP driven services in certain markets through over-the-top (“OTT”) trials, in which we offered customers HSD only service with an alternative video streaming option (e.g., Amazon Firestick). Additionally, we launched our WOW! tv+ service which provides IP based video service to our customers. Our new Internet based video platform offers many advantages compared to the legacy video services we have historically provided, including an integrated customer experience for consuming video content through multiple mediums. The platform also provides for integration with android-based Internet of Things (“IoT”) devices within each customer home as well as provides operational benefits for WOW as we deploy more efficient set-top boxes and recapture bandwidth within our network. As of December 31, 2020, WOW! tv+ is available in nearly 95% of our footprint.
We have also entered into agreements with third-party streaming providers, such as YouTube TV and Sling TV, alongside previous agreements with Philo and Fubo, to promote their services alongside our HSD service. Additionally, we made enhancements to our online store and launched a self-installation kit. These initiatives are moving us towards our objective of clearing our network for better bandwidth utilization, providing more desired solutions for our customers, and optimization of our customer service efforts.
The initiatives above align with the accelerated shift in the industry toward consumption of content over the internet and increased dependency on fast reliable HSD service to effectively work and learn from home. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the average percentage of HSD only new connections was approximately 79% compared to an average percentage of approximately 58% for the year ended December 31, 2019. Additionally, new customers are connecting at higher speeds with approximately 86% of new customers purchasing HSD only service at 200MB or higher during the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to approximately 54% in the fourth quarter of 2019. WOW has met, and expects to continue to meet, capacity demands as network traffic increases.
We continue to refine our response to the continuing global health crisis related to the outbreak of coronavirus, or COVID-19, by focusing on the management of network bandwidth needs and development of self-service options for our customers. In addition to addressing the needs of our customers, WOW is addressing the needs of others within the communities that the Company operates through participation in the ACA Connects “K-12 Bridge to Broadband” initiative to connect students with online learning. ACA Connects is a trade association for small and medium-sized independent broadband providers. The initiative helps school districts and states provide internet access for students in low-income households.
As of December 31, 2020, we are not able to fully predict the overall impact of the global health crisis on our business. While we have not seen a significant increase in delinquent payments, we have increased our allowance for doubtful accounts by an immaterial amount as a precaution resulting from uncertainty related to the potential impact of our residential and business service customers’ ability to pay for services. Additionally, while we have seen only a slight delay in the overall timing of customer payments, we are not yet able to assess the future economic impact of COVID-19 on our business.
Thus far, we have not experienced any adverse effects on our ability to procure materials and equipment. However, we are not able to predict if we will incur delays in obtaining required materials from suppliers and vendors throughout the duration of the global health crisis.
We reviewed the provisions outlined in the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act and have taken advantage of the following provisions: (i) deferral of the employer’s portion of social security payroll taxes to 2021 and 2022, (ii) the interest expense limitation increase from 30% to 50%, and (iii) the acceleration of Alternative Minimum Tax refund credits to 2020. However, while we continue to evaluate the provisions of the CARES Act and other governmental relief efforts, we do not anticipate any other provisions of the CARES Act or other such relief efforts to have a significant impact on our business.
Key Transactions Impacting Operating Results and Financial Condition
Hurricane Michael
On October 10, 2018, Hurricane Michael made landfall in the Florida Panhandle, resulting in significant damage to our network infrastructure and widespread power outages and service disruptions for the majority of our customers in this service area. As a result, we issued service outage credits to impacted customers totaling $5.4 million as of December 31, 2018. In addition, we incurred $0.7 million of additional expenses primarily related to repair and maintenance costs associated with the restoration of the network and customer service, net of programming and other savings and insurance proceeds.
For several weeks after the storm, a portion of our workforce was dedicated to restoring services to our customers as quickly as possible. In less than 90 days, we restored approximately 430 miles of network infrastructure and as of January 4, 2019, completed our restoration of the Panama City, FL network. As of December 31, 2018, we incurred capital expenditures related to restoration of the network of approximately $26.4 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we finalized the insurance claim related to the damages incurred from Hurricane Michael, receiving $9.6 million of business interruption insurance recoveries.
Sale of Chicago Fiber Network
In December 2017, we finalized the sale of a portion of our fiber network in the Chicago market to a subsidiary of Verizon for $225.0 million in cash. In addition, we and a subsidiary of Verizon entered into a construction agreement pursuant to which we agreed to complete the build-out of the network in exchange for $50.0 million (which approximated our estimate to complete the network build-out), recognized over time as the remaining network elements were completed and accepted. We completed the network build-out during the third quarter of 2019. From project inception through completion, the Company has recorded a total loss on the Construction Services Agreement of $0.9 million.
Avista and Crestview Investment
Historically, the Company’s outstanding shares have been majority held by Crestview, LLC (“Crestview”) and Avista Capital Partners (“Avista”), private equity firms based in New York. On August 6, 2019, Avista, in its capacity as the general partner of several funds, executed a distribution-in-kind of its shares of the Company’s common stock to its limited partners, effectively extinguishing its ownership of the Company. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 36% of our outstanding common shares were held by Crestview.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
In the preparation of our consolidated financial statements, we are required to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that we believe are reasonable based upon the information available, in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. Critical accounting policies are defined as those policies that are reflective of significant judgments, estimates and uncertainties, which would potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. We believe the following accounting policies are the most critical in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements because of the judgment necessary to account for these matters and the significant estimates involved, which are susceptible to change.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Carrying Value. The net carrying value of our property, plant and equipment was $1,100.3 million and $1,073.7 million, representing approximately 44% and 43% of our total assets, at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Property, plant and equipment are recorded at cost and include costs associated with the construction of cable transmission and distribution facilities and new service installations at customer locations. Capitalized costs include materials, labor and certain indirect costs attributable to the capitalization activity. Maintenance and repairs are expensed as incurred. Upon sale or retirement of an asset, the cost and related depreciation are removed from the related accounts and resulting gains or losses are reflected in operating results. We make judgments regarding the installation and construction activities to be capitalized. We capitalize direct labor associated with capitalizable activities and indirect cost using standards developed from operational data, including the proportionate time to perform a new installation relative to the total technical operations activities and an evaluation of the nature of the indirect costs incurred to support capitalizable activities. Judgment is required to determine the extent to which indirect costs that have been incurred are related to capitalizable activities and, as a result, should be capitalized. Indirect costs include (i) employee benefits and payroll taxes associated with capitalized direct labor, (ii) direct variable costs of installation and construction vehicle costs, (iii) the direct variable costs of support personnel directly involved in assisting with installation activities, such as dispatchers and (iv) other indirect costs directly attributable to capitalizable activities.
Impairment of Property, Plant and Equipment. Long-lived assets, including property, plant and equipment, are evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If the total of the expected undiscounted cash flows is less than the carrying amount of the asset, a loss is recognized for the difference between the fair value and the carrying value of the asset. No impairments of long-lived assets were recorded for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets consist primarily of acquired franchise operating rights, franchise related customer relationships and goodwill. Franchise operating rights represent the value attributable to agreements with local franchising authorities, which allows access to homes in the public right of way. Our franchise operating rights were acquired through business combinations. We do not amortize cable franchise operating rights as we have determined that they have an indefinite life. Costs incurred in negotiating and renewing cable franchise agreements are expensed as incurred. Franchise related customer relationships represent the value of the benefit to us of acquiring the existing cable subscriber base and are amortized over the estimated life of the subscriber base, generally four years, on a straight-line basis. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the identifiable net assets we acquired in business combinations.
We conduct our cable operations under the authority of state cable television franchises, except in Alabama, Maryland and parts of Michigan where we continue to operate under local franchises. Our franchises have service terms that vary, but generally last from five to 15 years. All of our term-limited franchise agreements are subject to renewal. The renewal process for our state franchises is specified by state law and tends to be a simple process, requiring the filing of a renewal application with information no more burdensome than that contained in our original application.
Although renewal is not assured, there are provisions in the law that protect the Company from arbitrary or unreasonable denial. In most areas in which we operate, we are a “competitive” operator, meaning that we compete directly in the service area with at least one other franchised cable operator. The Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (“1992 Cable Act”) says that “a franchising authority may not...unreasonably refuse to award an additional competitive franchise.” The 1992 Cable Act also provides a formal renewal process that protects cable operators that elect the process against arbitrary or unreasonable refusals to renew a franchise. In addition, on December 20, 2006, the FCC established rules and provided guidance that prohibit local franchising authorities from unreasonably refusing to award competitive franchises for the provision of cable services. In order to eliminate certain barriers to entry into the cable market, and to encourage investment in broadband facilities, the FCC preempted local laws, regulations, and requirements, including local level-playing-field provisions, to the extent they impose greater restrictions on market entry than those adopted under the order. On August 1, 2019, the FCC adopted a Third Report and Order concluding that its franchising rules and findings fully apply to state-level franchising actions and regulations. These orders have the potential to benefit us by facilitating our ability to obtain and renew cable service franchises.
In our experience, state and local franchising authorities encourage our entry into the market, as our competitive presence often leads to overall better service, more service options and lower prices. In our and our expert advisors’ experience, it has not been the practice for a franchising authority to deny a cable franchise renewal. We have never had a renewal denied.
Franchise Operating Rights. The net carrying value of our franchise operating rights was $785.5 million and $799.5 million, representing approximately 32% of total assets, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. See Note 6 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in “Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for further discussion of how we value and evaluate franchise operating rights for impairment.
The estimates and assumptions made in our impairment analysis are inherently subject to significant uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control, and there is no assurance that these results can be achieved. The primary assumptions for which there is a reasonable possibility of the occurrence of a variation that would significantly affect the measurement value include the assumptions regarding revenue growth, programming expense growth rates, the amount and timing of capital expenditures and the discount rate utilized.
We evaluate the recoverability of our franchise operating rights at least annually on October 1, or more frequently whenever events or substantive changes in circumstances indicate that the assets might be impaired. As a result of the 2020 analysis, we identified two franchise operating rights assets in which the fair value was less than the carrying value and recognized an impairment charge equal to the difference. We recognized impairment charges of $14.0 million, $9.7 million and $143.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Goodwill. The net carrying value of goodwill was $408.8 million, representing approximately 16% of total assets, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. See Note 6 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements contained in “Part II. Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for further discussion of how we value and evaluate goodwill for impairment.
Similar to franchise operating rights, we evaluate the recoverability of our goodwill annually on October 1, or more frequently whenever events or substantive changes in circumstances indicate that the assets might be impaired. We recognized impairment charges of $73.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. No such impairment charges were recognized for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 as the result of the annual impairment test indicated the fair value of our goodwill exceeded the carrying value.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax liabilities and assets are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the difference is expected to reverse. Additionally, the impact of changes in the tax rates and laws on deferred taxes, if any, is reflected in the financial statements in the period of enactment. Valuation allowances are established to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that will more likely than not be realized. To the extent that a determination was made to establish or adjust a valuation allowance, the expense or benefit is recorded in the period in which the determination is made.
From time to time, we engage in transactions in which the tax consequences may be subject to uncertainty. Examples of such transactions include business acquisitions and dispositions, including dispositions designed to be tax free, issues related to consideration paid or received, investments and certain financing transactions. Significant judgment is required in assessing and estimating the tax consequences of these transactions. We prepare and file tax returns based on interpretation of tax laws and regulations. In the normal course of business, our tax returns are subject to examination by various taxing authorities. Such examinations may result in future tax, interest and penalty assessments by these taxing authorities. In determining our income tax provision for financial reporting purposes, we establish a reserve for uncertain income tax positions unless such positions are determined to be more likely than not of being sustained upon examination, based on their technical merits. That is, for financial reporting purposes, we only recognize tax benefits taken on the tax return that we believe are more likely than not of being sustained. There is considerable judgment involved in determining whether positions taken on the tax return are more likely than not of being sustained.
We adjust our tax reserve estimates periodically because of ongoing examinations by, and settlements with, the various taxing authorities, as well as changes in tax laws, regulations and interpretations. The consolidated income tax provision of any given year includes adjustments to prior year income tax accruals that are considered appropriate and any related estimated interest. Our policy is to recognize, when applicable, interest and penalties on uncertain income tax positions as part of income tax provision.
Homes Passed and Customers
We report homes passed as the number of serviceable addresses, such as single residence homes, apartments and condominium units, and businesses passed by our broadband network and listed in our database. We report total subscribers as the number of subscribers who receive at least one of our HSD, Video or Telephony services, without regard to which or how many services they subscribe. We define each of the individual HSD subscribers, Video subscribers and Telephony subscribers as a revenue generating unit (“RGU”). The following table summarizes homes passed, total subscribers and total RGUs for our services as of each respective date and does not make adjustment for any of the Company’s acquisitions or divestitures:
The following table displays the homes passed and subscribers related to the Company’s edge-out activities:
While we take appropriate steps to ensure subscriber information is presented on a consistent and accurate basis at any given balance sheet date, we periodically review our policies in light of the variability we may encounter across our different markets due to the nature and pricing of products, services and billing systems. Accordingly, we may from time to time make appropriate adjustments to our subscriber information based on such reviews.
Financial Statement Presentation
Revenue
Our operating revenue is primarily derived from monthly recurring charges for HSD, Video, Telephony and other business services to residential and business customers, in addition to other revenues.
● HSD revenue consists primarily of fixed monthly fees for data service and rental of modems.
● Video revenue consists primarily of fixed monthly fees for basic, premium and digital cable television services and rental of video converter equipment, as well as charges from optional services, such as pay-per-view, video-on-demand and other events available to the customer. The Company is required to pay certain cable franchising authorities an amount based on the percentage of gross revenue derived from video services. The Company generally passes these fees on to the customer, which is included in video revenue.
● Telephony revenue consists primarily of fixed monthly fees for local service and enhanced services, such as call waiting, voice mail and measured and flat rate long-distance service.
● Other business service revenue consists primarily of monthly recurring charges for session initiated protocol, web hosting, metro Ethernet, wireless backhaul, broadband carrier services and cloud infrastructure services provided to business customers.
● Other revenue consists primarily of revenue from line assurance warranty services provided to residential and business customers and revenue from late fees and advertising placement.
Revenues attributable to monthly subscription fees charged to customers for our HSD, Video and Telephony services provided by our broadband networks were 93% and 92% of total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The remaining percentage of total revenue represents non-subscription revenue primarily from other business services, line assurance warranty services and advertising placement.
Costs and Expenses
Our expenses primarily consist of operating, selling, general and administrative expenses, depreciation and amortization expense, and interest expense.
Operating expenses primarily include programming costs, data costs, transport costs and network access fees related to our HSD, Video and Telephony services, hardware/software expenses, network operations and maintenance services, customer service and call center expenses, bad debt, billing and collection expenses and franchise and other regulatory fees.
Selling, general and administrative expenses primarily include salaries and benefits of corporate and field management, sales and marketing personnel, human resources and related administrative costs.
Depreciation and amortization includes depreciation of our network infrastructure, including associated equipment, hardware and software, buildings and leasehold improvements, and finance lease obligations. Amortization is recognized on other intangible assets with definite lives primarily related to acquisitions. Depreciation and amortization expense is presented separately from operating and selling, general and administrative expenses in the accompanying unaudited condensed consolidated statements of operations.
We control our costs of operations by maintaining strict controls on expenditures. More specifically, we are focused on managing our cost structure by improving workforce productivity, increasing the effectiveness of our purchasing activities and maintaining discipline in customer acquisition. We expect programming expenses to continue to increase per Video subscriber due to a variety of factors, including increased demands by owners of some broadcast stations for carriage of other services or payments to those broadcasters for retransmission consent and annual increases imposed by programmers with additional selling power as a result of media consolidation. We have not been able to fully pass these increases on to our customers without the loss of customers, nor do we expect to be able to do so in the future.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $2.6 million as compared to revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019, as follows:
Subscription Revenue
Total subscription revenue increased $14.4 million, or 1%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was driven by a $46.9 million increase in average revenue per unit (“ARPU”), as HSD acquisition sell-in ARPU has increased coupled with periodic Video service rate increases, and a $34.2 million increase in volume attributable almost exclusively to the addition of HSD only subscribers. ARPU is calculated as subscription revenue for each of the HSD, Video and Telephony services divided by the average total RGUs for each service category for the respective period. These increases were partially offset by a $66.7 million shift in service offering mix, as we continue to experience a reduction in Video and Telephony RGUs.
Other Business Services
Other business services revenue decreased $2.1 million, or 8%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to decreases in data center revenue.
Other
Other revenue decreased $9.7 million, or 15%, the during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to decreases in advertising, late fee and line assurance revenue. The reduction of late fee revenue is primarily attributable to the Company’s participation in the FCC pledge from March 12, 2020 to June 30, 2020 to stop charging late fees to customers affected by the global health crisis.
Operating Expenses (Excluding Depreciation and Amortization)
Operating expenses (excluding depreciation and amortization) decreased $5.6 million, or 1%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company finalized the insurance claim related to the damages incurred from Hurricane Michael in the fourth quarter of 2018, receiving approximately $9.6 million of business interruption insurance proceeds, which offset expenses that were otherwise incurred in 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company incurred lower direct expenses, specifically programming expense, partially offset by increased hardware and software and third-party service provider expense.
Incremental Contribution
Incremental contribution is defined as subscription services revenue less costs directly incurred from third parties in connection with the provision of such services to our customers (service direct expense). Incremental contribution increased $38.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
The increase is primarily due to an increase in HSD subscription revenue combined with the decrease in programming expense. Programming expense decreased from $364.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $339.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of lower Video RGUs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $10.2 million, or 6%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily attributable to increases in costs associated with marketing expense and digital transformation initiatives, partially offset by decreased restructuring and travel and entertainment expenses.‌
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
Depreciation and amortization expenses increased $24.4 million, or 12%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase is primarily attributable to assets placed in service in the fourth quarter of 2019 combined with an increase of equipment and vehicle lease activity.
Impairment Losses on Intangibles and Goodwill
The Company recognized non-cash impairment charges of $14.0 million and $9.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The primary driver of the impairment charge in 2020 was a decline in the estimated fair market value of certain indefinite-lived intangible assets, as indicated by the decline in the Company’s common stock and revisions to market-level forecasts. See Note 6 - Franchise Operating Rights & Goodwill for discussion of non-cash impairment charges for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Loss on Sale of Operating Assets
In December 2017, we sold a portion of our Chicago fiber network to a subsidiary of Verizon for $225.0 million in cash. In addition, we and a subsidiary of Verizon entered into a construction agreement pursuant to which we agreed to complete the build-out of the network in exchange for $50.0 million (which approximated our estimate to complete the network build-out), recognized over time as the remaining network elements were completed and accepted. We completed the network build-out during the third quarter of 2019. We recognized a $3.3 million loss on sale of assets resulting from the completion of the construction agreement during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased $11.4 million, or 8%, in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily due to lower interest rates during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income Tax Expense
We reported total income tax expense of $7.8 million and $1.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is primarily due to changes in the valuation allowance, deferred tax assets related to net operating loss carryforwards, and a state bonus depreciation modification, offset by the change in pre-tax income year-over-year.
Use of Incremental Contribution and Adjusted EBITDA
We use certain measures that are not defined by GAAP to evaluate various aspects of our business such as adjusted EBITDA and incremental contribution. These measures should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, consolidated net income (loss) and operating income (loss) or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP as measures of operating performance or operating cash flows, or as measures of liquidity. Our use of the terms adjusted EBITDA and incremental contribution may vary from others in our industry. These metrics have important limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. These metrics do not identify or allocate any other operating costs and expenses that are components of our income from operations (loss) to specific subscription revenues as we do not measure or record such costs and expenses in a manner that would allow attribution to a specific component of subscription revenue.
Adjusted EBITDA
The following table provides a reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss), which is the most directly comparable GAAP measure, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Incremental contribution
Incremental contribution is included herein because we believe that it is a key metric used by our management to assess the financial performance of the business by showing how the relative relationship of the various components of subscription services contributes to our overall consolidated financial results. Our management further believes that it provides useful information to investors in evaluating our financial condition and results of operations because the additional detail illustrates how an incremental dollar of revenue generates cash, before any unallocated costs are considered, which we believe is a key component of our overall strategy and important for understanding what drives our cash flow position relative to our historical results. Incremental contribution is defined by us as the components of subscription revenue, less costs directly incurred from third parties in connection with the provision of such services to our customers.
The following table provides a reconciliation of incremental contribution to income (loss) from operations, which is the most directly comparable GAAP measure, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Previously Disclosed Results of Operations
For a complete narrative of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 refer to Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2020, we had $114.8 million in current assets, including $12.4 million in cash and cash equivalents, and $235.9 million in current liabilities. Our outstanding consolidated debt and finance lease obligations aggregated $2,266.0 million, of which $37.5 million is classified as current in our consolidated balance sheets.
We are required to prepay principal amounts under our Senior Secured Credit Facilities credit agreement if we generate excess cash flow, as defined in the credit agreement. As of December 31, 2020, we had borrowing capacity of $256.6 million under our Revolving Credit Facility and were in compliance with all our debt covenants. Accordingly, we believe that we have sufficient resources to fund our obligations and anticipated liquidity requirements in the foreseeable future in light of the current economic uncertainties.
Operating, Investing, and Financing Activities
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities increased $11.1 million from $266.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $277.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily due to timing differences of our receivables and payables.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities increased $10.2 million from $224.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $234.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change is primarily attributable to non-recurring proceeds from the sale of the Chicago fiber assets received during 2019 partially offset by a decrease in capital expenditures.
We have ongoing capital expenditure requirements related to the maintenance, expansion and technological upgrades of our network infrastructure. Capital expenditures are funded primarily through a combination of cash on hand and cash flow from operations. Our capital expenditures were $234.1 million and $247.5 million for years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The $13.4 million decrease from the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily to a decrease in edge-out expenditures partially offset by an increase in
customer premise equipment (“CPE”) purchases to ensure the Company received the necessary equipment to meet customer demand in light of the coronavirus outbreak and mitigate against potential supply chain issues. Additionally, the Company is no longer incurring costs in relation to the Construction Services Agreement as it was completed during the third quarter of 2019. Capital expenditures associated with the Construction Services Agreement were recognized within the business services capital expenditure category in 2019.
The following table sets forth additional information regarding our capital expenditures for the periods presented:
(1) Customer premise equipment (“CPE”) includes equipment and installation costs incurred to deliver services to residential and business services customers. CPE includes the costs of acquiring and installing our set-top boxes and modems, as well as the cost of customer connections to our network.
(2) Scalable infrastructure includes costs, not directly related to customer acquisition activity, to support new customer growth and provide service enhancements (e.g., headend equipment).
(3) Line extensions include costs associated with new home development within our footprint and edge-outs (e.g., fiber / coaxial cable, amplifiers, electronic equipment, make-ready and design engineering).
(4) Support capital and other includes costs to modify or replace existing HFC network, including enhancements, and all other costs to support day-to-day operations, including land, buildings, vehicles, office equipment, tools and test equipment.
(5) Edge-outs represent costs to extend our network into new adjacent service areas, including the associated CPE.
(6) Business services represent costs associated with the build-out of our network to support business services customers, including the associated CPE
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities increased $17.3 million from $34.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $51.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily attributable to an increase in net repayments of indebtedness of $17.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Contractual Obligations
We have obligations to make future payments for goods and services under certain contractual arrangements. These contractual obligations secure the future rights to various assets and services to be used in the normal course of our operations. In accordance with GAAP, the future rights and obligations pertaining to firm commitments, such as operating lease obligations and certain contractual purchase obligations, are not reflected as assets or liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. The long term debt obligations are our principal payments on cash debt service obligations. Finance lease obligations are future lease payments on certain equipment and vehicles. Operating lease obligations are the future minimum rental payments required under the operating leases that have initial or remaining non-cancellable lease terms in excess of one year as of December 31, 2020.
The following table summarizes certain of our obligations as of December 31, 2020 and the estimated timing and effect that such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods (in millions):
(1) Interest payments associated with our variable-rate debt have not been included in the table. Assuming that our $2,237.9 million of variable-rate Senior Secured Credit Facilities as of December 31, 2020 is held to maturity, and utilizing interest rates in effect at December 31, 2020, our annual interest payments (including commitment fees and letter of credit fees) on variable rate Senior Secured Credit Facilities as of December 31, 2020 is anticipated to be approximately $106.0 million for fiscal year 2021 and $219.1 million for fiscal years 2022-2023. The debt matures on August 19, 2023. The future annual interest obligations noted herein are estimated only in relation to debt outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
(2) In addition to the above operating lease obligations, we also rent utility poles used in our operations. Generally, pole rentals are cancellable on short notice, but we anticipate that such rentals will recur. Rent expense for pole rental attachments was approximately $9.4 million, $9.1 million and $8.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Part II-Item 8 Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 2, “Recent Accounting Pronouncements” for a description of new accounting pronouncements.