ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
W. R. Berkley Corporation is an insurance holding company that is among the largest commercial lines writers in the United States and operates worldwide in two business segments of the property and casualty business: Insurance and Reinsurance & Monoline Excess. Our decentralized structure provides us with the flexibility to respond quickly and efficiently to local or specific market conditions and to pursue specialty business niches. It also allows us to be closer to our customers in order to better understand their individual needs and risk characteristics. While providing our business units with certain operating autonomy, our structure allows us to capitalize on the benefits of economies of scale through centralized capital, investment, reinsurance and enterprise risk management, and actuarial, financial and corporate legal staff support. The Company's primary sources of revenues and earnings are its insurance operations and its investments.
An important part of our strategy is to form new operating units to capitalize on various business opportunities. Over the years, the Company has formed numerous new operating units that are focused on important parts of the economy in the U.S., including healthcare, cyber security, energy and agriculture, and on growing international markets, including the Asia-Pacific region, South America and Mexico.
The profitability of the Company’s insurance business is affected primarily by the adequacy of premium rates. The ultimate adequacy of premium rates is not known with certainty at the time an insurance policy is issued because premiums are determined before claims are reported. The ultimate adequacy of premium rates is affected mainly by the severity and frequency of claims, which are influenced by many factors, including natural and other disasters, regulatory measures and court decisions that define and change the extent of coverage and the effects of economic or social inflation on the amount of compensation for injuries or losses. General insurance prices are also influenced by available insurance capacity, i.e., the level of capital employed in the industry, and the industry’s willingness to deploy that capital.
The Company’s profitability is also affected by its investment income and investment gains. The Company’s invested assets are invested principally in fixed maturity securities. The return on fixed maturity securities is affected primarily by general interest rates, as well as the credit quality and duration of the securities. Returns available on fixed maturity investments have been at low levels for an extended period.
The Company also invests in equity securities, merger arbitrage securities, investment funds, private equity, loans and real estate related assets. The Company's investments in investment funds and its other alternative investments have experienced, and the Company expects to continue to experience, greater fluctuations in investment income. The Company's share of the earnings or losses from investment funds is generally reported on a one-quarter lag in order to facilitate the timely completion of the Company's consolidated financial statements.
Effective January 1, 2020, the Company adopted new accounting standard ASU 2016-13 Financial Instruments - Credit Losses. Refer to Note 1 in the financial statements for further information on the accounting guidance and impact of its adoption on the Company's results and financial position.
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, including the related impact on the U.S. and global economies, has materially and adversely affected our results of operations. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded approximately $171 million for COVID-19-related losses, net of reinsurance, and reinstatement premiums of approximately $18 million. The ultimate impact of COVID-19 on the economy and on the Company’s results of operations, financial position and liquidity is uncertain and not within the Company’s control. The scope, duration and magnitude of the direct and indirect effects of COVID-19 continue to evolve in ways that are difficult or impossible to anticipate. Despite the effects of COVID-19 to date, the Company’s financial position and liquidity improved commencing in the second quarter.
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations, financial position and liquidity is expected to include, among others:
Adverse Legislative and Regulatory Action. Legislative and regulatory initiatives taken or that may be taken in response to COVID-19, such as those that seek to retroactively mandate or provide a presumption of coverage for losses which our insurance policies would not otherwise cover and were not priced to cover, may adversely affect us, particularly in our workers’ compensation and property coverages businesses.
Claim Losses Related to COVID-19 May Exceed Reserves. Given the great uncertainties associated with COVID-19 and its impact and the limited information upon which our current assumptions and assessments have been made, our reserves and underlying estimated level of claim losses and costs arising from COVID-19 may materially change.
Claim Losses and Adjustment Expenses May Increase. As the effects of COVID-19 on industry practices and economic, legal, judicial, social and other environmental conditions continue to evolve, unexpected and unintended issues related to claims and coverages may emerge (including in the area of property coverages where physical damage requirements and communicable disease exclusions are currently being challenged).
Reinsurance. Reinsurers may dispute the applicability of reinsurance to COVID-19 related losses (including the application of reinsurance reinstatements) and, as a result, our reinsurers may refuse to pay reinsurance recoverables related thereto or they may not pay them on a timely basis. In addition, we may be unable to renew our current reinsurance coverages or purchase new coverages with respect to certain exposures under our policies, including COVID-19-related exposures.
Premium Volumes May Be Negatively Impacted. Reduced economic activity relating to the COVID-19 pandemic will likely decrease demand for our insurance products and services. In addition, we may alter our view on the insurance coverages that are appropriate to offer in various jurisdictions, which could further negatively impact our premium volumes.
Investments. Further disruptions in global financial markets due to the continuing impact of COVID-19 could cause us to incur additional unrealized and/or realized investment losses, including impairments in our fixed income portfolio and other investments.
Credit Risk. As credit risk is generally a function of the economy, we face greater credit risk from our policyholders, independent agents and brokers in connection with the payment and remittance of premiums as a result of the economic conditions caused by COVID-19. Similarly, our credit risk related to the reimbursement of deductibles from policyholders and in connection with reinsurance recoverables has increased.
Operational Disruptions and Costs. Our operations could be disrupted if key members of our senior management or a significant percentage of our workforce or the workforce of our agents, brokers, suppliers or other third party service providers are unable to continue to work because of illness, government directives or otherwise. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have implemented remote working policies which have resulted in disruptions to our business routines, heightened risk to cybersecurity attacks and data security incidents and a greater dependency on internet and telecommunication access and capabilities.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The following presents a discussion of accounting policies and estimates relating to reserves for losses and loss expenses, assumed reinsurance premiums and other-than-temporary impairments of investments. Management believes these policies and estimates are the most critical to its operations and require the most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Reserves for Losses and Loss Expenses. To recognize liabilities for unpaid losses, either known or unknown, insurers establish reserves, which is a balance sheet account representing estimates of future amounts needed to pay claims and related expenses with respect to insured events which have occurred. Estimates and assumptions relating to reserves for losses and loss expenses are based on complex and subjective judgments, often including the interplay of specific uncertainties with related accounting and actuarial measurements. Such estimates are also susceptible to change as significant periods of time may elapse between the occurrence of an insured loss, the report of the loss to the insurer, the ultimate determination of the cost of the loss and the insurer’s payment of that loss.
In general, when a claim is reported, claims personnel establish a “case reserve” for the estimated amount of the ultimate payment based upon known information about the claim at that time. The estimate represents an informed judgment based on general reserving practices and reflects the experience and knowledge of the claims personnel regarding the nature and value of the specific type of claim. Reserves are also established on an aggregate basis to provide for losses incurred but not reported (“IBNR”) to the insurer, potential inadequacy of case reserves and the estimated expenses of settling claims, including legal and other fees and general expenses of administrating the claims adjustment process. Reserves are established based upon the then current legal interpretation of coverage provided.
In examining reserve adequacy, several factors are considered in estimating the ultimate economic value of losses. These factors include, among other things, historical data, legal developments, changes in social attitudes and economic conditions, including the effects of inflation. The actuarial process relies on the basic assumption that past experience, adjusted judgmentally for the effects of current developments and anticipated trends, is an appropriate basis for predicting future outcomes. Reserve amounts are based on management’s informed estimates and judgments using currently available data. As additional experience and other data become available and are reviewed, these estimates and judgments may be revised. This may result in reserve increases or decreases that would be reflected in our results in periods in which such estimates and assumptions are changed.
Reserves do not represent a certain calculation of liability. Rather, reserves represent an estimate of what management expects the ultimate settlement and claim administration will cost. While the methods for establishing reserves are well tested over time, the major assumptions about anticipated loss emergence patterns are subject to uncertainty. These estimates, which generally involve actuarial projections, are based on management’s assessment of facts and circumstances then known, as well as estimates of trends in claims severity and frequency, judicial theories of liability and other factors, including the actions of third parties which are beyond the Company’s control. These variables are affected by external and internal events, such as inflation and economic volatility, judicial and litigation trends, reinsurance coverage, legislative changes and claim handling and reserving practices, which make it more difficult to accurately predict claim costs. The inherent uncertainties of estimating reserves are greater for certain types of liabilities where long periods of time elapse before a definitive determination of liability is made. Because setting reserves is inherently uncertain, the Company cannot provide assurance that its current reserves will prove adequate in light of subsequent events.
Loss reserves included in the Company’s financial statements represent management’s best estimates based upon an actuarially derived point estimate and other considerations. The Company uses a variety of actuarial techniques and methods to derive an actuarial point estimate for each operating unit. These methods include paid loss development, incurred loss development, paid and incurred Bornhuetter-Ferguson methods and frequency and severity methods. In circumstances where one actuarial method is considered more credible than the others, that method is used to set the point estimate. For example, the paid loss and incurred loss development methods rely on historical paid and incurred loss data. For new lines of business, where there is insufficient history of paid and incurred claims data, or in circumstances where there have been significant changes in claim practices, the paid and incurred loss development methods would be less credible than other actuarial methods. The actuarial point estimate may also be based on a judgmental weighting of estimates produced from each of the methods considered. Industry loss experience is used to supplement the Company’s own data in selecting “tail factors” and in areas where the Company’s own data is limited. The actuarial data is analyzed by line of business, coverage and accident or policy year, as appropriate, for each operating unit.
The establishment of the actuarially derived loss reserve point estimate also includes consideration of qualitative factors that may affect the ultimate losses. These qualitative considerations include, among others, the impact of re-underwriting initiatives, changes in the mix of business, changes in distribution sources and changes in policy terms and conditions. Examples of changes in terms and conditions that can have a significant impact on reserve levels are the use of aggregate policy limits, the expansion of coverage exclusions, whether or not defense costs are within policy limits, and changes in deductibles and attachment points.
The key assumptions used to arrive at the best estimate of loss reserves are the expected loss ratios, rate of loss cost inflation, and reported and paid loss emergence patterns. Expected loss ratios represent management’s expectation of losses at the time the business is priced and written, before any actual claims experience has emerged. This expectation is a significant determinant of the estimate of loss reserves for recently written business where there is little paid or incurred loss data to consider. Expected loss ratios are generally derived from historical loss ratios adjusted for the impact of rate changes, loss cost trends and known changes in the type of risks underwritten. Expected loss ratios are estimated for each key line of business within each operating unit. Expected loss cost inflation is particularly important for the long-tail lines, such as excess casualty, and claims with a high medical component, such as workers’ compensation. Reported and paid loss emergence patterns are used to project current reported or paid loss amounts to their ultimate settlement value. Loss development factors are based on the historical emergence patterns of paid and incurred losses, and are derived from the Company’s own experience and industry data. The paid loss emergence pattern is also significant to excess and assumed workers’ compensation reserves because those reserves are discounted to their estimated present value based upon such estimated payout patterns. Management believes the estimates and assumptions it makes in the reserving process provide the best estimate of the ultimate cost of settling claims and related expenses with respect to insured events which have occurred; however, different assumptions and variables could lead to significantly different reserve estimates.
Loss frequency and severity are measures of loss activity that are considered in determining the key assumptions described in our discussion of loss and loss expense reserves, including expected loss ratios, rate of loss cost inflation and reported and paid loss emergence patterns. Loss frequency is a measure of the number of claims per unit of insured exposure, and loss severity is a measure of the average size of claims. Factors affecting loss frequency include the effectiveness of loss controls and safety programs and changes in economic activity or weather patterns. Factors affecting loss severity include changes in policy limits, retentions, rate of inflation and judicial interpretations.
Another factor affecting estimates of loss frequency and severity is the loss reporting lag, which is the period of time between the occurrence of a loss and the date the loss is reported to the Company. The length of the loss reporting lag affects our ability to accurately predict loss frequency (loss frequencies are more predictable for lines with short reporting lags) as well as the amount of reserves needed for incurred but not reported losses (less IBNR is required for lines with short reporting lags). As a result, loss reserves for lines with short reporting lags are likely to have less variation from initial loss estimates. For lines with short reporting lags, which include commercial automobile, primary workers’ compensation, other liability (claims-made) and property business, the key assumption is the loss emergence pattern used to project ultimate loss estimates from known losses paid or reported to date. For lines of business with long reporting lags, which include other liability (occurrence), products liability, excess workers’ compensation and liability reinsurance, the key assumption is the expected loss ratio since there is often little paid or incurred loss data to consider. Historically, the Company has experienced less variation from its initial loss estimates for lines of businesses with short reporting lags than for lines of business with long reporting lags.
The key assumptions used in calculating the most recent estimate of the loss reserves are reviewed each quarter and adjusted, to the extent necessary, to reflect the latest reported loss data, current trends and other factors observed. If the actual level of loss frequency and severity are higher or lower than expected, the ultimate losses will be different than management’s estimate. The following table reflects the impact of changes (which could be favorable or unfavorable) in frequency and severity, relative to our assumptions, on our loss estimate for claims occurring in 2020:
Our net reserves for losses and loss expenses of approximately $11.6 billion as of December 31, 2020 relate to multiple accident years. Therefore, the impact of changes in frequency or severity for more than one accident year could be higher or lower than the amounts reflected above. The impact of such changes would likely be manifested gradually over the course of many years, as the magnitude of the changes became evident.
Approximately $2.6 billion, or 22%, of the Company’s net loss reserves as of December 31, 2020 relate to the Reinsurance & Monoline Excess segment. There is a higher degree of uncertainty and greater variability regarding estimates of excess workers' compensation and assumed reinsurance loss reserves. In the case of excess workers’ compensation, our policies generally attach at $1 million or higher. The claims which reach our layer therefore tend to involve the most serious injuries and many remain open for the lifetime of the claimant, which extends the claim settlement tail. These claims also occur less frequently but tend to be larger than primary claims, which increases claim variability. In the case of assumed reinsurance our loss reserve estimates are based, in part, upon information received from ceding companies. If information received from ceding companies is not timely or correct, the Company’s estimate of ultimate losses may not be accurate. Furthermore, due to
delayed reporting of claim information by ceding companies, the claim settlement tail for assumed reinsurance is also extended. Management considers the impact of delayed reporting and the extended tail in its selection of loss development factors for these lines of business.
Information received from ceding companies is used to set initial expected loss ratios, to establish case reserves and to estimate reserves for incurred but not reported losses on assumed reinsurance business. This information, which is generally provided through reinsurance intermediaries, is gathered through the underwriting process and from periodic claim reports and other correspondence with ceding companies. The Company performs underwriting and claim audits of selected ceding companies to determine the accuracy and completeness of information provided to the Company. The information received from the ceding companies is supplemented by the Company’s own loss development experience with similar lines of business as well as industry loss trends and loss development benchmarks.
Following is a summary of the Company’s reserves for losses and loss expenses by business segment as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Following is a summary of the Company’s net reserves for losses and loss expenses by major line of business as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
____________________
(1)Reserves for excess and assumed workers’ compensation business are net of an aggregate net discount of $483 million and $530 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(2)Short-tail lines include commercial multi-peril (non-liability), inland marine, accident and health, fidelity and surety, boiler and machinery and other lines.
(3)Reinsurance & Monoline Excess includes property and casualty reinsurance as well as operations that solely retain risk on an excess basis.
The Company evaluates reserves for losses and loss expenses on a quarterly basis. Changes in estimates of prior year losses are reported when such changes are made. The changes in prior year loss reserve estimates are generally the result of ongoing analysis of recent loss development trends. Original estimates are increased or decreased as additional information becomes known regarding individual claims and aggregate claim trends.
Certain of the Company's insurance and reinsurance contracts are retrospectively rated, whereby the Company collects more or less premiums based on the level of loss activity. For those contracts, changes in loss and loss expenses for prior years may be fully or partially offset by additional or return premiums.
Net prior year development (i.e, the sum of prior year reserve changes and prior year earned premiums changes) for each of the last three years ended December 31, are as follows:
The ongoing COVID-19 global pandemic has impacted, and will likely continue to impact, the Company’s results through its effect on claim frequency and severity. Loss cost trends have been impacted and will likely be further impacted by COVID-19-related claims in certain lines of business, as well as by other effects of COVID-19 associated with economic conditions, inflation, and social distancing and work from home rules, for example. Although it is still too early to determine the net impact, it appears that the losses incurred due to COVID-19-related claims are being offset, to a certain extent, by lower claim frequency in certain lines of our businesses, including commercial auto, workers’ compensation, and other liability. However, given the continuing nature of the pandemic, the impact of COVID-19 could ultimately increase or decrease overall loss cost trends and is likely to have differing impacts on the Company's different lines of business.
Most of the COVID-19-related claims reported to the Company to date involve certain short-tailed lines of business, including contingency and event cancellation, business interruption, and film production delay. The Company expects additional claims to be reported for these lines of business. The Company has also received COVID-19-related claims for longer-tailed casualty lines of business such as workers’ compensation and other liability; however, the estimated incurred loss impact for these reported claims appears to be modest at this time. Given the continuing uncertainty regarding the pandemic's pervasiveness, the future impact that the pandemic may have on claim frequency and severity remains uncertain at this time. In workers’ compensation, for example, nearly two-thirds of the states have enacted rules, legislation or administrative orders creating a presumption that certain “essential” workers who contract COVID-19 did so through the course of their employment. Several other states are considering similar actions, including varying the definition of “essential” workers. While the ultimate impact of these presumptions are unknown at this time, the Company believes that such state actions will likely increase workers’ compensation claims with respect to workers deemed “essential,” although this impact may be partially offset by lower workers’ compensation claim frequency with respect to non-essential workers.
The Company has estimated the potential COVID-19 impact to its contingency and event cancellation, workers’ compensation, and other lines of business under a number of possible scenarios; however, due to COVID-19’s evolving impact and the still limited amount of available data, there remains a high degree of uncertainty around the Company’s COVID-19 reserves. In addition, several states (and international jurisdictions), through regulation, legislation and/or judicial action, continue to seek to expand policy coverage terms beyond the policy’s intended coverage, including, for example, but not limited to, property coverages, where there are attempts to extend business interruption coverage where there is no physical damage or loss to property, and attempts to disregard policy exclusions for communicable disease. Accordingly, losses arising from these actions, and the other factors described above, could exceed the Company’s reserves established for those related policies.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized losses for COVID-19-related claims activity, net of reinsurance, of approximately $171 million, of which $161 million related to the Insurance segment and $10 million related to the Reinsurance & Monoline Excess segment. Such $171 million of COVID-19-related losses included $95 million of reported losses and $76 million of IBNR.
Favorable prior year development (net of additional and return premiums) was $16 million in 2020.
Insurance - Reserves for the Insurance segment developed favorably by $24 million in 2020 (net of additional and return premiums). Continuing the pattern seen in recent years, the overall favorable development in 2020 resulted from more significant favorable development on workers’ compensation business, which was partially offset by unfavorable development on professional liability, including excess professional liability.
For workers’ compensation, the favorable development was spread across almost all prior accident years, including prior to 2011, but was most significant in accident years 2016 through 2019. The favorable workers’ compensation development reflects a continuation of the benign loss cost trends experienced during recent years, particularly the favorable claim frequency trends (i.e., number of reported claims per unit of exposure). The long term trend of declining workers’ compensation frequency can be attributable to improved workplace safety. Loss severity trends were also aided by our continued investment in claims handling initiatives such as medical case management services and vendor savings through usage of preferred provider networks and pharmacy benefit managers. Reported workers’ compensation losses in 2020 continued to be below our expectations at most of our operating units, and were below the assumptions underlying our initial loss ratio picks and our previous reserve estimates for most prior accident years.
For professional liability business, unfavorable development was driven mainly by large losses reported in the directors and officers (“D&O”), lawyers professional and excess hospital professional liability lines of business. For these lines of
business, we continue to see an increase in the number of large losses reported and a lengthening of the reporting “tail” beyond historical levels. We believe a contributing cause is rising social inflation in the form of, for example, higher jury awards on cases that go to trial, and the corresponding higher demands from plaintiffs and higher values required to reach settlement on cases that do not go to trial. The unfavorable development for professional liability affected mainly accident years 2016 through 2018.
Reinsurance & Monoline Excess - Reserves for the Reinsurance & Monoline Excess segment developed unfavorably by $8 million in 2020. The unfavorable development in the segment was driven by non-proportional assumed liability business written in both the U.S. and U.K., and was partially offset by favorable development on excess workers’ compensation business. The unfavorable non-proportional assumed liability development was concentrated in accident years 2014 through 2018, and related primarily to accounts insuring construction projects and professional liability exposures.
Favorable prior year development (net of additional and return premiums) was $19 million in 2019.
Insurance - Reserves for the Insurance segment developed favorably by $21 million in 2019 (net of additional and return premiums). This overall favorable development resulted from more significant favorable development on workers’ compensation business, which was partially offset by unfavorable development on professional liability and general liability business.
For workers’ compensation, the favorable development was spread across many accident years, including prior to 2010, but was most significant in accident years 2014 through 2018, and particularly 2017 and 2018. The favorable workers’ compensation development reflects a continuation during 2019 of the benign loss cost trends experienced during recent years, particularly the favorable claim frequency trends (i.e., number of reported claims per unit of exposure). The long term trend of declining workers’ compensation frequency can be attributable to improved workplace safety. Loss severity trends were also aided by our continued investment in claims handling initiatives such as medical case management services and vendor savings through usage of preferred provider networks and pharmacy benefit managers. Our initial loss ratio “picks” for this line of business over the past few accident years have contemplated an increase in loss cost trends and reflect decreasing premium rates in the marketplace; reported workers’ compensation losses in 2019 continued to be below our expectations at most of our operating units, and were below the assumptions underlying our initial loss ratio picks and our previous reserve estimates.
For professional liability business, the unfavorable development was driven mainly by an increase in the number of large losses reported in the lawyers professional liability and directors and officers (“D&O”) liability lines of business. Many of the lawyers large losses involved claims made against insured law firms relating to work performed on matters stemming from the 2008 financial crisis. These claims affected mainly accident years 2013 through 2016. In addition, for both of these lines of business, we have seen evidence of social inflation in the form of higher jury awards on cases that go to trial, and corresponding higher demands from plaintiffs and higher values required to reach settlement on cases that do not go to trial. The unfavorable development for D&O affected mainly accident years 2014 through 2017.
For general liability business, most of the unfavorable development emanated from our excess and surplus lines (E&S) businesses, and was driven by an increase in the number of large losses reported. Many of these large losses were from construction and contracting classes of business, which have also been impacted by social inflation. The general liability unfavorable development impacted mainly accident years 2015 through 2018.
Reinsurance & Monoline Excess - Reserves for the Reinsurance & Monoline Excess segment developed unfavorably by $2 million in 2019. The unfavorable development in the segment was driven by non-proportional assumed liability business in both the U.S. and U.K., and was largely offset by favorable development on excess workers’ compensation business. The unfavorable non-proportional assumed liability development was concentrated in accident years 2015 through 2018, and included an adjustment for the Ogden discount rate in the U.K.
Favorable prior year development (net of additional and return premiums) was $39 million in 2018.
Insurance - Reserves for the Insurance segment developed favorably by $19 million in 2018. The favorable development was primarily attributable to workers’ compensation business, and was partially offset by unfavorable development for professional liability business.
For workers’ compensation, the favorable development was spread across many accident years, but was most significant in accident years 2015 through 2017. The favorable workers’ compensation development reflects a continuation during 2018 of the benign loss cost trends experienced during recent years, particularly the favorable claim frequency trends (i.e., number of reported claims per unit of exposure). The long term trend of declining workers' compensation frequency can be attributable to improved workplace safety. Loss severity trends were also aided by our continued investment in claims handling initiatives such as medical case management services and vendor savings through usage of preferred provider networks. Reported
workers’ compensation losses in 2018 continued to be below our expectations at most of our operating units, and were below the assumptions underlying our previous reserve estimates.
For professional liability business, adverse development was primarily related to unexpected large directors and officers (“D&O”) liability losses at one of our U.S. operating units, as well as lawyers professional liability losses at another operating unit. The adverse development stemmed primarily from accident years 2015 and 2016, and was driven by a higher frequency of large losses than we had experienced in previous years.
Reinsurance & Monoline Excess - Reserves for the Reinsurance & Monoline Excess segment developed favorably by $20 million in 2018. The favorable development was primarily due to excess workers’ compensation business, and was spread across many accident years, including years prior to 2009. This favorable excess workers’ compensation development was partially offset by unfavorable development on U.S. casualty facultative assumed business from accident years 2009 and prior related to construction projects.
Reserve Discount. The Company discounts its liabilities for certain workers’ compensation reserves. The amount of workers’ compensation reserves that were discounted was $1,655 million and $1,731 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The aggregate net discount for those reserves, after reflecting the effects of ceded reinsurance, was $483 million and $530 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. At December 31, 2020, discount rates by year ranged from 0.7% to 6.5%, with a weighted average discount rate of 3.6%.
Substantially all discounted workers’ compensation reserves (97% of total discounted reserves at December 31, 2020) are excess workers’ compensation reserves. In order to properly match loss expenses with income earned on investment securities supporting the liabilities, reserves for excess workers’ compensation business are discounted using risk-free discount rates determined by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve. These rates are determined annually based on the weighted average rate for the period. Once established, no adjustments are made to the discount rate for that period, and any increases or decreases in loss reserves in subsequent years are discounted at the same rate, without regard to when any such adjustments are recognized. The expected loss and loss expense payout patterns subject to discounting are derived from the Company’s loss payout experience.
The Company also discounts reserves for certain other long-duration workers’ compensation reserves (representing approximately 3% of total discounted reserves at December 31, 2020), including reserves for quota share reinsurance and reserves related to losses regarding occupational lung disease. These reserves are discounted at statutory rates prescribed or permitted by the Department of Insurance of the State of Delaware.
Assumed Reinsurance Premiums. The Company estimates the amount of assumed reinsurance premiums that it will receive under treaty reinsurance agreements at the inception of the contracts. These premium estimates are revised as the actual amount of assumed premiums is reported to the Company by the ceding companies. As estimates of assumed premiums are made or revised, the related amount of earned premiums, commissions and incurred losses associated with those premiums are recorded. Estimated assumed premiums receivable were approximately $44 million and $43 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The assumed premium estimates are based upon terms set forth in reinsurance agreements, information received from ceding companies during the underwriting and negotiation of agreements, reports received from ceding companies and discussions and correspondence with reinsurance intermediaries. The Company also considers its own view of market conditions, economic trends and experience with similar lines of business. These premium estimates represent management’s best estimate of the ultimate amount of premiums to be received under its assumed reinsurance agreements.
Allowance for Expected Credit Losses on Investments.
Fixed Maturity Securities - For fixed maturity securities in an unrealized loss position where the Company intends to sell, or it is more likely than not that it will be required to sell the security before recovery in value, the amortized cost basis is written down to fair value through net investment gains (losses). For fixed maturity securities in an unrealized loss position where the Company does not intend to sell, or it is more likely than not that it will not be required to sell the security before recovery in value, the Company evaluates whether the decline in fair value has resulted from credit losses or all other factors (non-credit factors). In making this assessment, the Company considers the extent to which fair value is less than amortized cost, changes to the rating of the security by a rating agency, and adverse conditions specifically related to the security, among other factors. If this assessment indicates that a credit loss exists, the present value of cash flows expected to be collected from the security are compared to the amortized cost basis of the security. If the present value of cash flows expected to be collected is less than the amortized cost basis, an allowance for expected credit losses is recorded for the credit loss through net investment gains (losses), limited by the amount that the fair value is less than the amortized cost basis. Effective January 1, 2020, the allowance is adjusted for any change in expected credit losses and subsequent recoveries through net investment gains (losses). The impairment related to non-credit factors is recognized in other comprehensive income (loss) .
The Company’s credit assessment of allowance for expected credit losses uses a third party model for available for sale and held to maturity securities, as well as loans receivable. The allowance for expected credit losses is generally based on the performance of the underlying collateral under various economic and default scenarios that involve subjective judgments and estimates by management. Modeling these securities involves various factors, such as projected default rates, the nature and realizable value of the collateral, if any, the ability of the issuer to make scheduled payments, historical performance and other relevant economic and performance factors. A discounted cash flow analysis is used to ascertain the amount of the allowance for expected credit losses, if any. In general, the model reverts to the rating-level long-term average marginal default rates based on 10 years of historical data, beyond the forecast period. For other inputs, the model in most cases reverts to the baseline long-term assumptions linearly over 5 years beyond the forecast period. The long-term assumptions are based on the historical averages.
The Company classifies its fixed maturity securities by credit rating, primarily based on ratings assigned by credit rating agencies. For purposes of classifying securities with different ratings, the Company uses the average of the credit ratings assigned, unless in limited situations the Company’s own analysis indicates an internal rating is more appropriate. Securities that are not rated by a rating agency are evaluated and classified by the Company on a case-by-case basis.
A summary of the Company’s non-investment grade fixed maturity securities that were in an unrealized loss position at December 31, 2020 is presented in the table below.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company has recorded an allowance for expected credit losses on fixed maturity securities of $3 million. The Company has evaluated the remaining fixed maturity securities in an unrealized loss position and believes the unrealized losses are due primarily to temporary market and sector-related factors rather than to issuer-specific factors. None of these securities are delinquent or in default under financial covenants. Based on its assessment of these issuers, the Company expects them to continue to meet their contractual payment obligations as they become due.
Loans Receivable - For loans receivable, the Company estimates an allowance for expected credit losses based on relevant information about past events, including historical loss experience, current conditions and forecasts that affect the expected collectability of the amortized cost of the financial asset. The allowance for expected credit losses is presented as a reduction to amortized cost of the financial asset in the consolidated balance sheet and changes to the estimate for expected credit losses are recognized through net investment gains (losses). Loans receivable are reported net of an allowance for expected credit losses of $5 million and $2 million as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Fair Value Measurements. The Company’s fixed maturity available for sale securities, equity securities, and its trading account securities are carried at fair value. Fair value is defined as "the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date". The Company utilizes a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value into three broad levels. Level 1 inputs are quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that the reporting entity has the ability to access at the measurement date. Level 2 inputs are inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for similar assets in active markets. Level 3 inputs are unobservable inputs for the asset or liability. Unobservable inputs may only be used to measure fair value to the extent that observable inputs are not available. The fair value of the vast majority of the Company’s portfolio is based on observable data (other than quoted prices) and, accordingly, is classified as Level 2.
In classifying particular financial securities in the fair value hierarchy, the Company uses its judgment to determine whether the market for a security is active and whether significant pricing inputs are observable. The Company determines the existence of an active market by assessing whether transactions occur with sufficient frequency and volume to provide reliable pricing information. The Company determines whether inputs are observable based on the use of such information by pricing services and external investment managers, the uninterrupted availability of such inputs, the need to make significant adjustments to such inputs and the volatility of such inputs over time. If the market for a security is determined to be inactive or if significant inputs used to price a security are determined to be unobservable, the security is categorized in Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy.
Because many fixed maturity securities do not trade on a daily basis, the Company utilizes pricing models and processes which may include benchmark curves, benchmarking of like securities, sector groupings and matrix pricing. Market inputs used to evaluate securities include benchmark yields, reported trades, broker/dealer quotes, issuer spreads, two-sided markets, benchmark securities, bids, offers and reference data. Quoted prices are often unavailable for recently issued securities that are infrequently traded or securities that are only traded in private transactions. For publicly traded securities for which quoted prices are unavailable, the Company determines fair value based on independent broker quotations and other observable market data. For securities traded only in private negotiations, the Company determines fair value based primarily on the cost of such securities, which is adjusted to reflect prices of recent placements of securities of the same issuer, financial data, projections and business developments of the issuer and other relevant information.
The following is a summary of pricing sources for the Company's fixed maturity securities available for sale as of December 31, 2020:
Independent pricing services - Substantially all of the Company’s fixed maturity securities available for sale were priced by independent pricing services (generally one U.S. pricing service plus additional pricing services with respect to a limited number of foreign securities held by the Company). The prices provided by the independent pricing services are generally based on observable market data in active markets (e.g., broker quotes and prices observed for comparable securities). The determination of whether markets are active or inactive is based upon the volume and level of activity for a particular asset class. The Company reviews the prices provided by pricing services for reasonableness based upon current trading levels for similar securities. If the prices appear unusual to the Company, they are re-examined and the value is either confirmed or revised. In addition, the Company periodically performs independent price tests of a sample of securities to ensure proper valuation and to verify our understanding of how securities are priced. As of December 31, 2020, the Company did not make any adjustments to the prices provided by the pricing services. Based upon the Company’s review of the methodologies used by the independent pricing services, these securities were classified as Level 2.
Syndicate manager - The Company has a 15% participation in a Lloyd’s syndicate, and the Company’s share of the securities owned by the syndicate is priced by the syndicate’s manager. The majority of the securities are liquid, short duration fixed maturity securities. The Company reviews the syndicate manager’s pricing methodology and audited financial statements and holds discussions with the syndicate manager as necessary to confirm its understanding and agreement with security prices. Based upon the Company’s review of the methodologies used by the syndicate manager, these securities were classified as Level 2.
Observable data - If independent pricing is not available, the Company prices the securities directly. Prices are based on observable market data where available, including current trading levels for similar securities and non-binding quotations from brokers. The Company generally requests two or more quotes. If more than one quote is received, the Company sets a price within the range of quotes received based on its assessment of the credibility of the quote and its own evaluation of the security. The Company generally does not adjust quotes obtained from brokers. Since these securities were priced based on observable data, they were classified as Level 2.
Cash flow model - If the above methodologies are not available, the Company prices securities using a discounted cash flow model based upon assumptions as to prevailing credit spreads, interest rates and interest rate volatility, time to maturity and subordination levels. Discount rates are adjusted to reflect illiquidity where appropriate. These securities were classified as Level 3.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Business Segment Results
Following is a summary of gross and net premiums written, net premiums earned, loss ratios (losses and loss expenses incurred expressed as a percentage of net premiums earned), expense ratios (underwriting expenses expressed as a percentage of net premiums earned) and GAAP combined ratios (sum of loss ratio and expense ratio) for each of our business segments for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The GAAP combined ratio represents a measure of underwriting profitability, excluding investment income. A GAAP combined ratio in excess of 100 indicates an underwriting loss; a number below 100 indicates an underwriting profit.
Net Income to Common Stockholders. The following table presents the Company’s net income to common stockholders and net income per diluted share for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The Company reported net income of $531 million in 2020 compared to $682 million in 2019. The $151 million decrease in net income was primarily due to an after-tax decrease in net investment income of $47 million mainly due to reduced investment yields in fixed maturity securities and repositioning a larger portion of the investment portfolio to cash and cash equivalents, an after-tax decrease in underwriting income of $46 million resulted from COVID-19-related losses and other catastrophe losses, a $39 million increase in tax expense due to change in effective tax rate, a $23 million decrease in after-tax foreign currency gains as the U.S. dollar weakened against a wide spectrum of currencies, a decrease in after-tax net investment gains of $13 million, a $6 million debt extinguishment expense on debt redeemed in 2020 and an after-tax decrease in other income of $1 million, partially offset by an after-tax reduction in corporate expenses of $12 million, an after-tax increase in insurance service fee income of $9 million, an after-tax reduction of $2 million from interest expense, and an after-tax increase in income from non-insurance businesses of $1 million. The number of weighted average diluted shares decreased by approximately 5 million for 2020 compared to 2019, mainly reflecting shares repurchased in 2020.
Premiums. Gross premiums written were $8,848 million in 2020, an increase of 7% from $8,262 million in 2019. The increase was due to the growth in the Insurance segment of $439 million and $147 million in the Reinsurance & Monoline Excess segment. Approximately 79% of premiums expiring in 2020 were renewed, and 80% of premiums expiring in 2019 were renewed.
Average renewal premium rates for insurance and facultative reinsurance increased 11.3% in 2020 and 4.8% in 2019, when adjusted for changes in exposures. Average renewal premium rates for insurance and facultative reinsurance excluding workers' compensation increased 13.6% in 2020 and 6.9% in 2019, when adjusted for changes in exposures.
A summary of gross premiums written in 2020 compared with 2019 by line of business within each business segment follows:
•Insurance gross premiums increased 6% to $7,837 million in 2020 from $7,398 million in 2019. Gross premiums increased $270 million (11%) for other liability, $196 million (20%) for professional liability, and $92 million (5%) for short-tail lines and $74 million (9%) for commercial auto, and decreased $193 million (15%) for workers' compensation.
•Reinsurance & Monoline Excess gross premiums increased 17% to $1,010 million in 2020 from $864 million in 2019. Gross premiums written increased $105 million (22%) for casualty lines, $27 million (14%) for property lines, and $14 million (7%) for monoline excess.
Net premiums written were $7,262 million in 2020, an increase of 6% from $6,863 million in 2019. Ceded reinsurance premiums as a percentage of gross written premiums were 18% in 2020 and 17% in 2019.
Premiums earned increased 4% to $6,931 million in 2020 from $6,633 million in 2019. Insurance premiums (including the impact of rate changes) are generally earned evenly over the policy term, and accordingly recent rate increases will be earned over the upcoming quarters. Premiums earned in 2020 are related to business written during both 2020 and 2019. Audit premiums were $128 million in 2020 compared with $199 million in 2019.
Net Investment Income. Following is a summary of net investment income for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Net investment income decreased 10% to $584 million in 2020 from $646 million in 2019 primarily due to a $92 million decrease in income from fixed maturity securities driven by lower investment yields and repositioning a larger portion of the investment portfolio to cash and cash equivalents, a $15 million decrease in income from investment funds and an increase in investment expenses of $3 million, partially offset by a $43 million increase in arbitrage trading account and a $5 million increase in equity securities. Investment funds are reported on a one quarter lag. The average annualized yield for fixed maturity securities was 2.7% in 2020 and 3.4% in 2019. The effective duration of the fixed maturity portfolio was 2.4 years at December 31, 2020 and 2.8 years at December 31, 2019. The Company shortened the duration of its fixed maturity security portfolio, thereby reducing the potential impact of mark-to-market on the portfolio and positioning the Company to react quickly to changes in the current interest rate environment. Average invested assets, at cost (including cash and cash equivalents), were $20.0 billion in 2020 and $19.1 billion in 2019.
Insurance Service Fees. The Company earns fees from an insurance distribution business, a third-party administrator, and as a servicing carrier of workers' compensation assigned risk plans for certain states. Insurance service fees were $89 million in 2020 and $93 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a reduction of assigned risk plan business.
Net Realized and Unrealized Gains on Investments. The Company buys and sells securities and other investment assets on a regular basis in order to maximize its total return on investments. Decisions to sell securities and other investment assets are based on management’s view of the underlying fundamentals of specific investments as well as management’s expectations regarding interest rates, credit spreads, currency values and general economic conditions. Net realized and unrealized gains on investments were $74 million in 2020 compared with $121 million in 2019. In 2020, the gains reflected net realized gains on investment of $99 million, including the sale of a building for a gain of $105 million, and decreased by a change in unrealized
losses on equity securities of $25 million. In 2019, the gains reflected net realized gains on investment sales of $36 million and increased by a change in unrealized gains on equity securities of $85 million.
Change in Allowance for Expected Credit Losses on Investments. Effective January 1, 2020, the Company adopted accounting guidance for credit losses on financial instruments. The cumulative effect adjustment from the change in accounting principle was $25 million after-tax, which decreased opening retained earnings and increased AOCI. Based on credit factors, the allowance for expected credit losses is increased or decreased depending on the percentage of unrealized loss relative to amortized cost by security, changes in rating of the security by a rating agency, and adverse conditions specifically related to the security, among other factors. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the pre-tax change in allowance for expected credit losses on investments decreased by $29 million ($23 million after-tax), which is reflected in net investment gains (losses).
Revenues from Non-Insurance Businesses. Revenues from non-insurance businesses were derived from businesses engaged in the distribution of promotional merchandise, world-wide textile solutions, and aviation-related businesses that provide services to aviation markets, including (i) the distribution, manufacturing, repair and overhaul of aircraft parts and components, (ii) the sale of new and used aircraft, and (iii) avionics, fuel, maintenance, storage and charter services. Revenues from non-insurance businesses were $390 million in 2020 and $407 million in 2019. The decrease mainly relates to a reduction in revenues from the aviation-related businesses impacted by COVID-19.
Losses and Loss Expenses. Losses and loss expenses increased to $4,469 million in 2020 from $4,131 million in 2019. The consolidated loss ratio was 64.5% in 2020 and 62.3% in 2019. Catastrophe losses, net of reinsurance recoveries, were $340 million (including losses of approximately $171 million related to COVID-19) in 2020 compared with $90 million in 2019. Favorable prior year reserve development (net of premium offsets) was $16 million in 2020 compared with $19 million in 2019. The loss ratio excluding catastrophe losses and prior year reserve development decreased 1.4 points to 59.8% in 2020 from 61.2% in 2019.
A summary of loss ratios in 2020 compared with 2019 by business segment follows:
•Insurance - The loss ratio of 64.9% in 2020 was 2.5 points higher than the loss ratio of 62.4% in 2019. Catastrophe losses were $307 million in 2020 compared with $68 million in 2019. The Company reflected a best estimate (net of reinsurance) based upon available information for COVID-19-related losses of approximately $161 million, which was included in catastrophe losses and primarily related to contingency and event cancellation coverage, workers’ compensation and short-tail lines. Favorable prior year reserve development was $24 million in 2020 compared with $21 million in 2019. The loss ratio excluding catastrophe losses and prior year reserve development decreased 1.4 points to 60.2% in 2020 from 61.6% in 2019.
•Reinsurance & Monoline Excess - The loss ratio of 61.3% in 2020 was 0.2 points lower than the loss ratio of 61.5% in 2019. Catastrophe losses were $33 million in 2020 compared with $22 million in 2019. The Company reflected a best estimate (net of reinsurance) based upon available information for COVID-19-related losses of approximately $10 million, which was included in catastrophe losses and primarily related to excess workers’ compensation and short-tail lines. Adverse prior year reserve development was $8 million in 2020 compared with adverse prior year reserve development of $2 million in 2019. The loss ratio excluding catastrophe losses and prior year reserve development decreased 1.5 points to 56.6% in 2020 from 58.1% in 2019.
Other Operating Costs and Expenses. Following is a summary of other operating costs and expenses:
Policy acquisition and insurance operating expenses are comprised of commissions paid to agents and brokers, premium taxes and other assessments and internal underwriting costs. Policy acquisition and insurance operating expenses increased 1% and net premiums earned increased 4% from 2019. The expense ratio (policy acquisition and insurance operating expenses expressed as a percentage of premiums earned) was 30.4% in 2020 and 31.5% in 2019. The improvement is primarily attributable to higher net premiums earned and lower travel and entertainment expenses due to the global pandemic. However, to the extent our net premiums earned decrease, due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic or otherwise, our expense ratio would be expected to increase.
Service expenses, which represent the costs associated with the fee-based businesses, decreased 15% to $86 million in 2020 from $101 million in 2019. The decrease is primarily due to a reduction of assigned risk plan business.
Net foreign currency losses (gains) result from transactions denominated in a currency other than an operating unit’s functional currency. Net foreign currency losses were $0.4 million in 2020 compared to gains of $31 million in 2019, mainly due to U.S. dollar weakening in relation to a wide spectrum of currencies in 2020.
Debt extinguishment costs of $8 million in 2020 related to the redemption of subordinated debentures that were due in 2053.
Other costs and expenses represent general and administrative expenses of the parent company and other expenses not allocated to business segments, including the cost of certain long-term incentive plans and new business ventures. Other costs and expenses decreased to $185 million in 2020 from $201 million in 2019 primarily due to a reduction in non-recurring performance-based compensation costs which occurred in 2019 and reduced travel-related expenses due to COVID-19 in 2020.
Expenses from Non-Insurance Businesses. Expenses from non-insurance businesses represent costs associated with businesses engaged in the distribution of promotional merchandise, world-wide textile solutions, and aviation-related businesses that include (i) cost of goods sold related to aircraft and products sold and services provided and (ii) general and administrative expenses. Expenses from non-insurance businesses were $384 million in 2020 compared to $403 million in 2019. The decrease mainly relates to a reduction of aviation-related business impacted by COVID-19 in 2020.
Interest Expense. Interest expense was $151 million in 2020 compared with $153 million in 2019. During 2019, the Company repaid at maturity $489 million aggregate principal amount of senior notes and other debt. In December 2019, the Company issued $300 million aggregate principal amount of 5.10% subordinated debentures due 2059. In May 2020, the Company issued $300 million aggregate principal amount of 4.00% senior notes due 2050. In September 2020, the Company issued an additional $170 million aggregate principal amount of 4.00% senior notes due 2050 and issued $250 million aggregate principal amount of 4.25% subordinated debentures due 2060 and repaid $300 million aggregate principal amount of 5.375% senior notes at maturity. In October 2020, the Company redeemed $350 million aggregate principal amount of 5.625% subordinated debentures due 2053. Accordingly, the timing of the repayments of debt at maturity and redemption that took place throughout 2019 and 2020 and issuances in 2019 and 2020 led to the decrease in interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The redemption of debentures and issuance of additional debentures in 2021, as described below in "Liquidity and Capital Resources -- Debt," are also expected to impact interest expense in 2021.
Income Taxes. The effective income tax rate was 24.4% in 2020 and 19.8% in 2019. The effective income tax rate differs from the federal income tax rate of 21% principally because the utilization of losses in certain foreign jurisdictions was limited, which was partially offset by tax-exempt investment income and tax benefits related to equity-based compensation. See Note 16 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for a reconciliation of the income tax expense and the amounts computed by applying the Federal and foreign income tax rate of 21%.
The Company has not provided U.S. deferred income taxes on the undistributed earnings of approximately $111 million of its non-U.S. subsidiaries since these earnings are intended to be permanently reinvested in the non-U.S. subsidiaries. In the future, if such earnings were distributed the Company projects that the incremental tax, if any, will be immaterial.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2018
For a comparison of the Company’s results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2018, see Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, which was filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 20, 2020.
Investments
As part of its investment strategy, the Company establishes a level of cash and highly liquid short-term and intermediate-term securities that, combined with expected cash flow, it believes is adequate to meet its payment obligations. Due to the low fixed maturity investment returns, the Company invests in equity securities, merger arbitrage securities, investment funds, private equity, loans and real estate related assets. The Company's investments in investment funds and its other alternative investments have experienced, and the Company expects to continue to experience, greater fluctuations in investment income.
The Company also attempts to maintain an appropriate relationship between the effective duration of the investment portfolio and the approximate duration of its liabilities (i.e., policy claims and debt obligations). The effective duration of the investment portfolio was 2.4 years at December 31, 2020 and 2.8 years at December 31, 2019. The Company’s investment portfolio and investment-related assets as of December 31, 2020 were as follows:
______________
(1)Pre-refunded securities are securities for which an escrow account has been established to fund the remaining payments of principal and interest through maturity. Such escrow accounts are funded almost exclusively with U.S. Treasury and U.S. government agency securities.
Fixed Maturity Securities. The Company’s investment policy with respect to fixed maturity securities is generally to purchase instruments with the expectation of holding them to their maturity. However, management of the available for sale
portfolio is considered necessary to maintain an approximate matching of assets and liabilities as well as to adjust the portfolio as a result of changes in financial market conditions and tax considerations.
The Company’s philosophy related to holding or selling fixed maturity securities is based on its objective of maximizing total return. The key factors that management considers in its investment decisions as to whether to hold or sell fixed maturity securities are its view of the underlying fundamentals of specific securities as well as its expectations regarding interest rates, credit spreads and currency values. In a period in which management expects interest rates to rise, the Company may sell longer duration securities in order to mitigate the impact of an interest rate rise on the fair value of the portfolio. Similarly, in a period in which management expects credit spreads to widen, the Company may sell lower quality securities, and in a period in which management expects certain foreign currencies to decline in value, the Company may sell securities denominated in those foreign currencies. The sale of fixed maturity securities in order to achieve the objective of maximizing total return may result in realized gains; however, there is no reason to expect these gains to continue in future periods.
Equity Securities. Equity securities primarily represent investments in common and preferred stocks in companies with potential growth opportunities in different sectors, mainly in the financial institutions sector.
Investment Funds. At December 31, 2020, the carrying value of investment funds was $1,309 million, including investments in financial services funds of $434 million, real estate funds of $311 million, transportation funds of $190 million, energy funds of $141 million, and other funds of $233 million. Investment funds are primarily reported on a one-quarter lag.
Real Estate. Real estate is directly owned property held for investment. At December 31, 2020, real estate properties in operation included a long-term ground lease in Washington D.C., an office complex in New York City, office buildings in West Palm Beach and Palm Beach, Florida, an office building in London, and the completed portion of a mixed-use project in Washington D.C. In addition, part of the previously mentioned mixed-use project in Washington D.C. is under development. The Company expects to fund further development costs for the project with a combination of its own funds and external financing. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company sold an office complex in New York City.
Arbitrage Trading Account. The arbitrage trading account is comprised of direct investments in arbitrage securities. Merger arbitrage is the business of investing in the securities of publicly held companies that are the targets in announced tender offers and mergers.
Loans Receivable. Loans receivable, which are carried at amortized cost (net of allowance for expected credit losses), had an amortized cost of $85 million and an aggregate fair value of $87 million at December 31, 2020. The amortized cost of loans receivable is net of an allowance for expected credit losses of $5 million as of December 31, 2020. Loans receivable include real estate loans of $52 million that are secured by commercial real estate located primarily in New York. Real estate loans receivable generally earn interest at floating LIBOR-based interest rates and have maturities (inclusive of extension options) through August 2025. Loans receivable include commercial loans of $33 million that are secured by business assets and have fixed interest rates and floating LIBOR-based interest rates with varying maturities not exceeding 10 years.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flow. Cash flow provided from operating activities increased to $1,617 million in 2020 from $1,144 million in 2019, primarily due to an increase in premium receipts, net of reinsurance and commissions settled and the timing of loss and loss expense payments as well as payments to tax authorities.
The Company's insurance subsidiaries' principal sources of cash are premiums, investment income, service fees and proceeds from sales and maturities of portfolio investments. The principal uses of cash are payments for claims, taxes, operating expenses and dividends. The Company expects its insurance subsidiaries to fund the payment of losses with cash received from premiums, investment income and fees. The Company generally targets an average duration for its investment portfolio that is within 1.5 years of the average duration of its liabilities so that portions of its investment portfolio mature throughout the claim cycle and are available for the payment of claims if necessary. In the event operating cash flow and proceeds from maturities and prepayments of fixed maturity securities are not sufficient to fund claim payments and other cash requirements, the remainder of the Company's cash and investments is available to pay claims and other obligations as they become due. The Company's investment portfolio is highly liquid, with approximately 79% invested in cash, cash equivalents and marketable fixed maturity securities as of December 31, 2020. If the sale of fixed maturity securities were to become necessary, a realized gain or loss equal to the difference between the cost and sales price of securities sold would be recognized.
Debt. At December 31, 2020, the Company had senior notes, subordinated debentures and other debt outstanding with a carrying value of $2,725 million and a face amount of $2,743 million, including $300 million aggregate principal amount of its 4.00% senior notes due 2050 issued in May 2020 as well as an additional $170 million aggregate principal amount of its 4.00% senior notes due 2050 and $250 million aggregate principal amount of its 4.25% subordinated debentures due 2060 issued in September 2020. The Company redeemed $350 million aggregate principal amount of its subordinated debentures due 2053 in October 2020. The maturities of the outstanding debt are $3 million in 2021, $427 million in 2022, $6 million in 2025, $102 million in 2028, $250 million in 2037, $350 million in 2044, $470 million in 2050, $400 million in 2056, $185 million in 2058, $300 million in 2059 and $250 million in 2060.
In January 2021, the Company called its $110 million aggregate principal amount of 5.90% subordinated debentures for redemption on March 1, 2021. Additionally in February 2021, the Company issued $300 million aggregate principal amount of 4.125% subordinated debentures due 2061.
Equity. The Company repurchased 6,363,301 and 269,072 shares of its common stock in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The aggregate cost of the repurchases was $346 million in 2020 and $18 million in 2019. In 2020, the Board declared regular quarterly cash dividends of $0.11 per share in the first quarter, and $0.12 per share in each of the remaining three quarters for a total of $84 million in aggregate dividends in 2020. At December 31, 2020, total common stockholders’ equity was $6.3 billion, common shares outstanding were 177,825,150 and stockholders’ equity per outstanding share was $35.49.
Total Capital. Total capitalization (equity, debt and subordinated debentures) was $9.0 billion at December 31, 2020. The percentage of the Company’s capital attributable to senior notes, subordinated debentures and other debt was 30% at December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Federal and Foreign Income Taxes
The Company files a consolidated income tax return in the U.S. and foreign tax returns in each of the countries in which it has overseas operations. At December 31, 2020, the Company had a gross deferred tax asset (net of valuation allowance) of $414 million (which primarily relates to loss and loss expense reserves and unearned premium reserves) and a gross deferred tax liability of $427 million (which primarily relates to deferred policy acquisition costs, unrealized investment gains and investment funds). The realization of the deferred tax asset is dependent upon the Company's ability to generate sufficient taxable income in future periods. Based on historical results and the prospects for future operations, management anticipates that it is more likely than not that future taxable income will be sufficient for the realization of this asset.
Reinsurance
The Company follows customary industry practice of reinsuring a portion of its exposures in exchange for paying reinsurers a part of the premiums received on the policies it writes. Reinsurance is purchased by the Company principally to reduce its net liability on individual risks and to protect against catastrophic losses. Although reinsurance does not legally discharge an insurer from its primary liability for the full amount of the policies, it does make the assuming reinsurer liable to the insurer to the extent of the reinsurance coverage. The Company monitors the financial condition of its reinsurers and attempts to place its coverages only with financially sound carriers. Reinsurance coverage and retentions vary depending on the line of business, location of the risk and nature of loss. The Company’s reinsurance purchases include the following:
•Property reinsurance treaties - The Company purchases property reinsurance to reduce its exposure to large individual property losses and catastrophe events. Following is a summary of significant property reinsurance treaties in effect as of January 1, 2021: The Company’s property per risk reinsurance generally covers losses between $2.5 million and $65 million. The Company’s catastrophe excess of loss reinsurance program provides protection for net losses between $17.5 million and $395 million for the majority of business written by its U.S. Insurance segment operating units and Lloyd's Syndicate, excluding offshore energy, but some perils are protected above $15 million. The Company’s catastrophe reinsurance agreements are subject to certain limits, exclusions and reinstatement premiums.
•Casualty reinsurance treaties - The Company purchases casualty reinsurance to reduce its exposure to large individual casualty losses, workers’ compensation catastrophe losses and casualty losses involving multiple claimants or insureds for the majority of business written by its U.S. companies. A significant casualty treaty (casualty catastrophe) in effect as of January 1, 2021 provides significant protection for losses between $5 million and $75 million from single events with claims involving two or more insurable interests or for systemic events involving multiple insureds and/or policy years. The treaty also covers casualty contingency losses in excess of $5 million and up to $100 million. For losses involving two or more claimants for primary workers’ compensation business, coverage is generally in place for losses between $10 million and $270 million. For excess workers’ compensation business, such coverage is generally in place for losses between $25 million and $545 million.
•Facultative reinsurance - The Company also purchases facultative reinsurance on certain individual policies or risks that are in excess of treaty reinsurance capacity.
•Other reinsurance - Depending on the operating unit, the Company purchases specific additional reinsurance to supplement the above programs.
•Effective January 1, 2021, Lifson Re will be a participant on the majority of the Company’s reinsurance placements for a 22.5% share of the placed amounts. This pertains to all traditional treaty reinsurance/retrocessional placements for both property and casualty business where there is more than one open market reinsurer participating. Lifson Re has been capitalized with more than $250 million of equity from a small group of sophisticated global investors with long-term investment horizons, including a minority participation by the Company. Lifson Re will participate on a fully collateralized basis.
The Company places a number of its casualty treaties on a “risk attaching” basis. Under risk attaching treaties, all claims from policies incepting during the period of the reinsurance contract are covered even if they occur after the expiration date of the reinsurance contract. If the Company is unable to renew or replace its existing reinsurance coverage, protection for unexpired policies would remain in place until their expiration. In such case, the Company could revise its underwriting strategy for new business to reflect the absence of reinsurance protection. The casualty catastrophe treaty highlighted above was purchased on a losses discovered basis. Property catastrophe and workers’ compensation catastrophe reinsurance is generally placed on a “losses occurring basis,” whereby only claims occurring during the period are covered. If the Company is unable to renew or replace these reinsurance coverages, unexpired policies would not be protected, though we frequently have the option to purchase run-off coverage in our treaties.
Following is a summary of earned premiums and loss and loss expenses ceded to reinsurers for each of the three years ended December 31, 2020:
Ceded earned premiums increased 12.9% in 2020 to $1,500 million. The ceded losses and loss expenses ratio increased 1 point to 64% in 2020 from 63% in 2019.
The following table presents the credit quality of amounts due from reinsurers as of December 31, 2020. Amounts due from reinsurers are net of reserves for uncollectible reinsurance of $1 million in the aggregate.
_________________
(1)S&P rating, or if not rated by S&P, A.M. Best rating.
(2)Secured by letters of credit or other forms of collateral.
(3)Many states require licensed insurers that provide workers' compensation insurance to participate in programs that provide workers' compensation to employers that cannot procure coverage from an insurer on a voluntary basis. Insurers can fulfill this residual market obligation by participating in pools where results are shared by the participating companies. The Company acts as a servicing carrier for workers' compensation pools in certain states. As a servicing carrier, the Company writes residual market business directly and then cedes 100% of this business to the respective pool. As a servicing carrier, the Company receives fee income for its services. The Company does not retain underwriting risk, and credit risk is limited as ceded balances are jointly shared by all the pool members.
Contractual Obligations
Following is a summary of the Company's contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020:
The estimated payments for reserves for losses and loss expenses in the above table represent the projected (undiscounted) payments for gross loss and loss expense reserves related to losses incurred as of December 31, 2020. The estimated payments in the above table do not consider payments for losses to be incurred in future periods. These amounts include reserves for reported losses and reserves for incurred but not reported losses. Estimated amounts recoverable from reinsurers are not reflected. The estimated payments by year are based on historical loss payment patterns.The actual payments may differ from the estimated amounts due to changes in ultimate loss reserves and in the timing of the settlement of those reserves. In addition, at December 31, 2020, the Company had commitments to invest up to $124 million and $200 million in certain investment funds and real estate construction projects, respectively. These amounts are not included in the above table.
The Company utilizes letters of credit to back certain reinsurance payments and obligations. Outstanding letters of credit were $4 million as of December 31, 2020. The Company has made certain guarantees to state regulators that the statutory capital of certain subsidiaries will be maintained above certain minimum levels.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
An off-balance sheet arrangement is any transaction, agreement or other contractual arrangement involving an unconsolidated entity under which a company has (1) made guarantees, (2) a retained or contingent interest in transferred assets, (3) an obligation under derivative instruments classified as equity or (4) any obligation arising out of a material variable interest in an unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk or credit risk support to the Company, or that engages in leasing, hedging or research and development arrangements with the Company. The Company has no arrangements of these types that management believes may have a material current or future effect on our financial condition, liquidity or results of operations.