Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
General
The Company's financial performance continues to be dependent in large part upon the growth in its outstanding loans receivable, the maintenance of loan quality and acceptable levels of operating expenses. Since March 31, 2017, gross loans receivable have increased at a 4.03% annual compounded rate from $943.3 million to $1.10 billion at March 31, 2021. We believe we were able to improve our gross loans receivable growth rates through acquisitions, improved marketing processes, and analytics. During the four-year period beginning March 31, 2017, the Company has expanded in size from 1,169 branches to 1,205 branches as of March 31, 2021. The Company plans to enter into new markets through opening new branches and acquisitions as opportunities arise.
The Company offers an income tax return preparation and electronic filing program in all but a few of its branches. The Company prepared approximately 77,000, 84,000, and 91,000 returns in each of the fiscal years 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Revenues from the Company’s tax preparation business amounted to approximately $18.1 million, a 13.6% decrease over the $20.9 million earned during fiscal 2020.
The following table sets forth certain information derived from the Company's consolidated statements of operations and balance sheets, as well as operating data and ratios, for the periods indicated:
_______________________________________________________
(1) Average gross loans receivable have been determined by averaging month-end gross loans receivable over the indicated period, excluding tax advances.
(2) Net loans receivable is defined as gross loans receivable less unearned interest and deferred fees.
(3) Average net loans receivable have been determined by averaging month-end gross loans receivable less unearned interest and deferred fees over the indicated period, excluding tax advances.
(4) Operating income is computed as total revenue less provision for credit losses and general and administrative expenses.
COVID-19 Pandemic Response and Impact
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused significant economic disruption in the United States as many state and local governments, including all of the states in which the Company operates, have ordered non-essential businesses to close and residents to shelter in place at home at one point in time or another. For the majority of states in which we operate, we have been considered an essential business and thus nearly all of our branches have remained open to date. However, the impact of COVID-19 is rapidly evolving, its future effects are uncertain, and it may be difficult to assess or predict the extent of the impacts of the pandemic on us as many factors are beyond our control and knowledge.
In response to the spread of COVID-19, we have modified our business practices in order to reduce personal interactions and provide additional support to our associates and customers. Some of these measures include reducing branch hours, limiting employee travel, implementing work-from-home initiatives for employees when possible, cancelling physical participation in meetings and training sessions, providing additional leave for those directly impacted, closing lobbies and offering curbside service, and encouraging customers to service accounts digitally rather than in person. As a result, the Company has seen significant increases in online and phone activity related to account access, payments, and refinances. The Company has expedited projects related to its digital presence and online lending and is currently piloting remote applications, signatures, and funding for select customers.
As non-essential businesses and schools began to close, we proactively halted marketing efforts and updated our underwriting criteria in light of the tremendous uncertainty, rapid increases in unemployment, and federal stimulus packages. The Company is experiencing expected declines in customer demand due to a combination of reduced marketing and stay-at-home orders reducing customer mobility. To assist customers impacted by COVID-19, the Company’s typical 30-day wait period for unemployment insurance claims has been waived and payment deferrals are being offered to impacted customers.
We believe we have sufficient liquidity to support the fundamental operations of our business throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. However, we are unable to estimate the long-term impact of COVID-19 on our business and will continue to assess our liquidity needs as the situation evolves. If we experience sustained adverse effects, we may fail to satisfy our minimum capital ratios and other requirements under our revolving credit facility.
The extent to which the pandemic will ultimately impact our business and financial condition will depend on future events that are impossible to predict, including, but not limited to, the duration and severity of the pandemic, the success of actions taken to contain, treat, and prevent the spread of the virus, the effectiveness of our borrower assistance initiatives and government economic stimulus measures, and the speed at which normal economic and operating conditions return.
See Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” for additional information.
Comparison of Fiscal 2021 Versus Fiscal 2020
Net income for fiscal 2021 was $88.3 million, a 213.5% increase from the $28.2 million earned during fiscal 2020. The increase in net income from continuing operations was primarily due to a $95.5 million decrease in the provision for credit losses partially offset by a $64.5 million decrease in revenue and a $21.7 million accrual in the prior year related to the investigation into our former Mexican business.
Operating income (revenues less provision for credit losses and general and administrative expenses) from continuing operations increased $76.3 million.
Total revenues from continuing operations decreased $64.5 million, or 10.9%, to $525.5 million in fiscal 2021, from $590.0 million in fiscal 2020. Revenues from continuing operations from the 1,152 branches open throughout both fiscal years decreased by 13.1%. At March 31, 2021, the Company had 1,205 branches in operation, an decrease of 38 branches from March 31, 2020.
Interest and fee income from continuing operations during fiscal 2021 decreased by $57.2 million, or 11.3%, from fiscal 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a corresponding decrease in average earning loans. Net loans receivable outstanding at March 31, 2021 decreased 8.4% compared to March 31, 2020, and average net loans receivable outstanding decreased 8.6% during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. Interest and fee income was also impacted by decreasing yields as the portfolio mix shifted to larger lower rate loans during the year. We expect the portfolio to continue to shift towards larger lower rate loans in the near term which should continue to decrease interest and fee yields in the future.
Insurance commissions and other income from continuing operations decreased by $7.3 million, or 8.9%, from fiscal 2020 to fiscal 2021. Insurance commissions from continuing operations decreased by $6.1 million, or 12.2%, from fiscal 2020 to fiscal 2021 due to a decrease in loan volume in states where we offer our insurance products. Other income from continuing operations decreased by $1.1 million, or 3.6%, from fiscal 2020 to fiscal 2021 primarily due to a reduction in tax preparation income of $2.8 million, partially off-set by an increase in revenue from in the Company's motor club product of $1.6 million.
The provision for losses from continuing operations during fiscal 2021 decreased by $95.5 million, or 52.5%, from the previous year. This increase can mostly be attributed to a decrease in charge-off and delinquency rates during the year. Accounts that were 91 days or more past due represented 3.1% and 4.2% of our loan portfolio on a recency basis at March 31, 2021 and March 31, 2020, respectively. The Company's year-over-year charge-off ratio (net charge-offs as a percentage of average net loans receivable) decreased from 18.0% for the year ended March 31, 2020 to 14.1% for the year ended March 31, 2021.
Customers who are new borrowers to the Company (less than two years since their first origination at the time of their current loan) as a percentage of the year-end portfolio have decreased a relative 10.2% year over year. These "new to World" customers now account for 31.0% of the portfolio, a decrease from 34.5% last year, however still an increase from an average of 29.2% in the prior four fiscal years (2016-2019). This decreased weighting of new borrowers, our riskiest customer type, in the portfolio contributed to the decrease in delinquency and charge-off rates of the overall portfolio. In addition to the decrease in portfolio weighting towards less tenured customers during the last 12 months, we have also seen a decrease in charge-off rates when comparing the less tenured customer segment to prior years, largely driven by stronger performance from COVID-19 stimulus and unemployment benefits, as well as improved underwriting practices on new borrowers.
Charge-off ratios for the past ten fiscal years averaged 14.9%, with a high of 18.0% (fiscal 2020) and a low of 12.8% (fiscal 2015). In fiscal 2021 the charge-off ratio was 14.1%. The following table presents the Company's charge-off ratios since 2011.
_______________________________________________________
2015 In fiscal 2015 the Company's net charge-off rate decreased to 12.8%. The net charge-off rate benefited from a change in branch level incentives during the year, which allows managers to continue collection efforts on accounts that are 91 days or more past due without having their monthly bonus negatively impacted. As expected, the change resulted in an increase in accounts 91 days or more past due and fewer charge-offs during fiscal 2015. We estimate the net charge-off rate would have been approximately 14.0% for fiscal 2015 excluding the impact of the change.
General and administrative expenses from continuing operations during fiscal 2021 decreased by $45.3 million, or 13.0%, over the previous fiscal year. General and administrative expenses from continuing operations, when divided by average open branches, decreased 13.4% from fiscal 2020 to fiscal 2021 and, overall, general and administrative expenses from continuing operations as a percent of total revenues from continuing operations decreased to 57.5% in fiscal 2021 from 58.9% in fiscal 2020. The change in general and administrative expense from continuing operations is explained in greater detail below.
Personnel expense from continuing operations totaled $184.6 million for fiscal 2021, a $19.2 million, or (9.4)%, decrease over fiscal 2020. The decrease was largely due to a $9.7 million decrease in share-based compensation driven by the long-term incentive plan and director equity awards granted during the FY2019. Regular payroll expense decreased $7.5 million year over year primarily due to decreases in headcount and benefit expense decreased $4.1 million, mostly due to decrease in insurance claims. The Company deferred $5.7 million less in payroll related origination costs under ASC 310, when comparing period over period, due to lower originations during the year, which partially offset the decrease in personnel expense.
Occupancy and equipment expense from continuing operations totaled $56.2 million for fiscal 2021, a $1.9 million, or 3.5%, increase over fiscal 2020. Occupancy and equipment expense is generally a function of the number of branches the Company has open throughout the year. In fiscal 2021 the expense per average open branch increased to $45.5 thousand, up from $44.2 thousand in fiscal 2020. Occupancy and equipment expense was negatively impacted by a $2.9 million write down of signage as a result of rebranding our branch offices during fiscal 2021.
Advertising expense from continuing operations totaled $17.2 million for fiscal 2021, a $7.1 million, or (29.3)%, decrease over fiscal 2020. The decrease was primarily due to decreased spending in our direct mail and digital campaigns.
Amortization of intangible assets from continuing operations totaled $5.5 million for fiscal 2021, a $0.5 million, or 9.3%, increase over fiscal 2020, which primarily relates to a corresponding increase in total intangible assets during the comparative periods due to acquisition activity during the current and prior year.
Other expense from continuing operations totaled $38.7 million for fiscal 2021, a $21.4 million, or 35.6%, decrease over fiscal 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a $21.7 million reduction in non deductible penalties related to the Company's Mexico investigation in the prior year.
Interest expense from continuing operations decreased by $0.2 million, or 0.8%, during fiscal 2021 when compared to the previous fiscal year as a result of an decrease in average debt outstanding of 1.0%. For fiscal 2020 and 2021 the effective interest rate stayed the same at 5.8%.
Income tax expense from continuing operations increased $16.4 million, or 242.4% for fiscal 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year. The effective tax rate increased to 20.8% for fiscal 2021 compared to 19.3% for fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily due to the recognition of net Federal and state tax credits of $8.1 million in fiscal year 2020 compared to $1.2 million in the current fiscal year which was partially offset by the recognition of non-deductible penalties totaling $21.7 million in the prior fiscal year.
Comparison of Fiscal 2020 Versus Fiscal 2019
For a comparison of our results of operations for the years ended March 31, 2019 and March 31, 2020, see Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020 (which was filed with the SEC on May 29, 2020), which comparison is incorporated herein by reference.
Mexico Exit
As previously disclosed, the Company sold all of the issued and outstanding capital stock and equity interest of its two Mexico subsidiaries, WAC de Mexico and SWAC, for a purchase price of MXN $826,795,050, effective as of July 1, 2018. The Company subsequently converted the purchase price into approximately USD $44.36 million using applicable exchange rates. The Company and its subsidiaries no longer operate in Mexico. Thus, the Company expects its revenues and gross loans receivables to be negatively impacted in future years compared to historical levels.
Regulatory Matters
Mexico Investigation
As previously disclosed, the Company voluntarily contacted the SEC and DOJ in June 2017 to advise both agencies that an internal investigation of its operations in Mexico was underway. The Company has fully cooperated with both agencies.
On August 6, 2020, the Company announced that it reached resolution with both the SEC and the DOJ regarding allegations primarily involving the Company’s former subsidiary in Mexico.
In connection with the resolution of the investigations, the Company agreed to the terms contained in a Declination Letter with the DOJ, dated August 5, 2020 (the “Declination Letter”). Pursuant to the terms of the Declination Letter, the DOJ declined to prosecute the Company and closed its investigation into the Company citing as the bases for this decision, among other things, the following: prompt, voluntary self-disclosure of the misconduct; full and proactive cooperation in this matter (including its provision of all known relevant facts about the misconduct); and full remediation, including the additional FCPA training added to the Company’s compliance program, separation from executives under whom the misconduct took place; and discontinuing relationships with third parties in Mexico involved in the misconduct.
The SEC approved the Offer of Settlement on August 6, 2020 and issued an Order Instituting Cease-and-Desist Proceedings Pursuant to Section 21C of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, Making Findings, and Imposing a Cease-and-Desist Order (the “SEC Order”). Pursuant to the terms of the SEC Order, the Company consented to 1) cease and desist from committing or causing any violations and any future violations of Sections 30A, 13(b)(2)(A) and 13(b)(2)(B) of the Exchange Act of 1934, and 2) pay disgorgement, prejudgment interest and civil penalties totaling $21,726,000 to the SEC.
CFPB Rulemaking Initiative
On October 5, 2017, the CFPB issued a final rule (the "Rule") imposing limitations on (i) short-term consumer loans, (ii) longer-term consumer installment loans with balloon payments, and (iii) higher-rate consumer installment loans repayable by a payment authorization. The Rule requires lenders originating short-term loans and longer-term balloon payment loans to evaluate whether each consumer has the ability to repay the loan along with current obligations and expenses (“ability to repay requirements”). The Rule also curtails repeated unsuccessful attempts to debit consumers’ accounts for short-term loans, balloon payment loans, and installment loans that involve a payment authorization and an Annual Percentage Rate over 36% (“payment requirements”). The Company does not believe that the Rule will have a material impact on the Company’s existing lending procedures, because the Company currently does not make short-term consumer loans or longer-term consumer installment loans with balloon payments that would subject the Company to the Rule’s ability to repay requirements. The Company also currently underwrites all its loans (including those secured by a vehicle title that would fall within the scope of these proposals) by reviewing the customer’s ability to repay based on the Company’s standards. However, implementation of the Rule’s payment requirements may require changes to the Company’s practices and procedures for such loans, which could materially and adversely affect the Company’s ability to make such loans, the cost of making such loans, the Company’s ability to, or frequency with which it could, refinance any such loans, and the profitability of such loans.
Further, on June 6, 2019, the CFPB amended the Rule to delay the August 19, 2019 compliance date for part of the Rule’s provisions, including the ability to repay requirements. The new compliance date for the ability to repay requirements is November 19, 2020. In addition, on February 6, 2019, the CFPB issued a notice of proposed rulemaking proposing to rescind provisions of the Rule governing the ability to repay requirements. The comment period for this proposed rulemaking closed in May 2019. According to the CFPB’s Fall 2019 rulemaking agenda, the CFPB is reviewing the approximately 190,000 comments it received and expected to take final action in April 2020 with respect to this proposal. However, no final action has been taken as of yet. Any regulatory changes could have effects beyond those currently contemplated that could further materially and adversely impact our business and operations. Unless rescinded or otherwise amended, the Company will have to comply with the Rule’s payment requirements if it continues to allow consumers to set up future recurring payments online for certain covered loans such that it meets the definition of having a “leveraged payment mechanism” under the Rule. If the payment provisions of the Rule apply, the Company will have to modify its loan payment procedures to comply with the required notices and mandated timeframes set forth in the final rule.
The CFPB also has stated that it expects to conduct separate rulemaking to identify larger participants in the installment lending market for purposes of its supervision program. This initiative was classified as “inactive” on the CFPB’s Spring 2018 rulemaking agenda and has remained inactive since, but the CFPB indicated that such action was not a decision on the merits. Though the likelihood and timing of any such rulemaking is uncertain, the Company believes that the implementation of such rules would likely bring the Company’s business under the CFPB’s supervisory authority which, among other things, would subject the Company to reporting obligations to, and on-site compliance examinations by, the CFPB. See Part I, Item 1, “Business - Government Regulation - Federal legislation,” for a further discussion of these matters and the federal regulations to which the Company’s operations are subject and Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” for more information regarding these regulatory and related risks.
Critical Accounting Policies
The Company’s accounting and reporting policies are in accordance with GAAP and conform to general practices within the finance company industry. The significant accounting policies used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements are discussed in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Certain critical accounting policies involve significant judgment by the Company’s management, including the use of estimates and assumptions which affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses. As a result, changes in these estimates and assumptions could significantly affect the Company’s financial position and results of operations. The Company considers its policies regarding the allowance for credit losses, share-based compensation, and income taxes to be its most critical accounting policies due to the significant degree of management judgment involved.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Accounting policies related to the allowance for credit losses are considered to be critical as these policies involve considerable subjective judgement and estimation by management. As discussed in Note 5 - Summary of Significant Policies, to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report, our policies related to the allowances for credit losses changed on April 1, 2020 in connection with the adoption of a new accounting standard update as codified in ASC 326. In the case of loans, the allowance for credit losses is a contra-asset valuation account, calculated in accordance with ASC 326 that is deducted from the amortized cost basis of loans to present the net amount expected to be collected. The amount of the allowance account represents management’s best estimate of current expected credit losses on these financial instruments considering available information, from internal and external sources, relevant to assessing exposure to credit loss over the contractual term of the instrument. Relevant available information includes historical credit loss experience, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts.
Share-Based Compensation
The Company measures compensation cost for share-based awards at fair value and recognizes compensation over the service period for awards expected to vest. The fair value of restricted stock is based on the number of shares granted and the quoted price of our common stock at the time of grant, and the fair value of stock options is determined using the Black-Scholes valuation model. The Black-Scholes model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including expected volatility, risk-free interest rate and expected life, changes to which can materially affect the fair value estimate. Actual results, and future changes in estimates, may differ substantially from our current estimates.
Income Taxes
Management uses certain assumptions and estimates in determining income taxes payable or refundable, deferred income tax liabilities and assets for events recognized differently in its financial statements and income tax returns, and income tax expense. Determining these amounts requires analysis of certain transactions and interpretation of tax laws and regulations. Management exercises considerable judgment in evaluating the amount and timing of recognition of the resulting income tax liabilities and assets. These judgments and estimates are re-evaluated on a periodic basis as regulatory and business factors change.
No assurance can be given that either the tax returns submitted by management or the income tax reported on the Consolidated Financial Statements will not be adjusted by either adverse rulings, changes in the tax code, or assessments made by the Internal Revenue Service or by state or foreign taxing authorities. The Company is subject to potential adverse adjustments including, but not limited to: an increase in the statutory federal or state income tax rates, the permanent non-deductibility of amounts currently considered deductible either now or in future periods, and the dependency on the generation of future taxable income in order to ultimately realize deferred income tax assets.
Under FASB ASC 740, the Company includes the current and deferred tax impact of its tax positions in the financial statements when it is more likely than not (likelihood of greater than 50%) that such positions will be sustained by taxing authorities, with full knowledge of relevant information, based on the technical merits of the tax position. While the Company supports its tax positions by unambiguous tax law, prior experience with the taxing authority, and analysis that considers all relevant facts, circumstances and regulations, management must still rely on assumptions and estimates to determine the overall likelihood of success and proper quantification of a given tax position.
Quarterly Information and Seasonality
The Company's loan volume and corresponding loans receivable follow seasonal trends. The Company's highest loan demand typically occurs from October through December, its third fiscal quarter. Loan demand has generally been the lowest and loan repayment highest from January to March, its fourth fiscal quarter. Loan volume and average balances typically remain relatively level during the remainder of the year. This seasonal trend affects quarterly operating performance through corresponding fluctuations in interest and fee income and insurance commissions earned and the provision for loan losses recorded, as well as fluctuations in the Company's cash needs. Consequently, operating results for the Company's third fiscal quarter generally are significantly lower than in other quarters and operating results for its fourth fiscal quarter are significantly higher than in other quarters. However, the effects of COVID-19 and related economic stimulus has reduced demand and impacted our typical seasonal trends.
The following table sets forth, on a quarterly basis, certain items included in the Company's unaudited Consolidated Financial Statements and shows the number of branches open during fiscal years 2021 and 2020.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data and Note 1-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Consolidated Financial Statements for the impact of new accounting pronouncements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company has financed and continues to finance its operations, acquisitions and branch expansion through a combination of cash flows from operations and borrowings from its institutional lenders. The Company has generally applied its cash flows from operations to fund its loan volume, fund acquisitions, repay long-term indebtedness and repurchase its common stock. As the Company's gross loans receivable increased from $1,004.2 million at March 31, 2018 to $1,104.7 million at March 31, 2021, net cash provided by operating activities for fiscal years 2021, 2020, and 2019 was $199.6 million, $257.4 million, and $244.7 million, respectively.
The Company continues to believe stock repurchases are a viable component of the Company’s long-term financial strategy and an excellent use of excess cash when the opportunity arises. However, our revolving credit facility limits share repurchases to 50% of consolidated adjusted net income in any fiscal year commencing with the fiscal year ending March 31, 2017. The Company can repurchase additional amounts of shares with prior written consent from lenders.
The Company did not acquire any branches during fiscal 2021. The Company believes that attractive opportunities to acquire new branches or receivables from its competitors or to acquire branches in communities not currently served by the Company will continue to become available as conditions in local economies and the financial circumstances of owners change.
The Company has a revolving credit facility with a syndicate of banks. The revolving credit facility provides for revolving borrowings of up to the lesser of (a) the aggregate commitments under the facility and (b) a borrowing base, and it includes a $300,000 letter of credit under a $1.5 million subfacility. In March of 2021, the credit facility was amended and restated to, among other things, (i) reduced the Applicable Margin to 3.50% rather than adjusting it from 3.50% to 4.50% based on the Company's EBITDA ratio; (ii) permit the Company to purchase its equity securities or make other distributions in respect of its equity securities in the amount of $90 million through June 30, 2022 plus up to 50% of consolidated adjusted net income for the period commencing on January 1, 2019, subject to certain restrictions; and (iii) extend the maturity date of the amended and restated revolving credit agreement to June 7, 2024.
Subject to a borrowing base formula, the Company may borrow at the rate of LIBOR plus 3.5% with a minimum rate of 4.5%. The Company’s amended and restated revolving credit agreement provides procedures for determining a replacement or
alternative rate in the event LIBOR is unavailable or discontinued or if the administrative agent elects to replace LIBOR prior to its discontinuation. There can be no assurances as to whether such replacement or alternative rate will be more or less favorable than LIBOR. We intend to monitor the developments with respect to the potential phasing out of LIBOR and will work to limit any negative impacts that could result during any transition away from LIBOR. At March 31, 2021, the aggregate commitments under the revolving credit facility were $685.0 million. The $300,000 letter of credit outstanding under the subfacility expires on December 31, 2021; however, it automatically extends for one year on the expiration date. The borrowing base limitation is equal to the product of (a) the Company’s eligible finance receivables, less unearned finance charges, insurance premiums and insurance commissions, and (b) an advance rate percentage that ranges from 74% to 80% based on a collateral performance indicator, as more completely described below. Further, under the amended and restated revolving credit agreement, the administrative agent has the right to set aside reasonable reserves against the available borrowing base in such amounts as it may deem appropriate, including, without limitation, reserves with respect to certain regulatory events or any increased operational, legal, or regulatory risk of the Company and its subsidiaries.
For the year ended March 31, 2021, the effective interest rate, including the commitment fee, on borrowings under the revolving credit facility was 5.8%. The Company pays a commitment fee equal to 0.50% per annum of the daily unused portion of the commitments. On March 31, 2021 $405.0 million was outstanding under this facility, and there was $181.4 million of unused borrowing availability under the borrowing base limitations.
The Company’s obligations under the revolving credit facility, together with treasury management and hedging obligations owing to any lender under the revolving credit facility or any affiliate of any such lender, are required to be guaranteed by each of the Company’s wholly-owned domestic subsidiaries. The obligations of the Company and the subsidiary guarantors under the revolving credit facility, together with such treasury management and hedging obligations, are secured by a first-priority security interest in substantially all assets of the Company and the subsidiary guarantors.
The agreement governing the Company’s revolving credit facility contains affirmative and negative covenants, including covenants that restrict the ability of the Company and its subsidiaries to, among other things, incur or guarantee indebtedness, incur liens, pay dividends and repurchase or redeem capital stock, dispose of assets, engage in mergers and consolidations, make acquisitions or other investments, redeem or prepay subordinated debt, amend subordinated debt documents, make changes in the nature of its business, and engage in transactions with affiliates. The agreement also contains financial covenants, including (i) a minimum consolidated net worth of $325.0 million on and after December 31, 2020; (ii) a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio of (a) 2.25 to 1.0 for the fiscal quarters ending March 31, 2020, June 30, 2020 and September 30, 2020 and (b) 2.75 to 1.0 for each fiscal quarter thereafter; (iii) a maximum ratio of total debt to consolidated adjusted net worth of 2.0 to 1.0; and (iv) a maximum collateral performance indicator of 24% as of the end of each calendar month. The agreement allows the Company to incur subordinated debt that matures after the termination date for the revolving credit facility and that contains specified subordination terms, subject to limitations on amount imposed by the financial covenants under the agreement.
The collateral performance indicator is equal to the sum of (a) a three-month rolling average rate of receivables at least sixty days past due and (b) an eight-month rolling average net charge-off rate. The Company was in compliance with these covenants at March 31, 2021 and does not believe that these covenants will materially limit its business and expansion strategy.
The agreement contains events of default including, without limitation, nonpayment of principal, interest or other obligations, violation of covenants, misrepresentation, cross-default to other debt, bankruptcy and other insolvency events, judgments, certain ERISA events, actual or asserted invalidity of loan documentation, invalidity of subordination provisions of subordinated debt, certain changes of control of the Company, and the occurrence of certain regulatory events (including the entry of any stay, order, judgment, ruling or similar event related to the Company’s or any of its subsidiaries’ originating, holding, pledging, collecting or enforcing its eligible finance receivables that is material to the Company or any subsidiary) which remains unvacated, undischarged, unbonded or unstayed by appeal or otherwise for a period of 60 days from the date of its entry and is reasonably likely to cause a material adverse change.
The Company believes that cash flow from operations and borrowings under its revolving credit facility or other sources will be adequate to fund the expected cost of opening or acquiring new branches, including funding initial operating losses of new branches and funding loans receivable originated by those branches and the Company's other branches (for the next 12 months and for the foreseeable future beyond that). Except as otherwise discussed in this report including, but not limited to, any discussions in Part 1, Item 1A, "Risk Factors" (as supplemented by any subsequent disclosures in information the Company files with or furnishes to the SEC from time to time), management is not currently aware of any trends, demands, commitments, events or uncertainties that it believes will or could result in, or are or could be reasonably likely to result in, any material adverse effect on the Company’s liquidity.
The following table summarizes the Company’s contractual obligations by period:
Share Repurchase Program
On January 26, 2021, the Board of Directors authorized the Company to repurchase up to $25.0 million of the Company’s outstanding common stock, inclusive of the amount that remains available for repurchase under prior repurchase authorizations. As of March 31, 2021, the Company had $21.4 million in aggregate remaining repurchase capacity. The timing and actual number of shares of common stock repurchased will depend on a variety of factors, including the stock price, corporate and regulatory requirements, restrictions under the revolving credit facility and other market and economic conditions.
The Company continues to believe stock repurchases are a viable component of the Company’s long-term financial strategy and an excellent use of excess cash when the opportunity arises. However, our revolving credit facility limits share repurchases to $90 million through June 30, 2022 plus up to 50% of consolidated adjusted net income for the period commencing on January 1, 2019, subject to certain restrictions. Our first priority is to ensure we have enough capital to fund loan growth. To the extent we have excess capital, we may repurchase stock, if appropriate and as authorized by our Board of Directors. As of March 31, 2021, the Company's debt outstanding was $405.0 million and its shareholders' equity was $404.9 million resulting in a debt-to-equity ratio of 1.0:1.0. Management will continue to monitor the Company's debt-to-equity ratio and is committed to maintaining a debt level that will allow the Company to continue to execute its business objectives, while not putting undue stress on its consolidated balance sheet.
Inflation
The Company does not believe that inflation, within reasonably anticipated rates, will have a materially adverse effect on its financial condition. Although inflation would increase the Company’s operating costs in absolute terms, the Company expects that the same decrease in the value of money would result in an increase in the size of loans demanded by its customer base. It is reasonable to anticipate that such a change in customer preference would result in an increase in total loan receivables and an increase in absolute revenues to be generated from that larger amount of loans receivable. The Company believes that this increase in absolute revenues should offset any increase in operating costs. In addition, because the Company’s loans have a relatively short contractual term and average life, it is unlikely that loans made at any given point in time will be repaid with significantly inflated dollars.
Legal Matters
From time to time the Company is involved in litigation relating to claims arising out of its operations in the normal course of business. See Part I, Item 3, “Legal Proceedings” and Note 16 to our audited Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of legal matters.