ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes to those financial statements that are included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
There are statements in this annual report on Form 10-K that are not historical facts. These “forward-looking statements” can be identified by use of terminology such as “believe”, “hope”, “may”, “anticipate”, “should”, “intend”, “plan”, “will”, “expect”, “estimate”, “project”, “positioned”, “strategy”, and similar expressions. You should be aware that these forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that are beyond our control. For a discussion of these risks, you should read this entire annual report on Form 10-K document carefully. Although management believes that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements are reasonable, they do not guarantee our future performance, and actual results could differ from those contemplated by these forward-looking statements. The assumptions used for the purposes for the forward-looking statements specified in the following information represent estimates of future events and are subject to uncertainty as to possible changes in the economy, legislative changes, changes in the industry, and other circumstances. As a result, the identification and interpretation of data and other information and their use in developing and selecting assumptions from and among reasonable alternatives require the exercise of judgment. To the extent that the assumed events do not occur, the outcome may vary substantially from anticipated or projected results, and, accordingly, no opinion is expressed on the achievability of those forward-looking statements. In the light of these risks and uncertainties, there can be no assurance that the results and events contemplated by the forward-looking statements contained in this annual report on Form 10-K will in fact transpire. You are cautioned not to place reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of their dates. We do not undertake any obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements.
OVERVIEW
Wall Street Media Co, Inc. (the “Company,” “we,” “us” or “our”) was organized as Mycatalogsonline.com, Inc. in the state of Nevada on January 6, 2009. In April 2009, the Company changed its name to My Catalogs Online, Inc. In August 2013, the Company changed its name to Wall Street Media Co., Inc.
The Company provides consulting and management services to entities looking to merge with, or acquire or otherwise consult with third party entities. These services are currently provided to Landmark-Pegasus, Inc., a related party (“Landmark-Pegasus”). Mr. Moroney also acts as Landmark-Pegasus’ President and is its sole director.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
In response to the Securities and Exchange Commission’s (the “SEC”) financial reporting release, FR-60, Cautionary Advice Regarding Disclosure About Critical Accounting Policies, the Company has selected its more subjective accounting estimation processes for purposes of explaining the methodology used in calculating the estimate, in addition to the inherent uncertainties pertaining to the estimate and the possible effects on the Company’s financial condition. These accounting estimates are discussed below. These estimates involve certain assumptions that if incorrect could create a material adverse impact on the Company’s results of operations and financial condition
Revenue Recognition
As of October 1, 2018, the Company adopted Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) (“ASC 606”). The new guidance sets forth a new five-step revenue recognition model which replaces the prior revenue recognition guidance in its entirety and is intended to eliminate numerous industry-specific pieces of revenue recognition guidance that have historically existed in U.S. GAAP. The underlying principle of the new standard is that a business or other organization will recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects what it expects to receive in exchange for the goods or services. The Company adopted the standard using the modified retrospective method and the adoption did not have a material impact on its financial statements.
The Company provides consulting service currently to a single client and represents the Company’s only revenue source. The Company recognizes revenue when the performance obligation (i.e. consulting services) with the customer are satisfied and when the service is provided. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for providing the service.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED SEPTEMBER 30, 2021 COMPARED TO THE YEAR ENDED SEPTEMBER 30, 2020
Revenue: The Company’s revenues decreased approximately 9% from $79,500 during the year ended September 30, 2020 to $72,500 for the year ended September 30, 2021 due to a decrease in consulting services provided. All revenues generated during the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020 are with related parties.
Operating Expenses: The Company’s operating expenses increased approximately 17% from $62,991 during the year ended September 30, 2020 to $73,728 for the year ended September 30, 2021. The primary reason for this was due to an increase in bad debt expense.
Interest Expense: The Company’s interest expense increased approximately .1% from $3,705 during the year ended September 30, 2020 as compared to $3,711 for the year ended September 30, 2021 due to no change in notes payable during the year.
Income from Operations: The Company’s income from operations decreased approximately 107% from $16,509 for the year ended September 30, 2020 as compared to a loss from operations of $1,228 for the year ended September 30, 2021. The primary reasons for this was due to the decrease in consulting services provided and the increase in bad debt expense. $72,500 and $79,500, or 100%, of the Company’s revenue during the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, was derived from Landmark-Pegasus, a related party, or clients of Landmark-Pegasus. Landmark-Pegasus is wholly owned by John Moroney, who beneficially owns approximately 59.8% of the Company’s common stock. Mr. Moroney also acts as Landmark-Pegasus’ President and is Landmark-Pegasus’ sole director.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Net cash used in operating activities was $8,228 for the year ended September 30, 2021 as compared to $491 for the year ended September 30, 2020.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $0 for the year ended September 30, 2021 as compared to net cash used in financing activities of $1,500 for the year ended September 30, 2020, primarily due to repayments of accrued interest payable-related party.
The working capital deficit was $87,496 for the year ended September 30, 2021 as compared to a working capital deficit of $82,557 for the year ended September 30, 2020.
As of September 30, 2021, the Company had $1,156 in cash. The Company plans to fund ongoing operations by continuing to pursue contracts to provide consulting services in efforts to generate additional revenue. In addition, the Company is actively seeking investor funding.
RELATED PERSON TRANSACTIONS
For information on related party transactions and their financial impact, see Note 3 to the financial statements.
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02, “Leases” which, for operating leases, requires a lessee to recognize a right-of-use asset and a lease liability, initially measured at the present value of the lease payments, in its balance sheet. The standard also requires a lessee to recognize a single lease cost, calculated so that the cost of the lease is allocated over the lease term, on a generally straight-line basis. The ASU is effective for public companies for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted. This ASU was effective for the Company on October 1, 2019 and it did not have a material impact on the financial statements and disclosures of the Company since it does not have any leases which meet the criteria.
In August, 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and other options” which simplifies the accounting for convertible debt instruments and convertible preferred stock. The ASU is effective for public companies for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted. This ASU is not expected to have a material impact on the financial statements and disclosures of the Company since it does not have any debt that meets the criteria.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources, that is material to investors.