ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
INTRODUCTION
The Company’s financial highlights and key performance measures are presented in the table below.
Definition of ratios:
•Return on average assets - net income divided by average assets.
•Return on average equity - net income divided by average equity.
•Efficiency ratio - noninterest expense (excluding other real estate owned expense and write-down of premises) divided by noninterest income (excluding net securities gains/losses and gains/losses on disposition of premises and equipment) plus tax-equivalent net interest income.
•Texas ratio - total nonperforming assets divided by tangible common equity plus the allowance for loan losses.
•Dividend payout ratio - dividends paid to common stockholders divided by net income.
•Dividend yield - dividends per share paid to common stockholders divided by closing year-end stock price.
•Average equity to average assets ratio - average equity divided by average assets.
(1) A lower ratio is better.
(2) As presented, this is a non-GAAP financial measure. For further information, refer to the section "Non-GAAP Financial Measures" of this item
The Company’s 2020 net income was $32,712 compared to $28,690 in 2019. Net income for 2020 was a record for the Company. Basic and diluted earnings per common share for 2020 were $1.99 and $1.98, respectively, compared to $1.75 and 1.74, respectively, in 2019. During 2020, we paid our common stockholders $13,815 ($0.84 per common share) in dividends compared to $13,578 ($0.83 per common share) in 2019. The dividend declared and paid in the first quarter of 2021 was $0.22 per common share compared to $0.21 per common share for the fourth quarter of 2020, and was the highest quarterly dividend ever paid by the Company.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
Our loan portfolio grew to $2,280,575 as of December 31, 2020, from $1,941,663 as of December 31, 2019. This loan growth included $180,757 of PPP loans as of December 31, 2020. Deposits increased to $2,700,994 as of December 31, 2020, from $2,014,756 as of December 31, 2019. The growth in deposit balances was primarily due to changes in customer behavior as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and our customers’ desire to retain liquidity, as well as a result of additional funds provided to individuals and businesses by government relief programs. The increase in deposit balances had a direct impact on our asset balances and liquidity position at year end as funds were deployed in loan originations, investment security purchases and federal funds sold. Total assets were $3,185,744 at December 31, 2020, compared to $2,473,691 at December 31, 2019, a 28.8 percent increase. Our balance sheet may decrease and the mix of assets and liabilities may change in 2021. Loans and deposits may decrease as customer behavior adjusts to economic uncertainties created by the duration of the COVID pandemic, reductions in broad-based government relief programs and the efficiency of the rollout of COVID-19 vaccinations.
The Company has a quantitative peer analysis program in place for evaluating its results. The peer group is periodically reviewed, and was revised in the first quarter of 2020 after evaluating financial institutions that we believe better reflect our Company, particularly in terms of market capitalization, asset size, employee headcount and loan portfolio composition. The Company is in the middle of the group in terms of asset size. The group of 21 Midwestern, publicly traded, peer financial institutions against which we compared our performance for 2020 consisted of Bank First Corporation, Civista Bancshares, Inc., CrossFirst Bankshares, Inc., Equity Bancshares, Inc., Farmers National Banc Corp., Farmers & Merchants Bancorp, First Business Financial Services, Inc., First Financial Corp., First Mid Bancshares, Inc., German American Bancorp, Inc., Hills Bancorporation, Isabella Bank Corporation, LCNB Corp., Level One Bancorp, Inc., Macatawa Bank Corporation, Mackinac Financial Corporation, Mercantile Bank Corporation, MidWestOne Financial Group, Inc., Nicolet Bankshares, Inc., Peoples Bancorp, Inc., and Southern Missouri Bancorp, Inc. The Company's goal is to perform at or near the top of this peer group relative to what we consider to be three key metrics: return on average equity, efficiency ratio and Texas ratio. We believe these measures encompass the factors that define the performance of a community bank. Company and peer results for the key financial performance measures are summarized below.
(1) As presented, this is a non-GAAP financial measure. For further information, refer to the section “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” of this Item.
(2) Latest data available.
Our earnings outlook is positive, and we have strong capital resources. We anticipate the Company will be profitable in 2021 at a level that compares with that of our peers. The amount of our future profit is dependent, in large part, on our ability to continue to grow the loan portfolio, the amount of loan losses we incur, fluctuations in market interest rates, the strength of the local and national economy, and the economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.
The following discussion describes the consolidated operations and financial condition of the Company, including its subsidiary West Bank and West Bank’s special purpose subsidiaries. Results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 are compared to the results for the year ended December 31, 2019 and the consolidated financial condition of the Company as of December 31, 2020 is compared to December 31, 2019. Results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the results for the year ended December 31, 2018 can be found in Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of the Company’s 2019 annual report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on February 27, 2020.
SIGNIFICANT DEVELOPMENTS - IMPACT OF COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic, and efforts to contain it, have had a complex and significant adverse impact on the economy, the banking industry and the Company. The impact on future fiscal periods is subject to a high degree of uncertainty.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
Effects on Our Market Areas. Our commercial and consumer banking products and services are offered primarily in Iowa and Minnesota, where individual and government responses to the COVID-19 pandemic led to broad curtailment of economic activity beginning in March 2020. In Iowa and Minnesota, schools closed for the remainder of the school year, most retail establishments, including restaurants and entertainment venues, were ordered to close for varying lengths of time, and travel and non-critical healthcare services were significantly curtailed. Since the initial shut down in March 2020, phased reopening plans began in mid-May subject to public health reopening guidelines, including social distancing and limitations on capacity. Schools and colleges have reopened under various in-person, online and hybrid learning models. Recent increases in COVID-19 transmission has lead to additional targeted closures and restrictions. These measures have had a lasting impact on the economies of and customers located in these states. The Bank remained open during the closures as banks had been identified as essential services. Initially, the Bank continued to serve its customers through its drive-ups and Video Teller Machines and inside its branch offices by appointment only. Our full service branch lobbies reopened to walk-in customer activity in June 2020.
Both states in our market areas experienced increases in unemployment levels in 2020 as a result of the curtailment of business activities. Unemployment in Iowa was 3.1 percent in December 2020, after peaking at 11.0 percent in April 2020, according to the Iowa Workforce Development. Unemployment in Minnesota was 4.4 percent in December 2020, after peaking at 9.9 percent in May 2020, according to the Minnesota Department of Employment and Economic Development.
Policy and Regulatory Developments. Federal, state and local governments and regulatory authorities have enacted and issued a range of policy responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the following:
•The Federal Reserve decreased the range for the federal funds target rate by 0.5 percent on March 3, 2020, and by another 1.0 percent on March 16, 2020, reaching a current range of 0.0 - 0.25 percent.
•On March 27, 2020, President Trump signed the CARES Act, which established a $2 trillion economic stimulus package, including cash payments to individuals, supplemental unemployment insurance benefits and a $349 billion loan program administered through the SBA, referred to as the PPP. After the initial $349 billion in funds for the PPP was exhausted, an additional $310 billion in funding for PPP loans was authorized. As of December 31, 2020 the Bank originated $224,489 in PPP loans as a lender in the program in 2020. In addition, on December 27, 2020, President Trump signed the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, a $900.0 billion COVID-19 relief package that included an additional $284.0 billion in PPP funding.
•In addition, the CARES Act, as extended by the Coronavirus Response and Relief Supplemental Appropriation Act of 2021 (a part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021), provides financial institutions the option to temporarily suspend certain requirements under GAAP related to TDRs for a limited period of time to account for the effects of COVID-19. See Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional disclosure of TDRs.
•On April 7, 2020, federal banking regulators issued a revised Interagency Statement on Loan Modifications and Reporting for Financial Institutions, which, among other things, encouraged financial institutions to work prudently with borrowers who are or may be unable to meet their contractual payment obligations because of the effects of COVID-19, and stated that institutions generally do not need to categorize COVID-19-related modifications as TDRs and that the agencies will not direct supervised institutions to automatically categorize all COVID-19-related loan modifications as TDRs. See Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional disclosure of TDRs. On April 9, 2020, the Federal Reserve announced additional measures aimed at supporting small and mid-sized businesses, as well as state and local governments impacted by COVID-19. The Federal Reserve announced the Main Street Business Lending Program, which established two new loan facilities intended to facilitate lending to small and mid-sized businesses: (1) the Main Street New Loan Facility, or MSNLF, and (2) the Main Street Expanded Loan Facility, or MSELF. MSNLF loans are unsecured term loans originated on or after April 8, 2020, while MSELF loans are provided as upsized tranches of existing loans originated before April 8, 2020. The combined size of the program is authorized up to $600 billion.
•On August 3, 2020, the FFIEC issued a Joint Statement on Additional Loan Accommodations Related to COVID-19, which, among other things, encouraged financial institutions to consider prudent additional loan accommodation options when borrowers are unable to meet their obligations due to continuing financial challenges. Accommodation options should be based on prudent risk management and consumer protection principles.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
•In addition to the policy responses described above, the federal bank regulatory agencies, along with their state counterparts, have issued a stream of guidance in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and have taken a number of unprecedented steps to help banks navigate the pandemic and mitigate its impact. These include, without limitation: requiring banks to focus on business continuity and pandemic planning; adding pandemic scenarios to stress testing; encouraging bank use of capital buffers and reserves in lending programs; permitting certain regulatory reporting extensions; reducing margin requirements on swaps; permitting certain otherwise prohibited investments in investment funds; issuing guidance to encourage banks to work with customers affected by the pandemic and encourage loan workouts; and providing credit under the CRA for certain pandemic related loans, investments and public service. Moreover, because of the need for social distancing measures, the agencies revamped the manner in which they conducted periodic examinations of their regular institutions, including making greater use of off-site reviews. The Federal Reserve also issued guidance encouraging banking institutions to utilize its discount window for loans and intraday credit extended by its Reserve Banks to help households and businesses impacted by the pandemic and announced numerous funding facilities. The FDIC has also acted to mitigate the deposit insurance assessment effects of participating in the PPP and the Federal Reserve's PPP Liquidity Facility and Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility.
Effects on Our Business. The COVID-19 pandemic and the specific developments referred to above have had and will continue to have a significant impact on our business. In particular, we anticipate that a significant portion of the Bank’s borrowers in the hotel, restaurant, retail and movie theater industries will continue to endure significant economic distress, which has caused, and may continue to cause, them to draw on their existing lines of credit and adversely affect their ability to repay existing indebtedness, and may adversely impact the value of collateral. These developments, together with economic conditions generally, are also expected to impact our commercial real estate portfolio, particularly with respect to real estate with exposure to these industries, and the value of certain collateral securing our loans. As a result, our financial condition, capital levels and results of operations could be adversely affected, as described in further detail below.
Our Response. We took numerous steps in 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the following:
•We actively worked with loan customers to evaluate prudent loan modification terms. In 2020, West Bank provided loan modification for nearly 300 loans totaling over $550,000. As of December 31, 2020, 35 loans totaling $139,940, or 6.1 percent of total loans, were in payment deferral status under COVID-19-related modifications. The modifications included a deferral of principal and/or interest payments. Expiration of the deferrals range from January 2021 through June 2021. As of December 31, 2020, the modifications are for hotel loans totaling $64,449, movie theater loans totaling $17,863, mixed-use commercial real estate loans totaling $38,177 and other commercial and commercial real estate loans totaling $19,451.
•In 2020, West Bank originated 925 PPP loans totaling $224,489. As of December 31, 2020, total outstanding PPP loans were $180,757. Borrowers are in the process of filing for forgiveness with the SBA. When the borrower applies for loan forgiveness, the Bank has 60 days to submit the application to the SBA. The SBA then has 90 days to approve the loan forgiveness. We expect the forgiveness process to extend into the second quarter of 2021. Additionally, a second round of PPP loans began in January 2021, and the Company is a participating lender in this program. As of February 19, 2021, West Bank has originated 256 loans totaling approximately $43,100 in the second round program.
•From mid-March through the end of June 2020, we limited all branch activity to drive-up and appointment only services. We continue to promote our digital banking options through our website, and encourage customers to utilize our online and mobile banking services. Our customer service and retail banking departments have remained fully staffed and available to assist customers through our various digital channels. As we reopened our lobbies for customer activity, we implemented various social distancing and cleaning protocols recommended by governmental health departments to protect the health and safety of our employees and customers. We have successfully deployed a modified working strategy, including emphasis on social distancing and remote work as necessary to emphasize the safety of our teams and continuity of our business processes. We continue to pay all employees according to their normal work schedule, even if their workload has been altered. No employees have been furloughed or laid off as a result of COVID-19.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
Liquidity and Capital Strength. We maintain access to multiple sources of liquidity and continually review these sources in preparation for any unforeseen funding needs due to COVID-19. The Company has funding available from the FHLB, along with access to federal funds lines with various correspondent banks and access to the brokered certificate of deposit market. In addition, the Company has borrowing capacity at the Federal Reserve discount window and has access to the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility established by the Federal Reserve. If an extended recession causes large numbers of the Company’s deposit customers to withdraw their funds, the Company might become more reliant on volatile or more expensive sources of wholesale funding, which could have an adverse effect on the Company's net interest margin.
The Company's capital ratios continue to exceed the highest required regulatory benchmark levels. We have, in recent years, raised our quarterly dividend in the second quarter of each year. However, due to the uncertainty facing our economy, our Board of Directors kept the dividend at the 2019 level of $0.21 per share for all of 2020. In the first quarter of 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors declared a regular quarterly dividend of $0.22 per common share, an increase of $0.01 from the quarterly dividends paid in 2020.
Exposure to Stressed Industries. Certain industries have been particularly impacted by shutdowns, capacity restrictions, quarantines and social distancing guidelines in response to COVID-19 and efforts to contain it. The most significant impact to our customer base has been in the hospitality and entertainment industries. At December 31, 2020, West Bank's total commercial real estate and commercial operating loan exposure to the hotel, retail, restaurant and movie theater industries was approximately $197,199 $104,515, $23,671 and $17,863, respectively. Collectively, at December 31, 2020, those exposures made up approximately 15.1 percent of the total loan portfolio. Because of the significant uncertainties related to the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its potential effects on our customers, and on the national and local economy as a whole, there can be no assurances as to how the crisis may ultimately affect the Company's loan portfolio.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
This report is based on the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements that have been prepared in accordance with GAAP established by the FASB. The preparation of the Company’s financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, income and expenses. These estimates are based upon historical experience and on various other assumptions that management believes are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The Company’s significant accounting policies are described in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Based on its consideration of accounting policies that involve the most complex and subjective estimates and judgments, management has identified its most critical accounting policies to be those related to the fair value of financial instruments and the allowance for loan losses.
The fair value of a financial instrument is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants in the market in which the reporting entity transacts business. A framework has been established for measuring the fair value of financial instruments that considers the attributes specific to particular assets or liabilities and includes a three-level hierarchy for determining fair value based on the transparency of inputs to each valuation as of the measurement date. The Company estimates the fair value of financial instruments using a variety of valuation methods. When financial instruments are actively traded and have quoted market prices, quoted market prices are used for fair value and are classified as Level 1. When financial instruments, such as investment securities and derivatives, are not actively traded, the Company determines fair value based on various sources and may apply matrix pricing with observable prices for similar instruments where a price for the identical instrument is not observable. The fair values of these financial instruments, which are classified as Level 2, are determined by pricing models that consider observable market data such as interest rate volatilities, yield curves, credit spreads, prices from external market data providers and/or nonbinding broker-dealer quotations. When observable inputs do not exist, the Company estimates fair value based on available market data, and these values are classified as Level 3. Imprecision in estimating fair values can impact the carrying value of assets and the amount of revenue or loss recorded.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
The allowance for loan losses is established through a provision for loan losses charged to expense. Loans are charged against the allowance for loan losses when management believes that collectability of the principal is unlikely. The Company has policies and procedures for evaluating the overall credit quality of its loan portfolio, including timely identification of potential problem loans. On a quarterly basis, management reviews the appropriate level for the allowance for loan losses, incorporating a variety of risk considerations, both quantitative and qualitative. Quantitative factors include the Company’s historical loss experience, delinquency and charge-off trends, collateral values, known information about individual loans and other factors. Qualitative factors include the general economic environment in the Company’s market areas and the expected trend of those economic conditions. While management uses the best information available to make its evaluation, future adjustments to the allowance may be necessary if there are significant changes in economic conditions or the other factors considered. To the extent that actual results differ from forecasts and management’s judgment, the allowance for loan losses may be greater or less than future charge-offs.
The measurement of the allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2020 included quantitative and qualitative factors. The historical net loan loss experience had virtually no impact on the measurement of the allowance for loan losses as West Bank has had cumulative net loan recoveries over the past five years. Management’s assessment of qualitative factors applied to loans collectively evaluated for impairment were influenced by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on borrowers and broader economic conditions. The portion of the allowance for loan losses related to loans collectively evaluated for impairment increased $9,201 to a total of $26,436, or 1.16 percent of outstanding loans, as of December 31, 2020 compared to $17,235, or 0.89 percent of outstanding loans, as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, there were $3,000 in specific reserves related to loans individually evaluated for impairment compared to none as of December 31, 2019. The specific reserves resulted from the downgrade in credit quality of one borrower due to the severe economic impact of COVID-19 on its business. The specific impairment was determined after evaluating the value of the underlying collateral.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
This report contains references to financial measures that are not defined in GAAP. Such non-GAAP financial measures include the Company’s presentation of net interest income and net interest margin on a fully taxable equivalent (FTE) basis, the presentation of the efficiency ratio on an FTE basis, excluding certain income and expenses, and the presentation of the allowance for loan losses ratio, excluding PPP loans. Management believes these non-GAAP financial measures provide useful information to both management and investors to analyze and evaluate the Company’s financial performance. Net interest income and net interest margin on an FTE basis and the efficiency ratio on an FTE basis are considered standard measures of comparison within the banking industry. Allowance for loan losses to total loans, excluding PPP loans is a non-GAAP measure that serves as a useful measurement to evaluate the allowance for loan losses without the impact of SBA guaranteed PPP loans. Limitations associated with non-GAAP financial measures include the risks that persons might disagree as to the appropriateness of items included in these measures and that different companies might calculate these measures differently. These non-GAAP disclosures should not be considered an alternative to the Company’s GAAP results. The following table reconciles the non-GAAP financial measures of net interest income, net interest margin, and efficiency ratio on an FTE basis, loans, net of PPP loans and allowance for loan losses ratio, excluding PPP loans to their most directly comparable measures under GAAP.
(1) Computed on a tax-equivalent basis using a federal income tax rate of 21 percent, adjusted to reflect the effect of the nondeductible interest expense associated with owning tax-exempt securities and loans. Management believes the presentation of this non-GAAP measure provides supplemental useful information for proper understanding of the financial results, as it enhances the comparability of income arising from taxable and nontaxable sources.
(2) The efficiency ratio expresses noninterest expense as a percent of fully taxable equivalent net interest income and noninterest income, excluding specific noninterest income and expenses. Management believes the presentation of this non-GAAP measure provides supplemental useful information for proper understanding of the financial performance. It is a standard measure of comparison within the banking industry.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - 2020 COMPARED TO 2019
OVERVIEW
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $32,712, compared to $28,690 for the year ended December 31, 2019. Basic and diluted earnings per common share for 2020 were $1.99 and $1.98, respectively, and were $1.75 and 1.74, respectively for 2019.
The increase in 2020 net income compared to 2019 was primarily the result of higher net interest income and noninterest income, partially offset by an increase in provision for loan losses. Net interest income grew $16,403, or 24.7 percent, in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in net interest income was primarily due to the decrease in interest expense on deposits and other borrowings. Interest expense decreased $14,845, or 46.0 percent, compared to 2019, primarily due to the Federal Reserve’s reductions in the targeted federal funds rate that occurred in March 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. In response to the economic conditions and reduction in market interest rates, West Bank lowered its interest rates in March 2020 in almost all deposit categories.
The Company recorded a provision for loan losses of $12,000 in 2020 compared to a provision for loan losses of $600 in 2019. The increase in the provision for loan losses was due to the uncertainty surrounding economic conditions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and slow economic recovery in the hotel and entertainment industries, and an increase in specific reserves on impaired loans.
Noninterest income increased $1,284, or 15.4 percent, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to loan swap fees earned on back-to-back interest rate swaps and realized investment securities gains in 2020, compared to losses in 2019. Noninterest expense grew $648, or 1.7 percent, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to an increase in FDIC insurance expense.
The Company has consistently used the efficiency ratio as one of its key financial metrics to measure expense control. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s efficiency ratio decreased to 41.96 percent from the prior year’s ratio of 50.96 percent. This ratio is computed by dividing noninterest expense (excluding other real estate owned expense and write-down of premises) by the sum of tax-equivalent net interest income plus noninterest income (excluding net investment securities gains or losses and gains or losses on disposition of premises and equipment), and a lower ratio is better. The higher efficiency ratio in 2019 was attributable to our expansion of operations in the three new Minnesota markets of Owatonna, Mankato and St. Cloud. In March 2019, the Company began operations in these three new Minnesota markets. The financial results of 2019 included certain operational and business development costs directly related to the Minnesota expansion totaling approximately $2.8 million on a pretax basis, while net interest income and fee income in these markets was approximately $1.1 million in 2019. The expense drag from the ramp up of these operations resulted in a higher than normal efficiency ratio in 2019. We entered 2020 with profitable operations in these new markets. The lower efficiency ratio in 2020, compared to 2019, was primarily the result of profitable operations in the new Minnesota markets and the decrease in interest expense, which was attributable to the Federal Reserve’s reductions in the federal funds rate.
The Texas ratio, which is the ratio of nonperforming assets to tangible common equity plus the allowance for loan losses, increased to 6.40 percent as of December 31, 2020, compared to 0.23 percent as of December 31, 2019. A lower Texas ratio indicates a stronger credit quality condition. The increase in our Texas ratio in 2020 was primarily due to an increase in nonaccrual loans resulting from the downgrade in the credit quality of one borrower due to the severe economic impact of COVID-19 on its business. For more discussion on loan quality, see the “Loan Portfolio” and “Summary of the Allowance for Loan Losses” sections in this Item of this Form 10-K.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
Net Interest Income
Net interest income increased to $82,833 for 2020 from $66,430 for 2019, as the impact of the growth of interest-earning assets and decrease in average rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities exceeded the effects of an increase in average balance of interest-bearing liabilities and decrease in average yields on interest-earning assets. The net interest margin for 2020 increased 25 basis points to 3.20 percent compared to 2.95 percent for 2019. The average yield on earning assets decreased by 51 basis points, while the rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities decreased by 91 basis points. The primary driver of the increase in the net interest margin was a decrease in interest rates paid on deposits and other borrowed funds and an increase in average loan balances, partially offset by a decrease in yield on loans and investments. The Federal Reserve decreased the targeted federal funds rate by a total of 150 basis points during the first quarter of 2020. Management expects these reductions in the targeted federal funds rate will result in continued low rates paid on deposits and declining yields on loans in 2021. For additional analysis of net interest income, see the section captioned “Distribution of Assets, Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity; Interest Rates; and Interest Differential” in this Item of this Form 10-K.
Provision for Loan Losses and Loan Quality
The allowance for loan losses, which totaled $29,436 as of December 31, 2020, represented 1.29 percent of total loans and 181.8 percent of nonperforming loans at year end, compared to 0.89 percent and 3,203.5 percent, respectively, as of December 31, 2019. A provision for loan losses of $12,000 was recorded in 2020 compared to $600 in 2019. The increased provision for loan losses in 2020 was due to the uncertainty surrounding economic conditions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and slow economic recovery in the hotel and entertainment industries, and an increase in specific reserves on impaired loans. We believe the provision for loans losses could increase in future periods based on our belief that the credit quality of our loan portfolio may decline and loan defaults could increase as a result of the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the possibility of a prolonged economic recovery.
Nonperforming loans at December 31, 2020 totaled $16,194, or 0.71 percent of total loans, an increase from $538, or 0.03 percent of total loans, at December 31, 2019. The increase in nonperforming loans at December 31, 2020, compared to December 31, 2019, was primarily due to the downgrade in the credit quality of one borrower due to the severe economic impact of COVID-19 on its business. This borrower’s loans were classified as watch prior to COVID-19 and were further downgraded to substandard and put on nonaccrual in September 2020. Nonperforming loans include loans on nonaccrual status, loans past due 90 days or more and still accruing interest, and loans that have been considered to be troubled debt restructured (TDR) due to the borrowers’ financial difficulties. The Company held no other real estate owned properties as of December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Noninterest Income
The following table shows the variance from the prior year in the noninterest income categories shown in the Consolidated Statements of Income. In addition, accounts within the “Other income” category that represent a significant portion of the total or a significant variance are shown.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
The Company offers loan level interest rate swaps to its customers and offsets its exposure from such contracts by entering into mirror image swaps with a swap counterparty (back-to-back swap program). Loan swap fees consist of fees earned in the back-to-back swap program which began in the first quarter of 2020, resulting in income from loan swap fees of $1,572 in 2020 and none in 2019. These fees are largely dependent on the timing and volume of customer activity and may not reoccur in future periods. The gain on sale of premises in 2019 was the result of the sale of the Iowa City branch facility after the Company consolidated the Iowa City and Coralville branches. Service charges on deposit accounts decreased for 2020 when compared to 2019, primarily as a result of the reduction in nonsufficient fund fees.
Noninterest Expense
The following table shows the variance from the prior year in the noninterest expense categories shown in the Consolidated Statements of Income. In addition, accounts within the “Other expenses” category that represent a significant portion of the total or a significant variance are shown.
Salaries and employee benefits decreased in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to fewer full time equivalent employees and a decrease in expenses related to restricted stock unit awards and insurance benefits. These expense reductions were partially offset by normal annual performance raises, one-time staff bonuses for efforts related to the PPP program and an increase in the number of employees eligible for retirement benefit contributions. The Company has not made, and at this time does not expect to make, any material staffing or compensation changes as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Occupancy expense increased in 2020 compared to 2019 because of the incurrence of a full twelve months of expenses related to the expansion into the cities of Owatonna, Mankato and St. Cloud, Minnesota, which occurred toward the end of the first quarter of 2019. Data processing decreased in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a new contract signed with West Bank's core data processing provider. FDIC insurance expense increased in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to the increase in the Company's average assets and assessment rate. Additionally, the FDIC applied approximately $425 of credits to the Company’s quarterly assessment in 2019, which resulted in no expense in the third and fourth quarters of 2019. Business development expense decreased in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to the limitations placed on business development activities during COVID-19 restrictions and shutdowns. All other expenses were higher in 2020 compared to 2019, due primarily to losses as a result of check fraud schemes.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
Income Taxes
The Company records a provision for income tax expense currently payable, along with a provision for those taxes payable or refundable in the future (deferred taxes). Deferred taxes arise from differences in the timing of certain items for financial statement reporting compared to income tax reporting and are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Federal income tax expense for 2020 and 2019 was approximately $6,209 and $5,095, respectively, while state income tax expense was approximately $2,460 and $1,957, respectively. The effective rate of income tax expense as a percent of income before income taxes was 20.9 percent and 19.8 percent, respectively, for 2020 and 2019.
The effective income tax rates differ from the federal statutory income tax rates primarily due to tax-exempt interest income, the tax-exempt increase in cash value of bank-owned life insurance, disallowed interest expense, stock compensation and state income taxes. The effective tax rate for both 2020 and 2019 was also impacted by federal income tax credits, including low income housing tax credits and a new markets tax credit from West Bank’s investment in a qualified community development entity, of approximately $1,239 and $1,265, respectively.
The Company continues to maintain a valuation allowance against the tax effect of state net operating losses carryforwards as management believes it is likely that such carryforwards will expire without being utilized.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
DISTRIBUTION OF ASSETS, LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY; INTEREST RATES; AND INTEREST DIFFERENTIAL
Average Balances and an Analysis of Average Rates Earned and Paid
The following table shows average balances and interest income or interest expense, with the resulting average yield or rate by category of average interest-earning assets or interest-bearing liabilities for the years indicated. Interest income and the resulting net interest income are shown on a fully taxable basis. Interest expense includes the effect of interest rate swaps, if applicable.
(1)Average loan balances include nonaccrual loans. Interest income recognized on nonaccrual loans has been included.
(2)Interest income on loans includes amortization of loan fees and costs and prepayment penalties collected, which are not material.
(3)Tax-exempt income has been adjusted to a tax-equivalent basis using a federal income tax rate of 21 percent and is adjusted to reflect the effect of the nondeductible interest expense associated with owning tax-exempt investment securities and loans.
(4)Net interest income (FTE) and net interest margin (FTE) are non-GAAP financial measures. For further information, refer to the section “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” of this Item.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
Net Interest Income
The Company’s largest component of net income is net interest income, which is the difference between interest earned on interest-earning assets, consisting primarily of loans and investment securities, and interest paid on interest-bearing liabilities, consisting of deposits and borrowings. Fluctuations in net interest income can result from the combination of changes in the balances of asset and liability categories and changes in interest rates. Interest rates earned and paid are also affected by general economic conditions, particularly changes in market interest rates, and by competitive factors, government policies and the actions of regulatory authorities. The Federal Reserve decreased the targeted federal funds rate by 75 basis points in the second half of 2019. In addition, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Federal Reserve decreased the targeted federal funds interest rate by a total of 150 basis points in March 2020. These decreases impacted the comparability of net interest income between 2019 and 2020. The Federal Reserve is forecasting to keep the federal funds rate near zero for the next three years. We expect the short term interest rates to remain unchanged and the yield curve to slightly increase in 2021 compared to 2020.
Net interest margin is a measure of the net return on interest-earning assets and is computed by dividing annualized tax-equivalent net interest income by total average interest-earning assets for the period. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, the Company’s net interest margin on a tax-equivalent basis was 3.20, 2.95 and 3.06 percent, respectively. There was an increase of $16,276 in tax-equivalent net interest income in 2020 compared to 2019. This was primarily due to a decrease in interest rates paid on deposits and other borrowed funds and an increase in average loan balances, partially offset by a decrease in yield on loans and investments.
Rate and Volume Analysis
The rate and volume analysis shown below, on a tax-equivalent basis, is used to determine how much of the change in interest income or expense is the result of a change in volume or a change in interest yield or rate. The change in interest that is due to both volume and rate has been allocated to the change due to volume and the change due to rate in proportion to the absolute value of the change in each.
(1)Average balances of nonaccrual loans were included for computational purposes.
(2)Tax-exempt income has been converted to a tax-equivalent basis using a federal income tax rate of 21 percent and is adjusted for the effect of the nondeductible interest expense associated with owning tax-exempt investment securities and loans.
(3)Net interest income (FTE) is a non-GAAP financial measure. For further information, refer to the section “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” of this Item.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
Tax-equivalent interest income and fees on loans increased $5,138 for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019. The improvement was primarily due to an increase of $347,966 in average balance of loans in 2020 compared to 2019, which was significantly offset by the overall decline in loan yields. The average yield on loans decreased 53 basis points in 2020 compared to 2019. Average loan balances for the year ended December 31, 2020 included $151,074 of PPP loans. Interest income recognized on PPP loans, which includes the amortization of origination fees paid by the SBA, was $4,752 for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting in a yield of 3.15 percent. Interest income on PPP loans included approximately $1,000 of accelerated amortization of origination fees upon loan forgiveness and repayment by the SBA. While the PPP loans contributed to the increase in average loans and interest income, they negatively impacted the overall yield on loans. The future impact of PPP loans, including the second round of PPP lending, on net interest income and net interest margin will be subject to the timing of loan forgiveness by the SBA and may create volatility in the commercial loan yields during 2021.
The Company continues to focus on expanding existing and entering into new customer relationships while maintaining strong credit quality. The yield on the Company's loan portfolio is affected by the portfolio's loan mix, the interest rate environment, the effects of competition, the level of nonaccrual loans and reversals of previously accrued interest on charged-off loans. The political and economic environments can also influence the volume of new loan originations and the mix of variable-rate versus fixed-rate loans. We anticipate that our interest income will be adversely affected in future periods as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the possibility of decreases in the size of our loan portfolio and declining credit quality, the expected continuation of low interest rates, and an increase in nonaccrual loans.
The average balance of investment securities in 2020 was $45,948 lower than in 2019, primarily as a result of securities sold during 2019 and first quarter of 2020 to create liquidity for expected loan growth prior to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The average balance of interest-bearing demand, savings and money market deposits increased $162,775 in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase in average balances of money market and interest-bearing demand accounts. The growth in deposit balances was primarily due to changes in customer behavior as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and our customers’ desire to retain liquidity, as well as a result of additional funds provided to individuals and businesses by government relief programs. The average rate paid on interest-bearing demand, savings and money market deposits in 2020 decreased by 94 basis points compared to 2019. The average balance of time deposits decreased $40,546 in 2020 compared to 2019. The average rate paid on time deposits decreased 59 basis points in 2020 compared to 2019. The decreases in average rates paid were primarily due to decreasing interest rates on all deposit products in response to the unprecedented decrease in the target federal funds rate in March 2020.
The average balance of other borrowed funds increased $35,976 in 2020 compared to 2019. The rate paid on borrowed funds declined 96 basis points in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to the maturity of long-term, high-rate FHLB advances in December 2019 through September 2020 and the reduction of market rates beginning in the second half of 2019 on short-term and variable-rate borrowings. The Company had a higher than usual amount of liquid assets at December 31, 2020 as a result of unexpected high levels of deposits. However, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and possible decreases in interest-bearing deposits in future periods could result in an increase in borrowed funds.
As a result of the reductions in the targeted federal funds interest rate, as well as the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, such as lower levels of loans or increases in nonaccrual loans, our net interest income and net interest margin could decrease in future periods.
INVESTMENT SECURITIES PORTFOLIO
The following table sets forth the composition of the Company’s investment portfolio as of the dates indicated.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
The investment securities available for sale presented in the following table are reported at fair value and by contractual maturity as of December 31, 2020. Expected maturities may differ from contractual maturities because issuers may have the right to call or prepay obligations with or without call or prepayment penalties. The collateralized mortgage obligations and mortgage-backed securities have monthly paydowns that are not reflected in the table.
(1) Yields on tax-exempt obligations have been computed on a tax-equivalent basis using a federal income tax rate of 21 percent and are adjusted to reflect the effect of the nondeductible interest expense associated with owning tax-exempt investment securities.
Management’s process for obtaining and validating the fair value of investment securities is discussed in Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
As of December 31, 2020, the existing gross unrealized losses of $1,780 in the Company’s investment portfolio were considered to be temporary in nature due to market interest rate fluctuations, not reduced estimated cash flows. The Company has the ability and the intent to hold the related securities with unrealized losses for a period of time sufficient to allow for a recovery, which may be at maturity. However, management may decide to sell securities with unrealized losses at a future date for liquidity purposes, to manage interest rate risk, or to enhance interest income.
The balance of investment securities available for sale increased by $21,993 during 2020. Securities were sold early in 2020 to create liquidity for expected loan growth prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. Throughout 2020, securities were purchased and sold as part of various reinvestment strategies including reducing our interest rate risk exposure in variable-rate bonds and managing overall interest rate risk and yield. In the fourth quarter of 2020, excess liquidity was invested in state and political subdivision bonds and collateralized mortgage obligations. The securities issued by state and political subdivisions are diversified in 24 states. As of December 31, 2020, the Company did not have securities from a single issuer, except for the United States government or its agencies, that exceeded 10 percent of consolidated stockholders’ equity. At December 31, 2020, the collateralized loan obligations owned by the Company were rated AAA or AA.
As of December 31, 2020, approximately 53 percent of the available for sale investment securities portfolio consisted of government agency guaranteed collateralized mortgage obligations and mortgage-backed securities. In the current interest rate environment, those securities provide relatively good yields, have little to no credit risk, and provide fairly consistent cash flows. All collateralized mortgage obligations and mortgage-backed securities consist of residential mortgage pass-through securities and real estate mortgage investment conduits guaranteed by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FHLMC), Federal National Mortgage Association (FNMA), or Government National Mortgage Association (GNMA), and commercial mortgage pass-through securities guaranteed by the SBA. The debt obligations were all within the credit ratings acceptable under West Bank’s investment policy.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
LOAN PORTFOLIO
Types of Loans
The following table sets forth the composition of the Company’s loan portfolio by segment as of the dates indicated.
As of December 31, 2020, total loans were approximately 84 percent of total deposits and 72 percent of total assets. As of December 31, 2020, the majority of all loans were originated directly by West Bank to borrowers within West Bank’s principal market areas.
Loans outstanding at the end of 2020 increased 17.5 percent compared to the end of 2019. Changes in the loan portfolio during 2020 included an increase of $197,983 in commercial real estate loans and a decrease of $28,100 in construction, land and land development loans. Commercial loans, excluding PPP loans, declined $8,202. As of December 31, 2020, PPP loans outstanding totaled $180,757, all of which were included in commercial loans. The Company continues to focus on business development efforts in all of its operating markets. We anticipate that loan growth may slow down in 2021 as a result of the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the related economic uncertainties.
For a description of the loan segments, see Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. The interest rates charged on loans vary with the degree of risk and the amount and terms of the loan. Competitive pressures, the creditworthiness of the borrower, market interest rates, the availability of funds, and government regulations further influence the rate charged on a loan.
The Company follows a loan policy approved by West Bank’s Board of Directors. The loan policy is reviewed at least annually and is updated as considered necessary. The policy establishes lending limits, review criteria and other guidelines for loan administration and the allowance for loan losses, among other things. Loans are approved by West Bank’s Board of Directors and/or designated officers in accordance with the applicable guidelines and underwriting policies. Loans to any one borrower are limited by state banking laws. Loan officer lending authorities vary according to the individual loan officer’s experience and expertise.
Loans Secured by Real Estate
The commercial real estate market continues to be a significant source of business for West Bank. Management places a strong emphasis on monitoring the composition of the Company’s commercial real estate loan portfolio. The Company has an established lending policy which includes a number of underwriting factors to be considered in making a commercial real estate loan, including, but not limited to, location, loan-to-value ratio (LTV), cash flow, collateral and the credit history of the borrower. The lending policy also includes guidelines for real estate appraisals and evaluations, including minimum appraisal and evaluation standards.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
Although repayment risk exists on all loans, different factors influence repayment risk for each type of loan. The primary risks associated with commercial real estate loans are the quality of the borrower’s management and the health of the national and regional economies. Underwriting on commercial properties is primarily based on the economic viability of the project with heavy consideration given to the creditworthiness and experience of the borrower. Recognizing that debt is paid via cash flow, the projected cash flows of the project are critical in underwriting because these determine the ultimate value of the property and the ability to service debt. Therefore, in most commercial real estate projects, we generally require a minimum stabilized debt service coverage ratio of 1.20 to 1.35, depending on the real estate type. Exceptions to this policy can be made for certain borrowers that exhibit other credit quality strengths. Exceptions to the policy are monitored by management. Our strategy with respect to the management of these types of risks is to consistently follow prudent loan policies and underwriting practices.
The Company recognizes that a diversified loan portfolio contributes to reducing risk. The specific loan portfolio mix is subject to change based on loan demand, the business environment and various economic factors. The Company actively monitors concentrations within the loan portfolio to ensure appropriate diversification is maintained. In addition, management tracks the level of owner occupied commercial real estate loans versus non-owner occupied commercial real estate loans. Owner occupied commercial real estate loans are generally considered to have less risk than non-owner occupied commercial real estate loans.
In accordance with regulatory guidelines, the Company exercises heightened risk management practices when non-owner occupied commercial real estate lending exceeds 300 percent of total risk-based capital or construction, land development, and other land loans exceed 100 percent of total risk-based capital. Although the Company’s loan portfolio is heavily concentrated in real estate and its real estate portfolio levels exceed these regulatory guidelines, it has established risk management policies and procedures to regularly monitor the commercial real estate portfolio.
Commercial loans secured by real estate, including construction, land and land development, totaled $1,609,100, or 70 percent of total loans, at December 31, 2020. Non-owner occupied commercial real estate loan concentrations and the weighted average LTV by property type as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 are shown in the following table. LTV is determined using the maximum credit exposure of the loan compared to the most recent appraisal data on the property obtained in accordance with the Company’s lending policies.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
The following table summarizes non-owner occupied commercial real estate loans by property type and risk rating as of December 31, 2020. Risk ratings are defined in Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
As of December 31, 2020, there were no non-owner occupied commercial real estate loans that were past due 30 days or more.
Maturities of Loans
The contractual maturities of the Company’s loan portfolio are shown in the following tables. Actual repayments may differ from contractual maturities because individual borrowers may have the right to prepay loans with or without prepayment penalties.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
Risk Elements
The following table sets forth the amount of nonperforming assets held by the Company and common ratio measurements of those assets as of the dates indicated.
(1)While TDR loans are commonly reported by the industry as nonperforming, those not classified in the nonaccrual category are accruing interest due to payment performance. TDR loans on nonaccrual status, if any, are included in the nonaccrual category.
Nonperforming loans increased $15,656 from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. The increase in nonperforming loans was the result of a downgrade in the credit quality of one borrower due to the severe economic impact of COVID-19 on its business. This borrower’s loans were classified as watch prior to COVID-19 and were further downgraded to substandard and put on nonaccrual in September 2020. The borrower had sufficient cash flow to service its debt prior to COVID-19; however its cash flows decreased significantly as a result of forced closures and other operating restrictions and its ineligibility for PPP loans during 2020. The borrower has been evaluating debt reduction options, including downsizing its operations.
The Company’s Texas ratio, which is computed by dividing nonperforming assets by tangible common equity plus allowance for loan losses, was 6.40 percent as of December 31, 2020, compared to 0.23 percent as of December 31, 2019. We believe the COVID-19 pandemic may have an adverse effect on the credit quality of our loan portfolio in 2021. Further disruption to our customers in the hotel, retail, restaurant and movie theater industries could result in increased loan delinquencies. Management believes impaired loans may increase in the future as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and efforts to contain it. No credit issues are anticipated with PPP loans at this time, as they are 100 percent guaranteed by the SBA.
The accrual of interest on past due and other impaired loans is generally discontinued when loan payments are 90 days past due or when, in the opinion of management, the borrower may be unable to make all payments pursuant to contractual terms. Interest income is subsequently recognized only to the extent cash payments are received. Generally, all payments received while a loan is on nonaccrual status are applied to the principal balance of the loan. For the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, interest income that would have been recorded during the nonaccrual period under the original terms of such loans was approximately $235, $25 and $96, respectively. Loans are returned to accrual status when all principal and interest amounts contractually due are brought current and future payments are reasonably assured. In certain cases, interest may continue to accrue on loans past due more than 90 days when the value of the collateral is sufficient to cover both the principal amount of the loan and accrued interest and the loan is in the process of collection.
Interest income on other impaired loans is based upon the terms of the underlying loan agreement. However, the recorded net investment in impaired loans, including accrued interest, is limited to the present value of the expected cash flows of the impaired loan or the observable fair market value of the loan’s collateral. The average balance of all impaired loans during 2020 was approximately $5,651. Interest income recognized on impaired loans in 2020, 2019 and 2018 was approximately $24, $75 and $6, respectively.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
A loan is classified as a TDR loan when the Company separately concludes that a borrower is experiencing financial difficulties and a concession is granted that would not have otherwise been considered. Concessions may include restructuring of the loan terms to alleviate the burden of the borrower’s cash requirements, such as an extension of the payment terms beyond the original maturity date or a change in the interest rate charged. The payment history of the borrower, along with a current analysis of its cash flows, is used to determine the restructured terms. Underwriting procedures are similar to those of new loan originations, and renewals of performing loans in that current financial information is obtained and analyzed. A current assessment of collateral is performed. The approval process for TDR loans is the same as that for new loans. The TDR loans with extended terms are accounted for as impaired until performance is established. A change to the interest rate would change the classification of a loan to a TDR loan if the restructured loan yields a rate that is below a market rate for that of a new loan with comparable risk. TDR loans with below-market rates are considered impaired until fully collected. TDR loans may also be reported as nonaccrual or 90 days past due if they are not performing per the restructured terms.
The CARES Act provided financial institutions the option to temporarily suspend certain requirements under GAAP related to TDRs for a limited period of time in certain circumstances. This temporary suspension may only be applied to modifications of loans that were not more than 30 days past due as of December 31, 2019 and may not be applied to modifications that are not related to the COVID-19 pandemic. If elected, the temporary suspension may be applied to eligible modifications executed during the period beginning on March 1, 2020 and, as extended by the Coronavirus Response and Relief Supplemental Appropriations Act of 2021, ending on the earlier of January 1, 2022 or 60 days after the termination of the COVID-19 national emergency. In 2020, federal banking regulators, in consultation with FASB, issued interagency statements that included similar guidance on their approach for the accounting of loan modifications in light of the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic that provide that short-term modifications and additional accommodations made on a good faith basis in response to COVID-19 to borrowers who were current prior to any relief are not TDRs.
During 2020, West Bank provided COVID-19-related modifications for nearly 300 loans totaling over $550,000. As of December 31, 2020, West Bank’s COVID-19-related modifications totaled $139,940. These modifications included the deferral of principal and/or interest payments. None of these modifications were considered TDRs, in accordance with the CARES Act and other interpretive guidance provided by bank regulatory interagency statements. As of December 31, 2020, $15,817 of these loans were classified as substandard, considered impaired and were on nonaccrual.
The following table shows the industry concentrations of COVID-19 modifications as of December 31, 2020.
The following table shows the expiration of the modification periods as of December 31, 2020.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
SUMMARY OF THE ALLOWANCE FOR LOAN LOSSES
The provision for loan losses represents charges made to earnings to maintain an adequate allowance for loan losses. The adequacy of the allowance for loan losses is evaluated quarterly by management and reviewed by the Board of Directors. The allowance for loan losses is management’s best estimate of probable losses inherent in the loan portfolio as of the balance sheet date.
Factors considered in establishing an appropriate allowance include: the borrower’s financial condition; the value and adequacy of loan collateral; the condition of the local economy and the borrower’s specific industry; the levels and trends of loans by segment; and a review of delinquent and classified loans. The quarterly evaluation focuses on factors such as specific loan reviews, changes in the components of the loan portfolio given economic conditions, and historical loss experience. Any one of the following conditions may result in the review of a specific loan: concern about whether the customer’s cash flow or net worth is sufficient to repay the loan; delinquency status; criticism of the loan in a regulatory examination; the suspension of interest accrual; or other factors, including whether the loan has other special or unusual characteristics that suggest special monitoring is warranted. The Company’s concentration risks include geographic concentration in central and eastern Iowa and southern Minnesota. The local economies are composed primarily of service industries and state and county governments.
West Bank has a significant portion of its loan portfolio in commercial real estate loans, commercial lines of credit, commercial term loans, and construction and land development loans. West Bank’s typical commercial borrower is a small- or medium-sized, privately owned business entity. Compared to residential mortgages or consumer loans, commercial loans typically have larger balances and repayment usually depends on the borrowers’ successful business operations. Commercial loans also generally are not fully repaid over the loan period and, thus, may require refinancing or a large payoff at maturity. When the general economy turns downward, commercial borrowers may not be able to repay their loans, and the value of their assets, which are usually pledged as collateral, may decrease rapidly and significantly.
While management uses available information to recognize losses on loans, further reduction in the carrying amounts of loans may be necessary based on changes in circumstances, changes in the overall economy in the markets we currently serve, or later acquired information. Identifiable sectors within the general economy are subject to additional volatility, which at any time may have a substantial impact on the loan portfolio. In addition, regulatory agencies, as integral parts of their examination processes, periodically review the credit quality of the loan portfolio and the level of the allowance for loan losses. Such agencies may require West Bank to recognize additional losses based on such agencies’ review of information available to them at the time of their examinations.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
Change in the Allowance for Loan Losses
West Bank’s policy is to charge off loans when, in management’s opinion, a loan or a portion of a loan is deemed uncollectible. Concerted efforts are made to maximize subsequent recoveries. The following table summarizes activity in the Company’s allowance for loan losses by loan segment for the years indicated, including amounts of loans charged off, recoveries, additions to the allowance charged to income and related ratios.
(1) As presented, this is a non-GAAP financial measure. For further information, refer to the section “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” of this item.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
Breakdown of Allowance for Loan Losses by Category
The following table sets forth information concerning the Company’s allocation of the allowance for loan losses by loan segment as of the dates indicated.
* Percent of loans in each category to total loans.
The allocation of the allowance for loan losses is dependent upon the change in balances outstanding in the various categories; the historical net loss experience by category, which can vary over time; specific reserves for loans considered impaired; and management’s assessment of economic factors that may influence potential losses in the loan portfolio. In March 2020, the U.S. economy deteriorated as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. While job growth averaged approximately 232,000 per month for the first two months of 2020, approximately 22 million jobs were lost in March and April of 2020. Additionally, the national unemployment rate increased from 4.4 percent as of March 31, 2020 to 6.7 percent as of December 31, 2020 and peaked at 14.8 percent in April 2020. Additionally, the Federal Open Market Committee reduced the targeted federal funds rate range to 0.0 - 0.25 percent in March 2020. To establish the allowance for loan losses, the Company continued to use experience factors based on the highest losses calculated over a rolling 12-, 16- or 20-quarter period. Management believes that using the highest of these time periods will select the factor that best represents where we are in the economic cycle. For instance, if the economy worsens, the more recent activity should be more representative of the current environment. As the economy improves, the averages over a longer period of time should be more representative. No allowance for loan losses has been allocated to PPP loans, as these are 100 percent guaranteed by the SBA.
As of December 31, 2020, there were $3,000 in specific reserves related to loans individually evaluated for impairment. The specific reserves resulted from the downgrade in credit quality of one borrower due to the severe economic impact of COVID-19 on its business. The borrower has been evaluating debt reduction options, including downsizing its operations. The specific impairment was determined after evaluating the value of the underlying collateral. The portion of the allowance for loan losses related to loans collectively evaluated for impairment increased $9,201 to a total of $26,436, or 1.16 percent of outstanding loans, as of December 31, 2020 compared to $17,235, or 0.89 percent of outstanding loans, as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, the allowance for loan losses was 1.40 percent of outstanding loans, excluding $180,757 of PPP loans. Based upon the quarterly evaluations, management determined a provision for loan losses of $12,000 was appropriate for the year ended December 31, 2020. This provision for loan losses was due to the uncertainty surrounding economic conditions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and slow economic recovery in the hotel and entertainment industries, and the increase in specific reserves on impaired loans. Management believed the allowance for loan losses as of December 31, 2020 was adequate to absorb the losses inherent in the loan portfolio.
Additional details on the allowance for loan losses is included in Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
DEPOSITS
Deposits totaled $2,700,994 as of December 31, 2020, which was 34.1 percent higher than the total as of December 31, 2019. The growth in deposit balances was primarily due to changes in customer behavior as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and our customers’ desire to retain liquidity, as well as a result of additional funds provided to individuals and businesses by government relief programs. Funds disbursed under the PPP program were deposited into customer deposit accounts and will impact overall deposit fluctuations as customers spend those funds according to the PPP rules. Deposits increased $404,214 in the fourth quarter of 2020. This increase resulted from a mix of new business customers and growth in balances of existing customers. We believe that deposit levels could decrease in 2021 as a result of the distressed economic conditions in our market areas relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, low interest rates and customers’ utilization of liquidity.
The balance of time deposits decreased during 2020, primarily due to the maturity of brokered CDs totaling $50,000. West Bank continues to offer the Certificate of Deposit Account Registry Service (CDARS) program. The CDARS program is a reciprocal program providing FDIC insurance coverage for all participating deposits. CDARS time deposits made up approximately 40 percent of total time deposits at December 31, 2020.
Approximately 86 percent of the total time deposits issued by West Bank mature in the next year. It is anticipated that a significant portion of these time deposits will be renewed. In the event a substantial volume of time deposits is not renewed, management believes the Company has sufficient liquid assets and borrowing lines to fund the potential runoff.
The following table shows the amounts and remaining maturities of time certificates of deposit with balances of $100 or more as of December 31, 2020.
The following table sets forth the average balances for each major category of deposits and the weighted average interest rate paid for those deposits during the years indicated.
Management expects the average interest rates on deposits to remain low in 2021 as the Federal Reserve is forecasting to keep the federal funds rate near zero for the next three years. To limit the Company’s exposure to market interest rate changes, interest rate swaps are in place on $110,000 of deposit balances that effectively convert certain customer deposits with variable rates to fixed-rate instruments.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
BORROWED FUNDS
The following table summarizes the outstanding principal balances, net of any discount or debt issuance costs, and the weighted average effective rate for each category of borrowed funds as of the dates indicated.
(1) The effective interest rates include the effects of interest rate swaps and amortization of origination and discount fees.
The following tables set forth the average principal balance, net of any discount or debt issuance costs, the average effective rate paid, and the maximum outstanding balance for each category of borrowed funds for the years indicated.
(1) The effective interest rates include the effects of interest rate swaps and amortization of origination and discount fees.
The fluctuation in the balances of federal funds purchased is dependent upon the activity of our downstream correspondent banks and in the Company’s liquidity needs, which from time to time may require the Company to draw on the federal funds purchased lines with our correspondent banks or on overnight FHLB advances. Depending on which has the lower interest rate, the Company may utilize either source of funding.
In October 2018, an interest rate swap with a notional amount of $20,000 became effective and converted variable-rate subordinated notes to fixed-rate debt. The interest rate is a variable rate based on the 3-month LIBOR plus 3.05 percent. This interest rate swap has a fixed rate of 4.81 percent and matures in September 2026.
In a strategy to manage its exposures to the variability in interest payments on wholesale funding sources due to interest rate movements, the Company has entered into seven long-term interest rate swap agreements with a total notional amount of $175,000 to hedge the interest payments of rolling one- or three-month funding consisting of FHLB advances or brokered deposits. These interest rate swaps have maturity dates ranging from September 2023 through June 2029 and fixed rates ranging from 1.63 percent to 2.62 percent. As part of this strategy, the Company has one-month and three-month FHLB advances totaling $175,000 as of December 31, 2020. This strategy effectively provides fixed cost wholesale funding through the maturity dates of the various interest rate swaps. Additionally, the Company had short-term brokered CDs totaling $50,000 that matured and were not renewed during 2020. These brokered CDs were not being hedged by interest rate swaps but were a part of the Company’s short-term funding strategy.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
On May 25, 2017, the Company entered into a credit agreement with an unaffiliated commercial bank and borrowed $25,000. The borrowing was used to make a capital injection into West Bank in 2017. In June 2019, the Company modified the principal payment requirements of the credit agreement. Under the terms of the modification, required quarterly principal payments of $625 resumed in August 2020, with the balance due in May 2022. The Company may make additional principal payments without penalty. The interest rate is variable at 1.95 percent over the 30-day LIBOR rate.
In December 2018, West Bank’s new markets tax credit special purpose subsidiary entered into a credit agreement for $11,486. Interest is payable monthly over the term of the agreement with an interest rate of 1.00 percent. Monthly principal payments begin in January 2026, and the agreement matures in December 2048.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
In the normal course of business, West Bank commits to extend credit in the form of loan commitments and standby letters of credit in order to meet the financing needs of its customers. These commitments expose West Bank to varying degrees of credit and market risks in excess of the amounts recognized in the consolidated balance sheets and are subject to the same credit policies as are the loans recorded on the balance sheets.
West Bank’s exposure to credit loss in the event of nonperformance by the other party to the financial instrument for commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit is represented by the contractual amount of those instruments. West Bank uses the same credit policies in making commitments and conditional obligations as it does for on-balance sheet instruments. Commitments to lend are subject to borrowers’ continuing compliance with existing credit agreements. Management of the Company does not expect any significant losses as a result of these commitments. Off-balance sheet commitments are more fully discussed in Note 17 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The objective of liquidity management is to ensure the availability of sufficient cash flows to meet all financial commitments and to capitalize on opportunities for profitable business expansion. The Company’s principal source of funds is deposits. Other sources include loan principal repayments, proceeds from the maturity and sale of investment securities, principal payments on amortizing securities, federal funds purchased, advances from the FHLB, and funds provided by operations. Liquidity management is conducted on both a daily and a long-term basis. Investments in liquid assets are adjusted based on expected loan demand, projected loan and investment securities maturities and payments, expected deposit flows and the objectives set by West Bank’s asset-liability management policy.
The Company experienced a significant increase in deposits in the fourth quarter of 2020. Those deposits resulted in a significant increase in liquidity and total assets as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019. We believe that deposit levels could decrease in 2021 as a result of the distressed economic conditions in our market areas relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, low interest rates and customers’ utilization of liquidity.
The Company believes there could be potential stresses on liquidity management on a longer-term basis as a direct result of the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic. As customers manage their own liquidity needs, we could experience an increase in the utilization of existing lines of credit. In addition, the Bank is participating in the PPP under the CARES Act and the Coronavirus Response and Relief Supplemental Appropriations Act of 2021. The Federal Reserve Bank established a PPP Liquidity Facility that would provide funding specifically for loans made under the PPP, which would allow us to retain existing sources of liquidity for our traditional operations. PPP loans would be pledged as collateral on any of the Bank's borrowings under the PPP Liquidity Facility. The Bank has not utilized the Federal Reserve Bank's PPP Liquidity Facility to date.
As of December 31, 2020, West Bank had additional borrowing capacity available from the FHLB of approximately $378,000, as well as approximately $36,174 at the Federal Reserve discount window and $67,000 through unsecured federal funds lines of credit with correspondent banks. West Bank had no amounts outstanding at the Federal Reserve discount window or under the unsecured federal funds lines as of December 31, 2020. Net cash from continuing operating activities contributed $42,285, $36,967 and $34,744 to liquidity for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Management believed that the combination of high levels of potentially liquid assets, cash flows from operations and additional borrowing capacity provided the Company with sufficient liquidity as of December 31, 2020.
(dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
The Company’s total stockholders’ equity increased to $223,695 as of December 31, 2020 from $211,820 as of December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily the result of net income less dividends paid, partially offset by the decline in fair value of derivatives. At December 31, 2020, tangible common equity as a percent of tangible assets was 7.02 percent compared to 8.56 percent as of December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had no intangible assets. The decrease in the tangible common equity ratio was primarily due to the unprecedented asset growth of the Company propelled by the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and a decrease in accumulated other comprehensive income which was the result of a decline in the fair value of interest rate swaps.
The Company and West Bank are subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by federal and state banking agencies. Capital requirements are more fully discussed under the heading “Supervision and Regulation” included in Item 1 and in Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. As of December 31, 2020, the Company and West Bank met all capital adequacy requirements to which they were subject, and the Company’s and West Bank’s capital ratios were in excess of the requirements to be well-capitalized under capital regulations. Also, as of December 31, 2020, the ratios for the Company and West Bank were sufficient to meet the fully phased-in capital conservation buffer.
During 2020, the Company began construction on a new office in Sartell, Minnesota, which had a commitment of $8,324 as of December 31, 2020.
EFFECTS OF NEW STATEMENTS OF FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
A discussion of the effects of new financial accounting standards and developments as they relate to the Company is located in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.