ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward Looking Statements
This document contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of federal securities laws. Forward-looking information can be identified through the use of words such as “intend,” “plan,” “project,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “contemplate,” “possible,” “will,” “may,” “should,” “would” and “could.” Forward-looking statements and information are not historical facts, are premised on many factors and assumptions, and represent only management’s expectations, estimates and projections regarding future events. Similarly, these statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve certain risks and uncertainties that are difficult to predict. The Company intends such forward-looking statements to be covered by the safe harbor provisions for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, and is including this statement for purposes of invoking these safe harbor provisions. Such forward-looking statements may be deemed to include, among other things, statements relating to the Company’s future financial performance, the performance of its loan portfolio, the expected amount of future credit reserves and charge-offs, delinquency trends, growth plans, regulatory developments, securities that the Company may offer from time to time, and management’s long-term performance goals, as well as statements relating to the anticipated effects on financial condition and results of operations from expected developments or events, the Company’s business and growth strategies, including future acquisitions of banks, specialty finance or wealth management businesses, internal growth and plans to form additional de novo banks or branch offices. Actual results could differ materially from those addressed in the forward-looking statements as a result of numerous factors and uncertainties, including those discussed in the Risk Factors and summary thereof disclosed under Item 1A of this Annual Report on 10-K and in any of the Company’s subsequent SEC filings.
Therefore, there can be no assurances that future actual results will correspond to any forward-looking statements. The reader is cautioned not to place undue reliance on any forward-looking statement made by the Company. Any such statement speaks only as of the date the statement was made or as of such date that may be referenced within the statement. The Company undertakes no obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect the impact of circumstances or events after the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Persons are advised, however, to consult further disclosures management makes on related subjects in its reports filed with the SEC and in its press releases.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion highlights the significant factors affecting the operations and financial condition of Wintrust for the three years ended December 31, 2020. The detailed financial discussion focuses on 2020 results compared to 2019. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto, and Selected Financial Highlights appearing elsewhere within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
For a discussion of 2019 results compared to 2018, refer to Part II, Item 7, “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of the Wintrust Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 filed on February 28, 2020.
OPERATING SUMMARY
Wintrust’s key measures of profitability and balance sheet changes are shown in the following table:
(1)Net revenue is net interest income plus non-interest income.
(2)See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures/Ratios” for additional information on this performance measure/ratio.
(3)The net overhead ratio is calculated by netting total non-interest expense and total non-interest income and dividing by that period’s total average assets. A lower ratio indicates a higher degree of efficiency.
Please refer to the Consolidated Results of Operations section later in this discussion for an analysis of the Company’s operations for the past three years.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES/RATIOS
The accounting and reporting policies of Wintrust conform to generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) in the United States and prevailing practices in the banking industry. However, certain non-GAAP performance measures and ratios are used by management to evaluate and measure the Company’s performance. These include taxable-equivalent net interest income (including its individual components), taxable-equivalent net interest margin (including its individual components), the taxable-equivalent efficiency ratio, tangible common equity ratio, tangible book value per common share, return on average tangible common equity and pre-tax income, excluding provision for credit losses. Management believes that these measures and ratios provide users of the Company’s financial information a more meaningful view of the performance of the Company's interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and of the Company’s operating efficiency. Other financial holding companies may define or calculate these measures and ratios differently.
Management reviews yields on certain asset categories and the net interest margin of the Company and its banking subsidiaries on a fully taxable-equivalent (“FTE”) basis. In this non-GAAP presentation, net interest income is adjusted to reflect tax-exempt interest income on an equivalent before-tax basis using tax rates effective as of the end of the period. This measure ensures comparability of net interest income arising from both taxable and tax-exempt sources. Net interest income on a FTE basis is also used in the calculation of the Company’s efficiency ratio. The efficiency ratio, which is calculated by dividing non-interest expense by total taxable-equivalent net revenue (less securities gains or losses), measures how much it costs to produce one dollar of revenue. Securities gains or losses are excluded from this calculation to better match revenue from daily operations to operational expenses. Management considers the tangible common equity ratio and tangible book value per common share as useful measurements of the Company’s equity. The Company references the return on average tangible common equity as a measurement of profitability. Management considers pre-tax income, excluding provision for credit losses, as a useful measurement of the Company's core net income.
The following table presents a reconciliation of certain non-GAAP performance measures and ratios used by the Company to evaluate and measure the Company’s performance to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures for the last five years.
OVERVIEW AND STRATEGY
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the outbreak of COVID-19 was recognized as a global pandemic by the World Health Organization, resulting in unprecedented uncertainty and volatility in world-wide financial markets. Governments' actions calling for shelter in place and social distancing have led to rapid changes in business revenues, increased unemployment, and have impacted consumer activity, all of which have impacted and may continue to impact the Company's current and future results.
The Company activated its pandemic response plan in early March, as well as applicable elements of its business continuity plan. In order to protect the health of our customers and employees, and in accordance with applicable government directives, we modified certain of our business protocols to direct employees to work from home unless their role required them to be on site, in which case we have implemented enhanced safety measures including social distancing, enhanced cleaning and sanitization, and certain personal protective equipment. With the phased reopening of certain state and municipal areas, the Company has developed a comprehensive plan that permits certain remote employees to return to their respective workplaces, where enhanced safety measures also have been implemented. At present, however, the majority of the Company’s workforce continues to work remotely on a nearly daily basis.
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was enacted. The CARES Act includes appropriations and other measures designed to address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”), which is designed to aid eligible small and medium-sized businesses through federally-guaranteed loans distributed through certain financial institutions, under the administration of the Small Business Administration (“SBA”). From the date the Company began accepting applications, April 3, 2020, through the end of 2020, the Company secured authorization from the SBA and funded over 12,000 PPP loans for our customers with a carrying balance of approximately $3.4 billion. PPP loans are forgivable under certain circumstances, including the borrower’s use of certain loan proceeds to fund employee payroll during a specific period (e.g., eight weeks, 24 weeks) following disbursement of the borrower’s PPP loan. The Company generated net fees of $91.9 million to be recognized over the life of the PPP loans adjusted for estimated prepayments. As of December 31, 2020, the carrying balance of such loans was reduced to approximately $2.7 billion primarily resulting from forgiveness by the SBA.
All of our three primary business segments (community banking, specialty finance and wealth management), have been uniquely impacted and we expect will continue to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, requiring the implementation of certain responses as circumstances evolve. As non-exclusive examples of such impacts, our community banking business, including our mortgage business, has received borrower requests for temporary payment relief including payment deferrals. As of December 31, 2020, loans totaling approximately $344.8 million were modified as a result of COVID-19 disruption to our borrowers. Our insurance premium finance business is impacted by certain state legislation prohibiting canceling of insurance policies for designated periods. Our wealth management business is impacted by increased stock market volatility.
Given the continued uncertainty regarding future economic conditions, the Company has taken a number of actions to help ensure that it has adequate liquidity and capital to manage through the COVID-19 pandemic, including issuing fixed-rate reset non-cumulative perpetual preferred stock, Series E, liquidation preference $25,000 per share (the “Series E Preferred Stock”) as part of a public offering of depositary shares, each representing a 1/1,000th interest in a share of Series E Preferred Stock (the “Depositary Shares”). We believe the Company currently has adequate liquidity and capital to effectively manage through the COVID-19 pandemic. However, we will continue to prudently evaluate liquidity sources, including the possible utilization of the PPP liquidity facility, if necessary.
We continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 closely; however, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will impact our operations and financial conditions remains highly uncertain. Please refer to Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” of this Form 10-K for additional information.
2020 Highlights
The Company recorded net income of $293.0 million for the year of 2020 compared to $355.7 million and $343.2 million for the years of 2019 and 2018, respectively. The results for 2020 demonstrate challenges from compression in net interest margin and increased provision for credit losses primarily related to the implementation of the Current Expected Credit Losses ("CECL") accounting standard and the economic conditions created by the COVID-19 pandemic, offset by continued operating strengths including strong loan and deposit growth driven by the Company's participation in PPP and significant production by the Company’s mortgage banking business in the low interest rate environment during the year.
The Company increased its loan portfolio from $26.8 billion at December 31, 2019 to $32.1 billion at December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to participation in PPP lending as well as growth in several portfolios, including the commercial, industrial and other, commercial real estate, commercial premium finance receivables and life insurance premium finance receivables portfolios. For more information regarding changes in the Company’s loan portfolio, see “Analysis of Financial Condition - Interest Earning Assets” and Note 4 “Loans” to the Consolidated Financial Statements presented under Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The Company recorded net interest income of $1.0 billion in 2020 compared to $1.1 billion and $964.9 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively. The lower level of net interest income recorded in 2020 compared to 2019 resulted primarily from a 73 basis point decrease in the net interest margin in 2020 due to lower market rates on loans, partially offset by a $7.7 billion increase in average earning assets (see “Net Interest Margin” section later in this Item 7 for further detail).
Non-interest income totaled $604.2 million in 2020, increasing $197.0 million, or 48%, compared to 2019. The increase in non-interest income in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to increases in mortgage banking revenues due to higher production in 2020 from demand associated with historically low long-term interest rates in the market (see “Non-Interest Income” section later in this Item 7 for further detail).
Non-interest expense totaled $1.0 billion in 2020, increasing $112.0 million, or 12%, compared to 2019. The increase compared to 2020 was primarily attributable to a $79.7 million increase in salaries and employee benefits, $16.2 million increase in equipment expense, higher operating lease equipment depreciation, higher occupancy expense, higher FDIC insurance and higher contingent consideration expense related to the previous acquisition of mortgage operations. The increase in salaries and employee benefits was primarily attributable to the addition of employees from acquisitions, increased staffing to support mortgage operations and the Company’s growth and higher commissions and incentive compensation due to increased origination volume associated with the Company's mortgage business (see “Non-Interest Expense” section later in this Item 7 for further detail).
Management considers the maintenance of adequate liquidity to be important to the management of risk. Accordingly, during 2020, the Company continued its practice of maintaining appropriate funding capacity to provide the Company with adequate liquidity for its ongoing operations. In this regard, the Company benefited from its strong deposit base, a liquid short-term investment portfolio and its access to funding from a variety of external funding sources. The Company had overnight liquid funds and interest-bearing deposits with banks of $5.1 billion and $2.5 billion at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Economic Environment
The economic environment in 2020 was characterized by compression in net interest margin, and continued competition as banks have experienced improvements in their financial condition allowing them to be more active in the lending market. The Company has employed certain strategies to manage net income in the current rate environment, including those discussed below.
Net Interest Income
The Company has leveraged its operating strengths as well as its participation in PPP to grow its earning assets base, partially offsetting compression in net interest margin in 2020. In 2020, the Company's net interest margin decreased to 2.72% (2.73% on a fully tax-equivalent basis) as compared to 3.45% (3.47% on a fully tax-equivalent basis) in 2019, primarily as a result of falling rates in the market and the positioning of our balance sheet. As a result of the reduced net interest margin, partially offset by growth in earning assets, the Company’s net interest income decreased by $15.0 million in 2020 compared to 2019.
The Company has continued its practice of writing call options against certain investment securities to economically hedge the securities positions and receive fee income to compensate for net interest margin compression. In 2020, the Company recognized $2.3 million in fees on covered call options compared to $3.7 million in 2019.
The Company utilizes “back to back” interest rate derivative transactions, primarily interest rate swaps, to receive floating rate interest payments related to customer loans. In these arrangements, the Company makes a floating rate loan to a borrower who prefers to pay a fixed rate. To accommodate the risk management strategy of certain qualified borrowers, the Company enters a swap with its borrower to effectively convert the borrower's variable rate loan to a fixed rate. However, in order to minimize the Company's exposure on these transactions and continue to receive a floating rate, the Company simultaneously executes an offsetting mirror-image swap with various third parties.
Non-Interest Income
The interest rate environment impacts the profitability and mix of the Company's mortgage banking business which generated revenues of $346.0 million in 2020 and $154.3 million in 2019, representing 21% and 11% of total net revenue in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Mortgage banking revenue is primarily comprised of gains on sales of mortgage loans originated for new home purchases as well as mortgage refinancing. Mortgage revenue is also impacted by changes in the fair value of mortgage servicing rights (“MSRs”). Mortgage originations for sale and purchases totaled $8.0 billion and $4.5 billion in 2020 and 2019, respectively. In 2020, approximately 35% of originations were mortgages associated with new home purchases, while 65% of originations were related to refinancing of mortgages. In 2019, approximately 52% of originations were mortgages associated with new home purchases, while 48% of originations were related to refinancing of mortgages.
Non-Interest Expense
Management believes expense management is important to enhance profitability amid the low interest rate environment and increased competition. Cost control and an efficient infrastructure should position the Company appropriately as it continues its growth strategy. Management continues to be disciplined in its approach to growth and plans to leverage the Company's existing expense infrastructure to expand its presence in existing and complimentary markets. Potentially impacting the cost control strategies discussed above, the Company anticipates increased costs resulting from the regulatory environment in which we operate as well as continued investment in technology.
Credit Quality
The Company continues to actively address non-performing assets and remains disciplined in its approach to grow without sacrificing asset quality.
In particular:
•The Company’s 2020 provision for credit losses, totaled $214.2 million, compared to $53.9 million in 2019 and $34.8 million in 2018. The increased provision in 2020 was primarily the result of the adoption of CECL, specifically continued change to macroeconomic conditions throughout 2020 created by the COVID-19 pandemic, and the impact on the Company's macroeconomic forecasts of key model inputs (Commercial Real Estate Price Index, Baa corporate credit spreads, gross domestic product and Dow Jones Total Stock Market Index) as well as changes in the Company's loan portfolios. Net charge-offs decreased to $40.3 million in 2020 (of which $27.3 million related to commercial and commercial real estate loans), compared to $49.5 million in 2019 (of which $35.9 million related to commercial and commercial real estate loans) and $19.7 million in 2018 (of which $8.8 million related to commercial and commercial real estate loans).
•The Company's allowance for loan and unfunded lending-related commitment losses increased to $379.9 million at December 31, 2020, reflecting an increase of $221.4 million, or 139.7%, when compared to 2019. The increase in the allowance for credit losses was primarily the result of the adoption of CECL as of January 1, 2020 and deterioration in macroeconomic conditions subsequent to that date related to COVID-19. At December 31, 2020, approximately $243.6 million, or 64%, of the allowance for loan and unfunded lending-related commitment losses was associated with commercial real estate loans and an additional $94.2 million, or 25%, was associated with commercial loans.
•The Company has significant exposure to commercial real estate. At December 31, 2020, $8.5 billion, or 26%, of our loan portfolio was commercial real estate, with approximately 82.7% located in our market area. The commercial real estate loan portfolio was comprised of $1.4 billion in construction and development loans, and $7.1 billion in non-construction loans. In analyzing the commercial real estate market, the Company does not rely upon the assessment of broad market statistical data, in large part because the Company’s market area is diverse and covers many communities, each of which is impacted differently by economic forces affecting the Company’s general market area. As such, the extent of the decline in real estate valuations can vary meaningfully among the different types of commercial and other real estate loans made by the Company. The Company uses its multi-chartered structure and local management knowledge to analyze and manage the local market conditions at each of its banks.
•Total non-performing loans (loans on non-accrual status and loans more than 90 days past due and still accruing interest) were $127.5 million (of which $46.1 million, or 36%, was related to commercial real estate) at December 31, 2020, an increase of $9.9 million compared to December 31, 2019. Non-performing loans as a percentage of total loans were 0.40% at December 31, 2020 compared to 0.44% at December 31, 2019.
•The Company’s other real estate owned increased by $1.4 million to $16.6 million during 2020, from $15.2 million at December 31, 2019. The $16.6 million of other real estate owned as of December 31, 2020 was comprised of $12.5 million of commercial real estate property, $2.3 million of residential real estate property and $1.7 million of residential real estate development property.
During 2020, management continued its efforts to aggressively resolve problem loans through liquidation, rather than retention of loans or real estate acquired as collateral through the foreclosure process. Management believes these actions will serve the Company well in the future by providing some protection for the Company from further valuation deterioration and permitting management to spend less time on resolution of problem loans and more time on growing the Company’s core business and the evaluation of other opportunities.
Management continues to direct significant attention toward the prompt identification, management and resolution of problem loans. The Company has restructured certain loans by providing economic concessions to borrowers to better align the terms of their loans with their current ability to pay. At December 31, 2020, approximately $68.2 million in loans had terms modified representing troubled debt restructurings (“TDRs”), with $47.0 million of these TDRs continuing in accruing status. See Note 5, “Allowance for Credit Losses,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements presented under Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional discussion of TDRs.
The Company enters into residential mortgage loan sale agreements with investors in the normal course of business. The Company’s practice is generally not to retain long-term fixed-rate mortgages on its balance sheet in order to mitigate interest rate risk, and consequently sells most of such mortgages into the secondary market. These agreements provide recourse to investors through certain representations concerning credit information, loan documentation, collateral and insurability. Investors request the Company to indemnify them against losses on certain loans or to repurchase loans which the investors believe do not comply with applicable representations. An increase in requests for loss indemnification can negatively impact mortgage banking revenue as additional recourse expense. The liability for estimated losses on repurchase and indemnification claims for residential mortgage loans previously sold to investors was $0.8 million at December 31, 2020 and $2.4 million at December 31, 2019.
Community Banking
Through our community banking franchise, we provide banking and financial services primarily to individuals, small to mid-sized businesses, local governmental units and institutional clients residing primarily in the local areas we service. Profitability of this franchise is primarily driven by our net interest income and margin, our funding mix and related costs, the measurement of the allowance for credit losses and the impact of current and forecasted macroeconomic conditions on such measurement, the level of non-performing loans and other real estate owned, the amount of mortgage banking revenue and our history of acquiring banking operations and establishing de novo banking locations.
Net interest income and margin. The primary source of our revenue is net interest income. Net interest income is the difference between interest income and fees on earning assets, such as loans and securities, and interest expense on liabilities to fund those assets, including deposits and other borrowings. Net interest income can change significantly from period to period based on general levels of interest rates, customer prepayment patterns, the mix of interest-earning assets and the mix of interest-bearing and non-interest bearing deposits and borrowings.
Funding mix and related costs. The most significant source of funding in community banking is core deposits, which are comprised of non-interest bearing deposits, non-brokered interest-bearing transaction accounts, savings deposits and domestic time deposits. Our branch network is the principal source of core deposits, which generally carry lower interest rates than wholesale funds of comparable maturities. Community banking profitability has been favorably impacted in recent years as the Company funded strong loan growth with a more desirable blend of funds.
Measurement of the allowance for credit losses. The Company adopted CECL as of January 1, 2020, which requires the estimate of expected credit losses over the entire life of financial assets measured at amortized cost. To measure lifetime expected credit losses, the Company adjusts credit loss estimates for reasonable and supportable forecasts of macroeconomic conditions. Such forecasts can significantly impact the profitability of our community banks as changing estimates of lifetime losses from period to period can result in significant fluctuations in provision for credit losses during those periods. In 2020, such fluctuations in provision for credit losses unfavorably impacted the profitability of our community banks, primarily as a result of forecasted deterioration in macroeconomic conditions from COVID-19.
Level of non-performing loans and other real estate owned. The level of non-performing loans and other real estate owned can significantly impact our profitability as these loans and other real estate owned do not accrue any income, can be subject to
charge-offs and write-downs due to deteriorating market conditions and generally result in additional legal and collections expenses. The Company's credit quality measures have remained at historically low levels in recent years.
Mortgage banking revenue. Our community banking franchise is also influenced by the level of fees generated by the origination of residential mortgages and the sale of such mortgages into the secondary market by Wintrust Mortgage. The Company recognized an increase of $191.7 million in mortgage banking revenue in 2020 compared to 2019 as a result of higher origination volumes in 2020, higher margins on sales and increased servicing fees. Mortgage originations for sale totaled $8.0 billion and $4.5 billion in 2020 and 2019, respectively, increasing primarily as a result of demand associated with the historically low long-term interest rates in the market.
Expansion of banking operations. Our historical financial performance has been affected by costs associated with growing market share in deposits and loans, establishing and acquiring banks, opening new branch facilities and building an experienced management team. Our financial performance generally reflects the improved profitability of our banking subsidiaries as they mature, offset by the costs of establishing and acquiring banks and opening new branch facilities.
In determining the timing of the opening of additional branches of existing banks, and the acquisition of additional banks, we consider many factors, particularly our perceived ability to obtain an adequate return on our invested capital driven largely by the then existing cost of funds and lending margins, the general economic climate and the level of competition in a given market. See discussion of acquisition activity in the “Recent Acquisition Transactions” section below.
In addition to the factors considered above, before we engage in expansion through de novo branches we must first make a determination that the expansion fulfills our objective of enhancing shareholder value through potential future earnings growth and enhancement of the overall franchise value of the Company. Generally, we believe that, in normal market conditions, expansion through de novo growth is a better long-term investment than acquiring banks because the cost to bring a de novo location to profitability is generally substantially less than the premium paid for the acquisition of a healthy bank. Each opportunity to expand is unique from a cost and benefit perspective. Both FDIC-assisted and non-FDIC-assisted acquisitions offer a unique opportunity for the Company to expand into new and existing markets in a non-traditional manner. Potential acquisitions are reviewed in a similar manner as a de novo branch opportunities, however, FDIC-assisted and non-FDIC-assisted acquisitions have the ability to immediately enhance shareholder value. Factors including the valuation of our stock, other economic market conditions, the size and scope of the particular expansion opportunity and competitive landscape all influence the decision to expand via de novo growth or through acquisition.
Specialty Finance
Through our specialty finance segment, we offer financing of insurance premiums for businesses and individuals; lease financing and other direct leasing opportunities; accounts receivable financing, value-added, out-sourced administrative services; and other specialty finance businesses.
Financing of Commercial Insurance Premiums
The primary driver of profitability related to the financing of commercial insurance premiums is the net interest spread that FIRST Insurance Funding and FIFC Canada can produce between the yields on the loans generated and the cost of funds allocated to the business unit. The commercial insurance premium finance business is a competitive industry and yields on loans are influenced by the market rates offered by our competitors. The majority of loans originated by FIRST Insurance Funding are purchased by the banks in order to more fully utilize their lending capacity as these loans generally provide the banks with higher yields than alternative investments. We fund these loans primarily through our deposits, the cost of which is influenced by competitors in the retail banking markets in our market area.
Financing of Life Insurance Premiums
The primary driver of profitability related to the financing of life insurance premiums is the net interest spread that Wintrust Life Finance can produce between the yields on the loans generated and the cost of funds allocated to the business unit. Profitability of financing both commercial and life insurance premiums is also meaningfully impacted by leveraging information technology systems, maintaining operational efficiency and increasing average loan size, each of which allows us to expand our loan volume without significant capital investment.
Wealth Management
We offer a full range of wealth management services including trust and investment services, tax-deferred like-kind exchange services, asset management solutions, securities brokerage services, and 401(k) and retirement plan services through four separate subsidiaries (Wintrust Investments, CTC, Great Lakes Advisors and CDEC).
The primary drivers of profitability of the wealth management business can be associated with the level of commission received related to the trading performed by the brokerage customers for their accounts and the amount of assets under management in which the unit receives a management fee for advisory, administrative and custodial services. As such, revenues are influenced by a rise or fall in the debt and equity markets and the resulting increase or decrease in the value of our client accounts on which our fees are based. The commissions received by the brokerage unit are not as directly influenced by the directionality of the debt and equity markets but rather the desire of our customers to engage in trading based on their particular situations and outlooks of the market or particular stocks and bonds. Profitability in the brokerage business is impacted by commissions which fluctuate over time.
Financial Regulatory Reform
Our business is heavily regulated by both federal and state agencies. Both the scope of the laws and regulations and the intensity of the supervision to which our business is subject have increased in recent years, in response to the financial crisis as well as other factors such as technological and market changes. Many of these changes have occurred as a result of the Dodd-Frank Act and its implementing regulations, most of which are now in place. While the regulatory environment has entered a period of rebalancing of the post financial crisis framework, we expect that our business will remain subject to extensive regulation and supervision.
The exact impact of the changing regulatory environment on our business and operations depends upon legislative or regulatory changes to reform the financial regulatory framework and the actions of our competitors, customers, and other market participants. Legislative and regulatory changes could have a significant impact on us by, for example, requiring us to change our business practices; requiring us to meet more stringent capital, liquidity and leverage ratio requirements; limiting our ability to pursue business opportunities; imposing additional costs and compliance obligations on us; limiting fees we can charge for services; impacting the value of our assets; or otherwise adversely affecting our businesses and our earnings’ capabilities. We have already experienced significant increases in compliance related costs in recent years, and we are now subject to more stringent risk-based capital and leverage ratio requirements than we were prior to the adoption of the U.S. Basel III Rules. We are also now subject to many mortgage-related rules promulgated by the CFPB that materially restructured the origination, services and securitization of residential mortgages in the United States. We will continue to monitor the impact that the implementation of applicable rules, regulations and policies arising out of any legislative or regulatory changes may have on our organization. For further discussion of the laws and regulations applicable to us and our subsidiary banks, please refer to “Business-Supervision and Regulation.”
Recent Transactions
Acquisition of SBC
On November 1, 2019, the Company completed its acquisition of SBC. SBC was the parent company of Countryside Bank. Through this business combination, the Company acquired Countryside Bank’s six banking offices located in Countryside, Burbank, Darien, Homer Glen, Oak Brook and Chicago, Illinois. As of the acquisition date, the Company acquired approximately $619.8 million in assets, including approximately $423.0 million in loans, and approximately $507.8 million in deposits. The Company recorded goodwill of approximately $40.3 million related to the acquisition.
Acquisition of STC
On October 7, 2019, the Company completed its acquisition of STC Bancshares Corp. (“STC”). STC was the parent company of STC Capital Bank. Through this business combination, the Company acquired STC Capital Bank’s five banking offices located in the communities of St. Charles, Geneva and South Elgin, Illinois. As of the acquisition date, the Company acquired approximately $250.1 million in assets, including approximately $174.3 million in loans, and approximately $201.2 million in deposits. The Company recorded goodwill of approximately $19.1 million related to the acquisition.
Acquisition of ROC
On May 24, 2019, the Company completed its acquisition of ROC. ROC was the parent company of Oak Bank. Through this business combination, the Company acquired Oak Bank’s one banking location in Chicago, Illinois. As of the acquisition date, the Company acquired approximately $223.4 million in assets, including approximately $124.7 million in loans, and approximately $161.2 million in deposits. The Company recorded goodwill of approximately $11.7 million related to the acquisition.
Acquisition of CDEC
On December 14, 2018, the Company acquired Elektra, the parent company of CDEC. CDEC is a provider of Qualified Intermediary services (as defined by U.S. Treasury regulations) for taxpayers seeking to structure tax-deferred like-kind exchanges under Internal Revenue Code Section 1031. CDEC has successfully facilitated more than 8,000 like-kind exchanges in the past decade for taxpayers nationwide. These transactions typically generate customer deposits during the period following the sale of the property until such proceeds are used to purchase a replacement property. The Company recorded goodwill of approximately $37.3 million related to the acquisition.
Acquisition of certain assets and assumption of certain liabilities of AEB
On December 7, 2018, the Company completed its acquisition of certain assets and the assumption of certain liabilities of American Enterprise Bank (“AEB”). Through this asset acquisition, the Company acquired approximately $164.0 million in assets, including approximately $119.3 million in loans, and approximately $150.8 million in deposits.
Acquisition of Chicago Shore Corporation
On August 1, 2018, the Company completed its acquisition of CSC. CSC was the parent company of Delaware Place Bank. Through this business combination, the Company acquired Delaware Place Bank’s one banking location in Chicago, Illinois. As of the acquisition date, the Company acquired approximately $282.8 million in assets, including approximately $152.7 million in loans, and approximately $213.1 million in deposits. Additionally, the Company recorded goodwill of approximately $26.6 million related to the acquisition.
Acquisition of iFreedom Direct Corporation DBA Veterans First Mortgage
On January 4, 2018, the Company acquired certain assets, including mortgage servicing rights, and assumed certain liabilities of the mortgage banking business of iFreedom Direct Corporation DBA Veterans First Mortgage (“Veterans First”), in a business combination. The Company recorded goodwill of approximately $9.1 million related to the acquisition.
Other Completed Transactions
Series E Preferred Stock
In May 2020, the Company issued 11,500 shares of fixed-rate reset non-cumulative perpetual preferred stock, Series E, liquidation preference $25,000 per share (the “Series E Preferred Stock”) as part of a $287.5 million public offering of 11,500,000 depositary shares, each representing a 1/1,000th interest in a share of Series E Preferred Stock. When, as and if declared, dividends on the Series E Preferred Stock are payable quarterly in arrears at a fixed rate of 6.875% per annum after October 15, 2020.
Issuance of Subordinated Notes Due 2029
In June 2019, the Company completed a public offering of $300.0 million aggregate principal amount of its 4.85% Subordinated Notes due 2029. The Company received proceeds prior to expenses of approximately $296.7 million from the offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions, which were intended to be used for general corporate purposes.
Expiration of Common Stock Warrants
On December 19, 2018, the Company’s publicly traded warrants to purchase shares of the Company’s common stock expired. Warrants not exercised prior to this date totaling 409 warrant shares expired and became void, and the holders did not receive any shares of the Company’s common stock.
Termination of Loss Share Agreements
On October 16, 2017, the Company entered into agreements with the FDIC that terminated all existing loss share agreements with the FDIC. Under the terms of the agreements, the Company made a net payment of $15.2 million to the FDIC as consideration for the early termination of the loss share agreements. The Company recorded a pre-tax gain of approximately $0.4 million to write off the remaining loss share asset, relieve the claw-back liability and recognize the payment to the FDIC.
Mandatory Conversion of Series C Preferred Stock
On April 27, 2017, the Company caused a mandatory conversion of its remaining 124,184 shares of 5.00% Non-Cumulative Perpetual Convertible Preferred Stock, Series C (the "Series C Preferred Stock") (issued in March 2012) into 3,069,828 shares of the Company's common stock at a conversion rate of 24.72 shares of common stock per share of Series C Preferred Stock. Cash was paid in lieu of fractional shares for an amount considered insignificant.
SUMMARY OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP in the United States and prevailing practices of the banking industry. Application of these principles requires management to make estimates, assumptions, and judgments that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Certain policies and accounting principles inherently have a greater reliance on the use of estimates, assumptions and judgments, and as such have a greater possibility that changes in those estimates and assumptions could produce financial results that are materially different than originally reported. Estimates, assumptions and judgments are necessary when assets and liabilities are required or elected to be recorded at fair value, when a decline in the value of an asset not carried on the financial statements at fair value warrants an impairment write-down or valuation reserve to be established, or when an asset or liability needs to be recorded contingent upon a future event, and are based on information available as of the date of the financial statements; accordingly, as information changes, the financial statements could reflect different estimates and assumptions.
A summary of the Company’s significant accounting policies is presented in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. These policies, along with the disclosures presented in the other financial statement notes and in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis section, provide information on how significant assets and liabilities are valued in the financial statements and how those values are determined. Management views critical accounting policies to be those which are highly dependent on subjective or complex judgments, estimates and assumptions, and where changes in those estimates and assumptions could have a significant impact on the financial statements. Management views critical accounting policies to include the determination of the allowance for credit losses, estimations of fair value, the valuations required for impairment testing of goodwill, the valuation and accounting for derivative instruments and income taxes as the accounting areas that require the most subjective and complex judgments, and as such could be most subject to revision as new information becomes available.
Allowance for Credit Losses, including the Allowance for Loan Losses, Allowance for Losses on Lending-Related Commitments and Allowance for Held-to-Maturity Debt Securities
The allowance for credit losses represents management’s estimate of expected credit losses over the life of a financial asset carried at amortized cost. Determining the amount of the allowance for credit losses is considered a critical accounting estimate because it requires significant judgment and the use of estimates related to the fair value of the underlying collateral and amount and timing of expected future cash flows on individually assessed financial assets, estimated credit losses on pools of loans with similar risk characteristics, and consideration of reasonable and supportable forecasts of macroeconomic conditions, all of which are susceptible to significant change. The loan and held-to-maturity debt securities portfolios represent 72% of total assets on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet. The Company also maintains an allowance for lending-related commitments, specifically unfunded loan commitments and letters of credit, which relates to certain amounts the Company is committed to lend (not unconditionally cancelable) but for which funds have not yet been disbursed. See Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 and the section titled “Loan Portfolio and Asset Quality” in Item 7 for a description of the methodology used to determine the allowance for credit losses.
Estimations of Fair Value
A portion of the Company’s assets and liabilities are carried at fair value on the Consolidated Statements of Condition, with changes in fair value recorded either through earnings or other comprehensive income in accordance with applicable accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. These include the Company’s trading account securities, available-for-sale debt securities, equity securities with a readily determinable fair value, derivatives, mortgage loans held-for-sale, certain loans held-for-investment and mortgage servicing rights (“MSRs”). The determination of fair value is important for certain other assets, including goodwill and other intangible assets, loans individually assessed when measuring a related allowance for credit loss, and other real estate owned that are periodically evaluated for impairment using fair value estimates.
Fair value is generally defined as the amount at which an asset or liability could be exchanged in a current transaction between willing, unrelated parties, other than in a forced or liquidation sale. Fair value is based on quoted market prices in an active market, or if market prices are not available, is estimated using models employing techniques such as matrix pricing or discounting expected cash flows. The significant assumptions used in the models, which include assumptions for interest rates, discount rates, prepayments and credit losses, are independently verified against observable market data where possible. Where observable market data is not available, the estimate of fair value becomes more subjective and involves a high degree of judgment. In this circumstance, fair value is estimated based on management’s judgment regarding the value that market participants would assign to the asset or liability. This valuation process takes into consideration factors such as market illiquidity. Imprecision in estimating these factors can impact the amount recorded on the balance sheet for a particular asset or liability with related impacts to earnings or other comprehensive income. See Note 22, “Fair Value of Assets and Liabilities,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for a further discussion of fair value measurements.
Impairment Testing of Goodwill
The Company performs impairment testing of goodwill for each of its reporting units on an annual basis or more frequently when events warrant, using a qualitative or quantitative approach. Using a qualitative approach, the Company reviews any recent events or circumstances that would indicate it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. These events and circumstances include the performance of the Company, the condition of the related industry in which the reporting unit operates and general economic environment and other factors. If the Company determines it is not more likely than not that there is impairment based on an evaluation of these events and circumstances, the Company may forgo the two-step quantitative approach.
Using a quantitative approach, the goodwill impairment analysis involves a two-step process. The first step is a comparison of the reporting unit’s fair value to its carrying value. If the carrying value of a reporting unit was determined to have been higher than its fair value, the second step would have to be performed to measure the amount of impairment loss. The second step measures goodwill impairment by recognizing an impairment according to the excess of the carrying amount of the reporting unit over the calculated fair value of such unit. Valuations are estimated in good faith by management through the use of publicly available valuations of comparable entities and discounted cash flow models using internal financial projections in the reporting unit’s business plan.
Under both a qualitative and quantitative approach, the goodwill impairment analysis requires management to make subjective judgments in determining if an indicator of impairment has occurred. Events and factors that may significantly affect the analysis include: a significant decline in the Company’s expected future cash flows, a substantial increase in the discount rate, a sustained, significant decline in the Company’s stock price and market capitalization, a significant adverse change in legal factors or in the business climate. Other factors might include changing competitive forces, customer behaviors and attrition, revenue trends, cost structures, along with specific industry and market conditions. Adverse change in these factors could have a significant impact on the recoverability of intangible assets and could have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had three reporting units: Community Banking, Specialty Finance and Wealth Management. Based on the Company’s 2020 goodwill impairment testing, no goodwill impairment was indicated for any of the reporting units on their respective annual testing dates.
Derivative Instruments
The Company utilizes derivative instruments to manage risks such as interest rate risk or market risk. The Company’s policy prohibits using derivatives for speculative purposes.
Accounting for derivatives differs significantly depending on whether a derivative is designated as an accounting hedge, which is a transaction intended to reduce a risk associated with a specific asset or liability or future expected cash flow at the time it is purchased. In order to qualify as an accounting hedge, a derivative must be designated as such at inception by management and meet certain criteria. Management must also continue to evaluate whether the instrument effectively reduces the risk associated with that item. To determine if a derivative instrument continues to be an effective hedge, the Company must make assumptions and judgments about the continued effectiveness of the hedging strategies and the nature and timing of forecasted transactions. If the Company’s hedging strategy were to become ineffective, hedge accounting would no longer apply and the reported results of operations or financial condition could be materially affected. See Note 21, “Derivative Financial Instruments,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for a further discussion of derivative accounting.
Income Taxes
The Company is subject to the income tax laws of the United States, its states, Canada and other jurisdictions where it conducts business. These laws are complex and subject to potentially different interpretations by the taxpayer and the various taxing authorities. In determining the provision for income taxes, management must make judgments and estimates about the application of these inherently complex laws, related regulations and case law. In the process of preparing the Company’s tax returns, management attempts to make reasonable interpretations of the tax laws. These interpretations are subject to challenge by the tax authorities upon audit or to reinterpretation based on management’s ongoing assessment of facts and evolving case law. Management reviews its uncertain tax positions and recognition of the benefits of such positions on a regular basis.
On a quarterly basis, management assesses the reasonableness of its effective tax rate based upon its current best estimate of net income and the applicable taxes expected for the full year. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are reassessed on a quarterly basis, if business events or circumstances warrant. Additionally, any enactment of new tax rates such as the enactment of the Tax Act in December 2017 requires the Company to re-measure its existing deferred tax assets and liabilities to reflect the new tax rate, with such adjustments recognized in current year earnings. See Note 17, “Income Taxes,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for a further discussion of income taxes.
The COVID-19 pandemic, specifically the uncertainty related to the ultimate magnitude of impact on the economy and banking industry, is expected to impact many of the estimates, assumptions and judgments noted above that are used by management. This could result in volatility in the related accounting estimates, which will directly impact the Company's financial results.
CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of Wintrust’s results of operations requires an understanding that a majority of the Company’s bank subsidiaries have been started as de novo banks since December 1991. Wintrust has a strategy of continuing to build its customer base and securing broad product penetration in each marketplace that it serves. The Company has expanded its banking franchise from three banks with five offices in 1994 to 15 banks with 181 offices at the end of 2020. FIRST Insurance Funding and Wintrust Life Finance have matured into separate divisions that generated, on a national basis, $10.0 billion in total premium finance receivables in 2020 within the United States. FIFC Canada, acquired in 2012, originated $1.3 billion in Canadian commercial premium finance receivables in 2020. In addition, the wealth management companies have been building a team of experienced professionals who are located within a majority of the banks.
Earnings Summary
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2020, totaled $293.0 million, or $4.68 per diluted common share, compared to $355.7 million, or $6.03 per diluted common share, in 2019, and $343.2 million, or $5.86 per diluted common share, in 2018. During 2020, net income decreased by $62.7 million and earnings per diluted common share decreased by $1.35. Net income in 2020 was significantly impacted by disruption from COVID-19. Net interest income decreased in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily as a result of the reduction in the net interest margin primarily due to the low rate environment driven by monetary policy in response to disruption from the pandemic. This decrease was partially offset by significant growth in earning assets primarily driven by the Company’s participation in PPP, a part of the CARES Act, which was enacted in response to COVID-19. The Company’s provision for credit losses increased significantly in 2020 primarily due to deterioration from the expected impact of COVID-19 of forecasted macroeconomic conditions used in the measurement of the allowance for credit losses after the adoption of CECL. Partially offsetting the reduction to net income from lower net interest income and higher provisions for credit losses, mortgage banking revenue increased in 2020 primarily as a result of the impact of COVID-19 on interest rates in the market. The Company’s mortgages originated for sale increased significantly in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to historically low long-term interest rates, resulting in such increase in mortgage banking revenue during the period. Additionally, the reduction in net interest income and higher provision for credit losses were also offset by lower
advertising and marketing costs, primarily due to lower sponsorship costs from shortened or canceled sports seasons and other events due to COVID-19.
Other items impacting net income in 2020 compared to 2019 include higher salaries and benefits to support mortgage operations and growth in the Company, increased equipment expenses and higher FDIC insurance expense, partially offset by higher service charges on deposit accounts as the Company’s deposit balances increased during the period and higher interest rate swap fees due to higher customer activity.
Net Interest Income
The primary source of the Company’s revenue is net interest income. Net interest income is the difference between interest income and fees on earning assets, such as loans and securities, and interest expense on the liabilities to fund those assets, including interest bearing deposits and other borrowings. The amount of net interest income is affected by both changes in the level of interest rates, and the amount and composition of earning assets and interest bearing liabilities.
Net interest income in 2020 totaled $1.0 billion, down from $1.1 billion in 2019 and up from $964.9 million in 2018, representing a decrease of $15.0 million, or 1%, in 2020 and an increase of $90.0 million, or 9%, in 2019. The table presented later in this section, titled “Changes in Interest Income and Expense,” presents the dollar amount of changes in interest income and expense, by major category, attributable to changes in the volume of the balance sheet category and changes in the rate earned or paid with respect to that category of assets or liabilities for 2020 and 2019. Average earning assets increased $7.7 billion, or 25%, in 2020 and $3.7 billion, or 14%, in 2019. Loans are the most significant component of the earning asset base as they earn interest at a higher rate than the other earning assets. Average loans increased $5.2 billion, or 21%, in 2020 and $2.5 billion, or 11%, in 2019. Total average loans as a percentage of total average earning assets were 79%, 82% and 84% in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The average yield on loans was 3.84% in 2020, 4.93% in 2019 and 4.66% in 2018, reflecting a decrease of 109 basis points in 2020 and an increase of 27 basis points in 2019. The lower loan yields in 2020 compared to 2019 is primarily a result of the decline interest rate environment during 2020. The average yield on liquidity management assets was 1.60% in 2020, 2.79% in 2019 and 2.78% in 2018, reflecting a decrease of 119 basis points in 2020 and an increase of one basis points in 2019. The average rate paid on interest bearing deposits, the largest component of the Company’s interest bearing liabilities, was 0.77% in 2020, 1.35% in 2019 and 0.95% in 2018, representing a decrease of 58 basis points in 2020 and an increase of 40 basis points in 2019. The lower level of interest bearing deposits rates in 2020 compared to 2019 is primarily due to downward re-pricing of retail deposits as a result of declining interest rates. As a result of the above, net interest margin decreased to 2.72% (2.73% on a fully tax-equivalent basis) in 2020 compared to 3.45% (3.47% on a fully tax-equivalent basis) in 2019.
Net interest income and net interest margin were also affected by amortization of valuation adjustments to earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities of acquired businesses. Assets and liabilities of acquired businesses are required to be recognized at their estimated fair value at the date of acquisition. These valuation adjustments represent the difference between the estimated fair value and the carrying value of assets and liabilities acquired. These adjustments are amortized into interest income and interest expense based upon the estimated remaining lives of the assets and liabilities acquired.
Average Balance Sheets, Interest Income and Expense, and Interest Rate Yields and Costs
The following table sets forth the average balances, the interest earned or paid thereon, and the effective interest rate, yield or cost for each major category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018. The yields and costs include loan origination fees and certain direct origination costs that are considered adjustments to yields. Interest income on non-accruing loans is reflected in the year that it is collected, to the extent it is not applied to principal. Such amounts are not material to net interest income or the net change in net interest income in any year. Non-accrual loans are included in the average balances. Net interest income and the related net interest margin have been adjusted to reflect tax-exempt income, such as interest on municipal securities and loans, on a tax-equivalent basis. This table should be referred to in conjunction with discussion of the financial condition and results of operations of the Company.
(1)Interest income on tax-advantaged loans, trading securities and investment securities reflects a tax-equivalent adjustment based on a marginal federal corporate tax rate in effect as of the applicable period. The total adjustments for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 were $4.4 million, $6.2 million and $5.7 million, respectively.
(2)Other earning assets include brokerage customer receivables and trading account securities.
(3)Loans, net of unearned income, include non-accrual loans.
(4)Interest rate spread is the difference between the yield earned on earning assets and the rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities.
(5)Net free funds is the difference between total average earning assets and total average interest-bearing liabilities. The estimated contribution to net interest margin from net free funds is calculated using the rate paid for total interest-bearing liabilities.
(6)See“Non-GAAP Financial Measures/Ratios” for additional information on this performance ratio.
Changes In Interest Income and Expense
The following table shows the dollar amount of changes in interest income and expense by major categories of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities attributable to changes in volume or rate for the periods indicated:
The changes in net interest income are created by changes in both interest rates and volumes. In the table above, volume variances are computed using the change in volume multiplied by the previous year’s rate. Rate variances are computed using the change in rate multiplied by the previous year’s volume. The change in interest due to both rate and volume has been allocated between factors in proportion to the relationship of the absolute dollar amounts of the change in each. The change in interest due to an additional day resulting from the 2020 leap year has been allocated entirely to the change due to volume.
Non-Interest Income
The following table presents non-interest income by category for 2020, 2019 and 2018:
NM-Not Meaningful
Notable contributions to the change in non-interest income are as follows:
Wealth management revenue is comprised of the trust and asset management revenue of the CTC and Great Lakes Advisors, the brokerage commissions, managed money fees and insurance product commissions at Wintrust Investments and fees from tax-deferred like-kind exchange services provided by CDEC.
Trust and asset management revenue totaled $81.6 million in 2020, an increase of $3.3 million, or 4%, compared to 2019. Trust and asset management fees are based primarily on the market value of the assets under management or administration as well as volume of tax-deferred like-kind exchange services provided during a period. Such revenue increased from 2019 to 2020 primarily as a result of market appreciation related to managed money accounts with fees based on assets under management and higher asset levels from new customers and new financial advisors.
Mortgage banking revenue totaled $346.0 million in 2020 compared to $154.3 million in 2019 reflecting an increase of $191.7 million, or 124%, in 2020. The increase in 2020 as compared 2019 was a result of an increase in loans originated for sale and higher production revenue. Mortgage banking revenue includes revenue from activities related to originating, selling and servicing residential real estate loans for the secondary market. A main factor in the mortgage banking revenue recognized by the Company is the volume of mortgage loans originated or purchased for sale. Mortgage originations for sale totaled $8.0 billion for the year ended 2020 compared to $4.5 billion for the same period of 2019. The increase in originations was primarily due to demand associated with historically low long-term interest rates. The percentage of origination volume from refinancing activities was 65% in 2020 as compared to 48% in 2019. Mortgage revenue is also impacted by changes in the fair value of MSRs. The Company records MSRs at fair value on a recurring basis.
During 2020, the fair value of the MSRs portfolio increased as retained servicing rights led to capitalization of $71.1 million, partially offset by negative fair value adjustments of $30.8 million and a reduction in value due to payoffs and paydowns of the existing portfolio. Starting in 2019, the Company purchased options and entered into interest rate swaps to economically hedge a portion of the fair value changes recorded in earnings related to its MSRs portfolio. During the second
quarter of 2020, the Company terminated these interest rate swaps. There were no such options or interest rate swaps outstanding as of December 31, 2020. See Note 6, “Mortgage Servicing Rights,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for a summary of the changes in the carrying value of MSRs.
The table below presents additional selected information regarding mortgage banking for the respective periods.
(1)Production revenue represents revenue earned from the origination and subsequent sale of mortgages, including gains on loans sold and fees from originations, changes in derivative activity, processing and other related activities, and excludes servicing fees, changes in fair value of servicing rights and changes to the mortgage recourse obligation and other non-production revenue.
Service charges on deposit accounts totaled $45.0 million in 2020 and $39.1 million in 2019, reflecting an increase of 15% in 2020. The increase in 2020 was primarily a result of higher account analysis fees on deposit accounts which increased as a result of the Company's commercial banking initiative as well as additional service charges on deposit accounts from acquired institutions.
The Company recognized $1.9 million in net losses in 2020 compared to $3.5 million in net gains on investment securities in 2019. The Company did not recognize any credit-related write-downs or other-than-temporary impairment charges in 2020 or 2019, respectively.
Fees from covered call option transactions totaled $2.3 million in 2020, compared to $3.7 million in 2019. The Company has typically written call options with terms of less than three months against certain U.S. Treasury and agency securities held in its portfolio for liquidity and other purposes. Management has effectively entered into these transactions with the goal of economically hedging security positions and enhancing its overall return on its investment portfolio by using fees generated from these options to compensate for net interest margin compression. These option transactions are designed to mitigate overall interest rate risk and to increase the total return associated with holding certain investment securities and do not qualify as hedges pursuant to accounting guidance. There were no outstanding call option contracts at December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The Company recognized $1.0 million of trading losses in 2020 compared to trading losses of $158,000 in 2019. Trading gains and losses recorded by the Company primarily result from fair value adjustments related to interest rate derivatives not designated as hedges.
Operating lease income totaled $47.6 million in 2020 compared to $47.0 million in 2019. The increase in 2020 was primarily related to growth in business from the Company's leasing divisions.
Interest rate swap fee revenue totaled $20.7 million in 2020 and $13.1 million in 2019. Swap fee revenues result from interest rate swap transactions related to both customer-based trades and the related matched trades with inter-bank dealer counterparties. The revenue recognized on this customer-based activity is sensitive to the pace of organic loan growth, the shape of the yield curve and the customers’ expectations of interest rates. The fluctuations in swap fee revenue in 2020 primarily results from fluctuations in interest rate swap transactions related to both customer-based trades and the related matched trades with inter-bank dealer counterparties.
Bank owned life insurance (“BOLI”) generated non-interest income of $4.7 million in 2020 compared to $4.9 million in 2019. This income typically represents adjustments to the cash surrender value of BOLI policies and proceeds received from death benefits. The Company initially purchased BOLI to consolidate existing term life insurance contracts of executive officers and to mitigate the mortality risk associated with death benefits provided for in executive employment contracts and in connection with certain deferred compensation arrangements. The Company has also assumed additional BOLI policies as the result of the acquisition of certain banks. The cash surrender value of BOLI totaled $154.6 million at December 31, 2020 and $187.5 million at December 31, 2019, and is included in other assets.
Administrative services revenue generated by Tricom was $4.4 million in 2020 and $4.2 million in 2019. This revenue comprises income from administrative services, such as data processing of payrolls, billing and cash management services, to temporary staffing service clients located throughout the United States. Tricom also earns interest and fee income from providing high-yielding, short-term accounts receivable financing to this same client base, which is included in the net interest income category.
The Company realized income of $632,000 and $35,000 in 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing gains realized from the early pay-off of leases originated and managed by the Company's leasing division.
Miscellaneous other non-interest income totaled $36.0 million in 2020 compared to $39.6 million in 2019. Miscellaneous income includes loan servicing fees, income from other investments, service charges and other fees. The decrease in miscellaneous other income for 2020 compared to 2019 was the result of a decrease in partnership income.
Non-Interest Expense
The following table presents non-interest expense by category for 2020, 2019 and 2018:
NM-Not Meaningful
Notable contributions to the change in non-interest expense are as follows:
Salaries and employee benefits is the largest component of non-interest expense, accounting for 60% of the total in 2020 compared to 59% in 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, salaries and employee benefits totaled $626.1 million and increased $79.7 million, or 15%, compared to 2019. This increase was primarily attributed to increased salaries and commissions and incentive compensation expense. Salaries increased $41.4 million as a result of increased staffing costs to support mortgage origination and investment in technology related services to satisfy customer demands and create efficiencies in operations. Commissions and incentive compensation increased $30.0 million primarily due to increased commissions expense from higher levels of mortgage loan originations in the current year.
Equipment expense totaled $68.5 million in 2020 compared to $52.3 million in 2019, reflecting an increase of 31% in 2020. The increase in equipment expense in 2020 was primarily related to increased software licensing expenses. Equipment expense includes furniture, equipment and computer software, depreciation and repairs and maintenance costs.
Operating lease equipment expense totaled $37.9 million in 2020 and $35.8 million in 2019. The increase in 2020 was primarily related to growth in business from the Company's leasing divisions.
Occupancy expense for the years 2020 and 2019 was $70.0 million and $64.3 million, respectively, reflecting an increase of 9% in 2020. The increase in 2020 was primarily associated with an impairment charge of $1.4 million related to the planned closure of 10 bank branches, increased real estate tax assessment estimates and a higher level of utility charges. Occupancy expense includes depreciation on premises, real estate taxes and insurance, utilities and maintenance of premises, as well as net rent expense for leased premises.
Data processing expenses totaled $30.2 million in 2020 compared to $27.8 million in 2019, representing an increase of 9% in 2020. The amount of data processing expenses incurred increased based on the overall growth of loan and deposit accounts and
conversion costs related to previously completed acquisitions. No additional material conversion charges are anticipated related to any completed acquisitions.
Advertising and marketing expenses totaled $36.3 million for 2020 compared to $48.6 million for 2019. Marketing costs are incurred to promote the Company’s brand, commercial banking capabilities, the Company’s MaxSafe® suite of products, community-based products, to attract loans and deposits and to announce new branch openings as well as the expansion of the Company's non-bank businesses. The decrease in 2020 was primarily as a result of decreased sponsorship costs due to the cancellation of events, including sports sponsorships, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The level of marketing expenditures depends on the type of marketing programs utilized which are determined based on the market area, targeted audience, competition and various other factors. Management continues to utilize mass market media promotions as well as targeted marketing programs in certain market areas. In 2019, the Company incurred increased advertising and marketing costs to increase Wintrust's name recognition associated with the overall goal of becoming recognized as “Chicago’s Bank” and “Wisconsin’s Bank.”
FDIC insurance expense totaled $25.0 million in 2020 compared to $9.2 million in 2019 reflecting an increase of $15.8 million in 2020. The increase in 2020 as compared to 2019 was a result of assessment credits received from the FDIC in 2019 as well as higher assessment rates impacted by declines in the Tier 1 Leverage Ratio at the Company's bank affiliates as a result of asset growth, including PPP loans.
The Company recorded a $1.3 million gain on sale of an OREO property in 2020 resulting in net OREO income of $921,000 in 2020, compared to net OREO expense of $3.6 million in 2019. OREO expenses include all costs associated with obtaining, maintaining and selling other real estate owned properties as well as valuation adjustments.
Miscellaneous non-interest expense increased $10.3 million, or 12%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily a result of an increase of $15.1 million of contingent consideration expense related to the previous acquisition of mortgage operations. The liability for contingent consideration expense related to the previous acquisition of mortgage operations is based upon forward looking mortgage origination volumes and the estimated profitability of that operation. Should those assumptions change going forward, the liability may need to be increased or decreased. The contractual period covering this contingent consideration ends in January 2023 and the final two years of the contract contemplate a lower ratio of contingent consideration relative to financial performance. As a result, the Company does not expect to have material adjustments to the contingent consideration liability in future periods. Miscellaneous non-interest expense includes ATM expenses, correspondent banking charges, directors’ fees, telephone and communication, travel and entertainment, corporate insurance, dues and subscriptions, problem loan expenses, operating losses and lending origination costs that are not deferred.
Income Taxes
The Company recorded income tax expense of $96.8 million in 2020 compared to $124.4 million in 2019 and $117.0 million in 2018. The effective tax rates were 24.8% in 2020, 25.9% in 2019 and 25.4% in 2018. The effective tax rate in 2020 benefited from $9.1 million in state income tax settlements related to uncertain tax positions. Net of the federal tax impact, the reduction to income tax expense was $7.2 million. Income tax expense was also impacted by the tax effects related to the issuance of shares in share-based compensation plans. These tax effects fluctuate based on the Company’s stock price and timing of employee stock option exercises and vesting of other share based awards. The Company recorded additional tax expense related to share-based compensation of $618,000 in 2020, and tax benefits of $1.8 million and $3.9 million in 2019 and 2018, respectively, the majority of which were recognized in the first quarter of each year. Please refer to Note 17 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for further discussion and analysis of the Company’s tax position, including a reconciliation of the tax expense computed at the statutory tax rate to the Company’s actual tax expense.
Operating Segment Results
As described in Note 24 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, the Company’s operations consist of three primary segments: community banking, specialty finance and wealth management. The Company’s profitability is primarily dependent on the net interest income, provision for credit losses, non-interest income and operating expenses of its community banking segment. For purposes of internal segment profitability, management allocates certain intersegment and parent company balances. Management allocates a portion of revenues to the specialty finance segment related to loans and leases originated by the specialty finance segment and sold or assigned to the community banking segment. Similarly, for purposes of analyzing the contribution from the wealth management segment, management allocates a portion of the net interest income earned by the community banking segment on deposit balances of customers of the wealth management segment to the wealth management
segment. Finally, expenses incurred at the Wintrust parent company are allocated to each segment based on each segment's risk-weighted assets.
The community banking segment’s net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $808.4 million as compared to $841.6 million for the same period in 2019, a decrease of $33.2 million, or 4%. The decrease in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to compression of the net interest margin attributable to the decrease in interest rates in the environment and the impact of COVID-19 on macroeconomic conditions. The community banking segment's provision for credit losses totaled $206.8 million in 2020 compared to $47.9 million in 2019. The provision for credit losses increased in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to the implementation of CECL and the macroeconomic conditions created by the COVID-19 pandemic. Non-interest income for the community banking segment increased $194.5 million, or 71%, in 2020 when compared to 2019. The increase in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to an increase in mortgage banking revenue from significantly increased mortgage originations during 2020. The community banking segment’s net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $163.6 million, a decrease of $74.9 million, compared to net income of $238.5 million in 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to a higher provision for credit losses in 2020 due to the implementation of CECL and the macroeconomic conditions created by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The specialty finance segment’s net interest income totaled $177.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $161.7 million in the same period of 2019, an increase of $15.3 million, or 9%. The increase in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to growth in earnings assets on the premium finance receivables portfolios. The specialty finance segment's provision for credit losses totaled $7.4 million in 2020 compared to $6.0 million in 2019. The specialty finance segment’s non-interest income totaled $86.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $79.5 million in 2019. The increase in non-interest income in 2020 is primarily a result of higher originations and increased balances related to the commercial premium finance portfolio and growth in business from the Company's leasing division. For 2020, our commercial premium finance operations, life insurance premium finance operations, leasing operations and accounts receivable finance operations accounted for 42%, 31%, 23% and 4%, respectively, of the total revenues of our specialty finance business. Net income of the specialty finance segment totaled $100.3 million and $89.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The wealth management segment reported net interest income of $30.6 million for 2020 and $30.1 million for 2019. Net interest income for this segment is primarily comprised of an allocation of net interest income earned by the community banking segment on non-interest bearing and interest-bearing wealth management customer account balances on deposit at the banks. Wealth management customer account balances on deposit at the banks averaged $2.0 billion and $1.7 billion in 2020 and 2019, respectively. This segment recorded non-interest income of $103.4 million for 2020 as compared to $100.1 million for 2019. This increase is primarily due to growth in assets from new and existing customers and market appreciation. Distribution of wealth management services through each bank continues to be a focus of the Company as the number of brokers in its banks continues to increase. The Company is committed to growing the wealth management segment in order to better service its customers and create a more diversified revenue stream. The wealth management segment reported net income of $29.0 million for 2020 compared to $27.8 million for 2019.
Analysis of Financial Condition
Total assets were $45.1 billion at December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $8.5 billion, or 23%, when compared to December 31, 2019. Total funding, which includes deposits, all notes and advances, including secured borrowings and junior subordinated debentures, was $39.5 billion at December 31, 2020 and $31.9 billion at December 31, 2019. See Notes 3, 4, and 10 through 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for additional period-end detail on the Company’s interest-earning assets and funding liabilities.
Interest-Earning Assets
The following table sets forth, by category, the composition of average earning assets and the relative percentage of each category to total average earning assets for the periods presented:
(1)Includes non-accrual loans.
(2)Liquidity management assets include investment securities, other securities, interest-earning deposits with banks, federal funds sold and securities purchased under resale agreements.
(3)Other earning assets include brokerage customer receivables and trading account securities.
Total average earning assets increased $7.7 billion, or 25%, in 2020. Average earning assets comprised 92% of average total assets in 2020 and 2019.
Mortgage loans held-for-sale. Average mortgage loans held-for-sale totaled $707.1 million in 2020, compared to $308.6 million in 2019. These balances represent mortgage loans awaiting subsequent sale in the secondary market with such sales eliminating the interest-rate risk associated with these loans, as they are predominantly long-term fixed rate loans, and provides a source of non-interest revenue. The increase in average balance from 2019 to 2020 was primarily due to higher mortgage production in 2020 due to the low rate environment as well as higher balances repurchased by the Company under the early buyout option available for loans sold to GNMA with servicing retained. See “Loan Portfolio and Asset Quality” section later in this Item 7 for additional discussion of these early buyout options.
Loans. Average total loans, net of unearned income, totaled $30.2 billion and increased $5.2 billion, or 21%, in 2020. Average commercial loans, excluding PPP loans, totaled $8.7 billion in 2020, and increased $606.6 million, or 8%, over the average balance in 2019. Average commercial PPP loans totaled $2.3 billion in 2020. Average commercial real estate loans totaled $8.3 billion in 2020, increasing $953.4 million, or 13%, since 2019. Combined, these categories comprised 64% and 62% of the average loan portfolio in 2020 and 2019, respectively. The growth realized in these categories for 2020 is primarily attributable to Company’s participation in funding PPP loans, increased business development efforts and various acquisitions occurring in 2019.
Home equity loans averaged $466.8 million in 2020, and decreased $60.1 million, or 11%, when compared to the average balance in 2019. Unused commitments on home equity lines of credit totaled $756.2 million at December 31, 2020 and $800.6 million at December 31, 2019. The Company has been actively managing its home equity portfolio to ensure that diligent pricing, appraisal and other underwriting activities continue to exist.
Residential real estate loans averaged $1.2 billion in 2020, and increased $149.8 million, or 14%, from the average balance in 2019. The increase in average balance was partially due to the Company deciding to allocate more balances from its mortgage production for investment instead of for subsequent sale and servicing in the secondary market.
Average premium finance receivables totaled $9.2 billion in 2020, and accounted for 31% of the Company’s average total loans. In 2020, average premium finance receivables increased $1.3 billion, or 16%, compared to 2019. The increase during 2020 was the result of continued originations within the portfolio due to hardening insurance market conditions driving a higher average size of new commercial insurance premium finance receivables as well as effective marketing and customer servicing. Approximately $11.3 billion of premium finance receivables were originated in 2020 compared to approximately $9.4 billion in 2019.
Other loans represent a wide variety of personal and consumer loans to individuals as well as high-yielding short-term accounts receivable financing to clients in the temporary staffing industry located throughout the United States. Consumer loans generally have shorter terms and higher interest rates than mortgage loans but generally involve more credit risk due to the type and nature of the collateral. Additionally, short-term accounts receivable financing may also involve greater credit risks than generally associated with the loan portfolios of more traditional community banks depending on the marketability of the collateral.
Covered loans represented loans acquired through the nine FDIC-assisted transactions, all of which occurred prior to 2013. These loans were subject to loss sharing agreements with the FDIC. The FDIC agreed to reimburse the Company for 80% of losses incurred on the purchased loans, foreclosed real estate, and certain other assets. On October 16, 2017, the Company entered into agreements with the FDIC that terminated all existing loss share agreements with the FDIC. The Company will be solely responsible for all future charge-offs, recoveries, gains, losses and expenses related to the previously covered assets as the FDIC will no longer share in those amounts.
Liquidity Management Assets. Funds that are not utilized for loan originations are used to purchase investment securities and short-term money market investments, to sell as federal funds and to maintain in interest-bearing deposits with banks. Average liquidity management assets accounted for 19% and 17% of total average earning assets in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Average liquidity management assets increased $2.1 billion in 2020 compared to 2019. The balances of these assets can fluctuate based on management’s ongoing effort to manage liquidity and for asset liability management purposes. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company will continue to prudently evaluate and utilize liquidity sources as needed, including the management of availability with the FHLB and FRB and utilization of the revolving credit facility with unaffiliated banks.
Other earning assets. Other earning assets include brokerage customer receivables and trading account securities. In the normal course of business, Wintrust Investments activities involve the execution, settlement, and financing of various securities transactions. Wintrust Investments customer securities activities are transacted on either a cash or margin basis. In margin transactions, Wintrust Investments, under an agreement with the out-sourced securities firm, extends credit to its customer, subject to various regulatory and internal margin requirements, collateralized by cash and securities in customer’s accounts. In connection with these activities, Wintrust Investments executes and the out-sourced firm clears customer transactions relating to the sale of securities not yet purchased, substantially all of which are transacted on a margin basis subject to individual exchange regulations. Such transactions may expose Wintrust Investments to off-balance-sheet risk, particularly in volatile trading markets, in the event margin requirements are not sufficient to fully cover losses that customers may incur. In the event a customer fails to satisfy its obligations, Wintrust Investments under an agreement with the out-sourced securities firm, may be required to purchase or sell financial instruments at prevailing market prices to fulfill the customer's obligations. Wintrust Investments seeks to control the risks associated with its customers’ activities by requiring customers to maintain margin collateral in compliance with various regulatory and internal guidelines. Wintrust Investments monitors required margin levels daily and, pursuant to such guidelines, requires customers to deposit additional collateral or to reduce positions when necessary.
Investment Securities Portfolio
Supplemental Statistical Data
The following statistical information is provided in accordance with the requirements of The Securities Act Industry Guide 3, Statistical Disclosure by Bank Holding Companies, which is part of Regulation S-K as promulgated by the SEC. This data should be read in conjunction with the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto, and Management’s Discussion and Analysis which are contained in Item 8 and Item 7, respectively, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The following table presents the amortized cost and fair value of the Company’s investment securities portfolios, by investment category, as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
(1)Consisting entirely of residential mortgage-backed securities, none of which are subprime.
(2)As of January 1, 2020, the Company adopted ASU 2016-13 related to credit losses on financial assets held at amortized cost. As a result of such adoption, the Company measured an allowance for credit losses related to lifetime expected credit losses on held-to-maturity investment securities.
Tables presenting the carrying amounts and gross unrealized gains and losses for securities at December 31, 2020 and 2019 are included by reference to Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements presented under Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following table presents the carrying value of the investment securities portfolios as of December 31, 2020, by maturity distribution. Carrying value represents the fair value of investment securities classified as available-for-sale, the amortized cost of those classified as held-to-maturity and the fair value of equity securities with readily determinable fair values.
(1) Consisting entirely of residential mortgage-backed securities, none of which are subprime.
The weighted average yield for each range of maturities of securities, on a tax-equivalent basis, is shown below as of December 31, 2020:
(1) Consisting entirely of residential mortgage-backed securities, none of which are subprime.
Loan Portfolio and Asset Quality
Loan Portfolio
The following table shows the Company’s loan portfolio by category as of December 31 for each of the five previous fiscal years:
Commercial and commercial real estate loans. Our commercial and commercial real estate loan portfolios are comprised primarily of commercial real estate loans and lines of credit for working capital purposes. The table below sets forth information regarding the types, amounts and performance of our loans within these portfolios as of December 31, 2020 and 2019:
We make commercial loans for many purposes, including working capital lines, which are generally renewable annually and supported by business assets, personal guarantees and additional collateral. Such loans may vary in size based on customer need. In addition, the Company has participated in the PPP program starting in 2020. Commercial business lending is generally considered to involve a slightly higher degree of risk than traditional consumer bank lending. Primarily as a result of the adoption of CECL and deterioration in macroeconomic conditions related to COVID-19, our allowance for credit losses in our
commercial loan portfolio increased to $94.2 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to $64.9 million as of December 31, 2019.
Our commercial real estate loans are generally secured by a first mortgage lien and assignment of rents on the property. Since most of our bank branches are located in the Chicago metropolitan area and southern Wisconsin, 82.7% of our commercial real estate loan portfolio is located in this region as of December 31, 2020. We have been able to effectively manage our total non-performing commercial real estate loans. As of December 31, 2020, our allowance for credit losses related to this portfolio was $243.6 million compared to $68.5 million as of December 31, 2019. Similar to the commercial loan portfolio, the increase in the allowance for credit losses is primarily due to the adoption of CECL and deterioration in macroeconomic conditions related to COVID-19, specifically as reflected by the Commercial Real Estate Price Index.
The Company also participates in mortgage warehouse lending which is included above within commercial, industrial and other, by providing interim funding to unaffiliated mortgage bankers to finance residential mortgages originated by such bankers for sale into the secondary market. The Company’s loans to the mortgage bankers are secured by the business assets of the mortgage companies as well as the specific mortgage loans funded by the Company, after they have been pre-approved for purchase by third party end lenders. The Company may also provide interim financing for packages of mortgage loans on a bulk basis in circumstances where the mortgage bankers desire to competitively bid on a number of mortgages for sale as a package in the secondary market. Amounts advanced with respect to any particular mortgage loan are usually required to be repaid within 21 days.
Home equity loans. Our home equity loans and lines of credit are originated by each of our banks in their local markets where we have a strong understanding of the underlying real estate value. Our banks monitor and manage these loans, and we conduct an automated review of all home equity loans and lines of credit at least twice per year. This review collects current credit performance for each home equity borrower and identifies situations where the credit strength of the borrower is declining, or where there are events that may influence repayment, such as tax liens or judgments. Our banks use this information to manage loans that may be higher risk and to determine whether to obtain additional credit information or updated property valuations.
The rates we offer on new home equity lending are based on several factors, including appraisals and valuation due diligence, in order to reflect inherent risk, and we place additional scrutiny on larger home equity requests. In a limited number of cases, we issue home equity credit together with first mortgage financing, and requests for such financing are evaluated on a combined basis. It is not our practice to advance more than 85% of the appraised value of the underlying asset, which ratio we refer to as the loan-to-value ratio, or LTV ratio, and a majority of the credit we previously extended, when issued, had an LTV ratio of less than 80%. Our home equity loan portfolio has performed well in light of the ongoing volatility in the overall residential real estate market.
Residential real estate. Our residential real estate portfolio predominantly includes one- to four-family adjustable rate mortgages, construction loans to individuals and bridge financing loans for qualifying customers. As of December 31, 2020, our residential loan portfolio totaled $1.3 billion, or 5% of our total outstanding loans.
Our adjustable rate mortgages relate to properties located principally in the Chicago metropolitan area and southern Wisconsin or vacation homes owned by local residents. These adjustable rate mortgages are often non-agency conforming. Adjustable rate mortgage loans decrease the interest rate risk we face on our mortgage portfolio. However, this risk is not eliminated due to the fact that such loans generally provide for periodic and lifetime limits on the interest rate adjustments among other features. Additionally, adjustable rate mortgages may pose a higher risk of delinquency and default because they require borrowers to make larger payments when interest rates rise. As of December 31, 2020, $26.1 million of our residential real estate mortgages, or 2.1% of our residential real estate loan portfolio were classified as nonaccrual, no balances were 90 or more days past due and still accruing, $14.2 million were 30 to 89 days past due or 1.1% and $1.2 billion were current or 96.8%. We believe that since our loan portfolio consists primarily of locally originated loans, and since the majority of our borrowers are longer-term customers with lower LTV ratios, we face a relatively low risk of borrower default and delinquency.
Due to interest rate risk considerations, we generally sell in the secondary market loans originated with long-term fixed rates, for which we receive fee income. We may also selectively retain certain of these loans within the banks’ own portfolios where they are non-agency conforming, or where the terms of the loans make them favorable to retain. A portion of the loans we sold into the secondary market were sold with the servicing of those loans retained. The amount of loans serviced for others as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $10.8 billion and $8.2 billion, respectively. All other mortgage loans sold into the secondary market were sold without the retention of servicing rights.
The Government National Mortgage Association (“GNMA”) optional repurchase programs allow financial institutions acting as servicers to buyout individual delinquent mortgage loans that meet certain criteria from the securitized loan pool for which the
institution was the original transferor of such loans. At the option of the servicer and without prior authorization from GNMA, the servicer may repurchase such delinquent loans for an amount equal to the remaining principal balance of the loan. Under FASB ASC Topic 860, “Transfers and Servicing,” this early buyout option is considered a conditional option until the delinquency criteria are met, at which time the option becomes unconditional. When the Company is deemed to have regained effective control over these loans under the unconditional repurchase option and the expected benefit of the potential repurchase is more than trivial, the loans can no longer be reported as sold and must be brought back onto the balance sheet as loans at fair value, regardless of whether the Company intends to exercise the early buyout option. These rebooked loans are reported as loans held-for-investment, part of the residential real estate portfolio, with the offsetting liability being reported in accrued interest payable and other liabilities. Rebooked GNMA loans held-for-investment amounted to $44.9 million at December 31, 2020, compared to $123.1 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease in balance from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 was the result of the Company increasing its exercise of such early buyout options in 2020. When the early buyout option on these rebooked GNMA loans is exercised, the repurchased loans continue to be carried at fair value. Additionally, such loans typically transfer to mortgage loans held-for-sale at the time of early buyout as the Company’s intent is to cure and resell such loans subsequent to repurchase from GNMA. As of December 31, 2020, early buyout exercised mortgage loans held-for-sale totaled $344.8 million compared to $16.0 million as of December 31, 2019.
It is not our current practice to underwrite, and we have no plans to underwrite, subprime, Alt A, no or little documentation loans, or option ARM loans. As of December 31, 2020, approximately $1.0 million of our mortgage loans consist of interest-only loans.
Premium finance receivables - commercial. FIRST Insurance Funding and FIFC Canada originated approximately $9.9 billion in commercial insurance premium finance receivables during 2020 as compared to approximately $8.3 billion in 2019. FIRST Insurance Funding and FIFC Canada make loans to businesses to finance the insurance premiums they pay on their commercial insurance policies. The loans are originated by working through independent medium and large insurance agents and brokers located throughout the United States and Canada. The insurance premiums financed are primarily for commercial customers’ purchases of liability, property and casualty and other commercial insurance.
This lending involves relatively rapid turnover of the loan portfolio and high volume of loan originations. Because of the indirect nature of this lending through third party agents and brokers and because the borrowers are located nationwide and in Canada, this segment is more susceptible to third party fraud than relationship lending. The Company performs ongoing credit and other reviews of the agents and brokers, and performs various internal audit steps to mitigate against the risk of any fraud. The majority of these loans are purchased by the banks in order to more fully utilize their lending capacity as these loans generally provide the banks with higher yields than alternative investments.
Premium finance receivables - life insurance. Wintrust Life Finance originated approximately $1.4 billion in life insurance premium finance receivables in 2020 as compared to $1.1 billion in 2019. The Company continues to experience a high level of competition and pricing pressure within the current market. These loans are originated directly with the borrowers with assistance from life insurance carriers, independent insurance agents, financial advisors and legal counsel. The life insurance policy is the primary form of collateral. In addition, these loans often are secured with a letter of credit, marketable securities or certificates of deposit. In some cases, Wintrust Life Finance may make a loan that has a partially unsecured position.
Consumer and other. Included in the consumer and other loan category is a wide variety of personal and consumer loans to individuals. The banks originate consumer loans in order to provide a wider range of financial services to their customers. Consumer loans generally have shorter terms and higher interest rates than mortgage loans but generally involve more credit risk than mortgage loans due to the type and nature of the collateral.
Foreign. The Company had approximately $616.4 million of loans to businesses with operations in foreign countries as of December 31, 2020 compared to $456.4 million at December 31, 2019 and $337.1 million at December 31, 2018. This balance as of December 31, 2020 consists of loans originated by FIFC Canada.
Maturities and Sensitivities of Loans to Changes in Interest Rates
The following table classifies the loan portfolio at December 31, 2020 by date at which the loans reprice or mature, and the type of rate exposure:
Past Due Loans and Non-Performing Assets
Our ability to manage credit risk depends in large part on our ability to properly identify and manage problem loans. To do so, the Company operates a credit risk rating system under which our credit management personnel assign a credit risk rating to each loan at the time of origination and review loans on a regular basis to determine each loan’s credit risk rating on a scale of 1 through 10 with higher scores indicating higher risk. The credit risk rating structure used is shown below:
1 Rating - Minimal Risk (Loss Potential - none or extremely low) (Superior asset quality, excellent liquidity, minimal leverage)
2 Rating - Modest Risk (Loss Potential demonstrably low) (Very good asset quality and liquidity, strong leverage capacity)
3 Rating - Average Risk (Loss Potential low but no longer refutable) (Mostly satisfactory asset quality and liquidity, good leverage capacity)
4 Rating - Above Average Risk (Loss Potential variable, but some potential for deterioration) (Acceptable asset quality, little excess liquidity, modest leverage capacity)
5 Rating - Management Attention Risk (Loss Potential moderate if corrective action not taken) (Generally acceptable asset quality, somewhat strained liquidity, minimal leverage capacity)
6 Rating - Special Mention (Loss Potential moderate if corrective action not taken) (Assets in this category are currently protected, potentially weak, but not to the point of substandard classification)
7 Rating - Substandard Accrual (Loss Potential distinct possibility that the bank may sustain some loss, but no discernible impairment) (Must have well defined weaknesses that jeopardize the liquidation of the debt)
8 Rating - Substandard Non-accrual (Loss Potential well documented probability of loss, including potential impairment) (Must have well defined weaknesses that jeopardize the liquidation of the debt)
9 Rating - Doubtful (Loss Potential extremely high) (These assets have all the weaknesses in those classified “substandard” with the added characteristic that the weaknesses make collection or liquidation in full, on the basis of current existing facts, conditions, and values, highly improbable)
10 Rating - Loss (fully charged-off) (Loans in this category are considered fully uncollectible.)
Each loan officer is responsible for monitoring his or her loan portfolio, recommending a credit risk rating for each loan in his or her portfolio and ensuring the credit risk ratings are appropriate. These credit risk ratings are then ratified by the bank’s chief credit officer and/or concurrence credit officer. Credit risk ratings are determined by evaluating a number of factors including, a borrower’s financial strength, cash flow coverage, collateral protection and guarantees. The Company maintains an internal loan review function as well as utilizes a third party loan review provider to independently review a portion of the loan portfolio to evaluate the appropriateness of the management-assigned credit risk ratings. These ratings are subject to further review at each of our bank subsidiaries by the applicable regulatory authority, including the FRB of Chicago and the OCC, and are also reviewed by our loan review and internal audit staff.
The Company’s Problem Loan Reporting system includes all loans with credit risk ratings of 6 through 9. This system is designed to provide an on-going detailed tracking mechanism for each problem loan. Once management determines that a loan has deteriorated to a point where it has a credit risk rating of 6 or worse, the Company’s Managed Asset Division performs an overall credit and collateral review. As part of this review, all underlying collateral is identified and the valuation methodology is analyzed and tracked. As a result of this initial review by the Company’s Managed Asset Division, the credit risk rating is reviewed and a portion of the outstanding loan balance may be deemed uncollectible and, as a result, no longer share similar risk characteristics as its related pool. If that is the case, the individual loan is considered collateral dependent and individually assessed for an allowance for credit loss. The Company’s individual assessment utilizes an independent re-appraisal of the collateral (unless such a third-party evaluation is not possible due to the unique nature of the collateral, such as a closely-held
business or thinly traded securities). In the case of commercial real estate collateral, an independent third party appraisal is ordered by the Company’s Real Estate Services Group to determine if there has been any change in the underlying collateral value. These independent appraisals are reviewed by the Real Estate Services Group and sometimes by independent third party valuation experts and may be adjusted depending upon market conditions.
Through the credit risk rating process, loans are reviewed to determine if they are performing in accordance with the original contractual terms. If the borrower has failed to comply with the original contractual terms, further action may be required by the Company, including a downgrade in the credit risk rating, movement to non-accrual status or a charge-off. If the Company determines that a loan amount or portion thereof is uncollectible, the loan’s credit risk rating is immediately downgraded to an 8 or 9 and the uncollectible amount is charged-off. Any loan that has a partial charge-off continues to be assigned a credit risk rating of an 8 or 9 for the duration of time that a balance remains outstanding. The Company undertakes a thorough and ongoing analysis to determine if additional impairment and/or charge-offs are appropriate and to begin a workout plan for the credit to minimize actual losses. In determining the appropriate charge-off for collateral-dependent loans, the Company considers the results of appraisals for the associated collateral.
The Company’s approach to workout plans and restructuring loans is built on the credit-risk rating process. A modification of a loan with an existing credit risk rating of 6 or worse or a modification of any other credit, which will result in a restructured credit risk rating of 6 or worse must be reviewed for TDR classification. In that event, our Managed Assets Division conducts an overall credit and collateral review. A modification of a loan is considered to be a TDR if both (1) the borrower is experiencing financial difficulty and (2) for economic or legal reasons, the bank grants a concession to a borrower that it would not otherwise consider. The modification of a loan where the credit risk rating is 5 or better both before and after such modification is not considered to be a TDR. Based on the Company’s credit risk rating system, it considers that borrowers whose credit risk rating is 5 or better are not experiencing financial difficulties and therefore, are not considered TDRs.
TDRs are individually assessed at the time of the modification and on a quarterly basis to measure an allowance for credit loss. The carrying amount of the loan is compared to the expected payments to be received, discounted at the loan's original rate, or for collateral dependent loans, to the fair value of the collateral. Any shortfall is recorded as a reserve.
For non-TDR loans, if based on current information and events, it is probable that the Company will be unable to collect all amounts due to it according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement, a loan is individually assessed for measuring the allowance for credit losses and if necessary, a reserve is established. In determining the appropriate reserve for collateral-dependent loans, the Company considers the results of appraisals for the associated collateral..
Non-Performing Assets
The following table sets forth the Company’s non-performing assets and TDRs performing under the contractual terms of the loan agreement as of the dates shown. Prior to January 1, 2020, PCI loans were aggregated into pools by common risk characteristics for accounting purposes, including recognition of interest income on a pool basis. As a result of the implementation of CECL, beginning in the first quarter of 2020, PCI loans transitioned to a classification of PCD loan, which no longer maintains the prior pools and related accounting concepts. Recognition of interest income on PCD loan is considered at the individual asset level following the Company's accrual policies, instead of based upon the entire pool of loans. Due to the adoption of CECL, the Company included $22.6 million in PCD loans in total non-performing loans as of December 31, 2020.
(1)Includes $2.6 million of non-performing loans and $2.9 million of other real estate owned reclassified from covered assets as a result of the termination of all existing loss share agreements with the FDIC during the fourth quarter of 2017.
(2)As of the dates shown no TDRs were past due greater than 90 days and still accruing interest.
(3)Non-accrual loans included TDRs totaling $21.2 million, $27.1 million, $32.8 million, $10.1 million and $11.8 million as of December 31, 2020, 2019, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
(4)Includes PCD loans. As a result of the adoption of ASU 2016-13, the Company transitioned all previously classified PCI loans to PCD loans effective January 1, 2020.
At this time, management believes reserves are appropriate to absorb losses that are expected upon the ultimate resolution of these credits. While the ultimate effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on non-performing assets remains unknown, significant increases may occur in subsequent periods. Management will continue to actively review and monitor its loan portfolios, in an effort to identify problem credits in a timely manner. Please refer to Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation -Overview section of this report for additional discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Loan Portfolio Aging
The tables below show the aging of the Company’s loan portfolio at December 31, 2020 and 2019:
(1)Includes PCD loans and, for periods prior to the adoption of ASU 2016-13, purchased credit impaired ("PCI") loans. PCI loans represented loans acquired with evidence of credit quality deterioration since origination, in accordance with ASC 310-30. Loan agings disclosed in comparative periods are based upon contractually required payments. As a result of the adoption of ASU 2016-13, the Company transitioned all previously classified PCI loans to PCD loans effective January 1, 2020.
As of December 31, 2020, $41.6 million of all loans, or 0.1%, were 60 to 89 days past due and $139.1 million, or 0.4%, were 30 to 59 days (or one payment) past due. As of December 31, 2019, $50.5 million of all loans, or 0.2%, were 60 to 89 days past due and $248.2 million, or 0.9%, were 30 to 59 days (or one payment) past due. Many of the commercial and commercial real estate loans shown as 60 to 89 days and 30 to 59 days past due are included on the Company’s internal problem loan reporting system. Loans on this system are closely monitored by management on a monthly basis.
The Company’s home equity and residential loan portfolios continue to exhibit low delinquency ratios. Home equity loans at December 31, 2020 that are current with regard to the contractual terms of the loan agreement represent 98.3% of the total
home equity portfolio. Residential real estate loans at December 31, 2020 that are current with regards to the contractual terms of the loan agreements comprise 96.8% of these residential real estate loans outstanding.
Non-performing Loans Rollforward
The table below presents a summary of non-performing loans for the periods presented:
(1)This includes activity for premium finance receivables and indirect consumer loans.
Prior to January 1, 2020, PCI loans were excluded from non-performing loans as they continued to earn interest income from the related accretable yield, independent of performance with contractual terms of the loan. As a result of the adoption of ASU 2016-13 effective January 1, 2020, the Company transitioned all previously classified PCI loans to PCD loans, which no longer maintain the prior pools and related accounting concepts. Specifically, recognition of interest income on PCD loans is considered at the individual asset level following the Company's accrual policies, instead of based upon the entire pool of loans. As such, after adoption, the Company includes PCD loans in total non-performing loans.
Allowance for Credit Losses
The allowance for credit losses, specifically the allowance for loan losses and the allowance for unfunded commitment losses, represents management’s estimate of lifetime expected credit losses in the loan portfolio. The allowance for credit losses is determined quarterly using a methodology that incorporates important risk characteristics of each loan, as described below under “How We Determine the Allowance for Credit Losses” in this Item 7.
The following table sets forth the allocation of the allowance for credit losses by major loan type and the percentage of loans in each category to total loans for the past five fiscal years:
Management determined that the allowance for credit losses was appropriate at December 31, 2020, and that the loan portfolio is well diversified and well secured, without undue concentration in any specific risk area. While this process involves a high degree of management judgment, the allowance for credit losses is based on a comprehensive, well documented, and consistently applied analysis of the Company’s loan portfolio. This analysis takes into consideration all available information existing as of the financial statement date, including environmental factors such as economic, industry, geographical and political factors, when considered applicable. The relative level of allowance for credit losses is reviewed and compared to industry peers. This review encompasses levels of total non-performing loans, portfolio mix, portfolio concentrations and overall levels of net charge-off. Historical trending of both the Company’s results and the industry peers is also reviewed to analyze comparative significance.
Allowance for Credit Losses, Excluding Covered Loans
The following tables summarize the activity in our allowance for credit losses, specifically related to loans and unfunded lending-related commitments, during the last five fiscal years.
(1)Includes $742,000 of allowance for covered loan losses reclassified as a result of the termination of all existing loss share agreements with the FDIC during the fourth quarter of 2017.
The allowance for credit losses, excluding the allowance for covered loan losses, is comprised of an allowance for loan losses, which is determined with respect to loans that we have originated, and an allowance for unfunded commitment losses. A separate allowance for held-to-maturity securities losses is measured related to such debt securities portfolio. Our allowance for unfunded commitment losses is determined with respect to funds that we have committed to lend but for which funds have not yet been disbursed and is computed using a methodology similar to that used to determine the allowance for loan losses. The allowance for unfunded lending-related commitments totaled $60.5 million as of December 31, 2020 compared to $1.6 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase in allowance for unfunded lending-related commitments in 2020 was primarily the result of the adoption of CECL as of January 1, 2020 and deterioration in macroeconomic conditions subsequent to that date related to COVID-19.
Additions to the allowance for credit losses are charged to earnings through the provision for credit losses. Charge-offs represent the amount of loans that have been determined to be uncollectible during a given period, and are deducted from the allowance for credit losses, and recoveries represent the amount of collections received from loans that had previously been charged off, and are credited to the allowance for credit losses. See Note 5 of the Consolidated Financial Statements presented under Item 8 of this report for further discussion of activity within the allowance for credit losses during the period and the relationship with respective loan balances for each loan category and the total loan portfolio.
How We Determine the Allowance for Credit Losses
The allowance for credit losses is measured on a collective or pooled basis by loans that share similar risk characteristics. If the loan no longer exhibits risk characteristics similar to that of a pool, typically due to credit deterioration of the related borrower, the Company analyzes the loan for purposes of individually assessing a specific allowance for credit loss as part of the Problem Loan Reporting system review. A separate reserve is collectively measured for loans continuing to share risk characteristics and, as a result, remaining in the pools. See Note 5 of the Consolidated Financial Statements presented under Item 8 of this report for further discussion of the allowance for credit losses measurement process.
Collective Measurement
The allowance for credit losses is measured on a collective or pooled basis when similar risk characteristics exist, based upon the segmentation discussed above. The Company utilizes modeling methodologies that estimate lifetime credit loss rates on each pool, including methodologies estimating the probability of default and loss given default on specific segments. Historical credit loss history is adjusted for reasonable and supportable forecasts developed by the Company on a quantitative or qualitative basis and incorporates third party economic forecasts. Reasonable and supportable forecasts consider the macroeconomic factors that are most relevant to evaluating and predicting expected credit losses in the Company's financial assets. Currently, the Company utilizes an eight quarter forecast period using a single macroeconomic scenario provided by a third-party and reviewed within the Company's governance structure. For periods beyond the ability to develop reasonable and supportable forecasts, the Company reverts to historical loss rates at an input level, straight-line over a four quarter reversion period. Expected credit losses are measured over the contractual term of the financial asset with consideration of expected prepayments. Expected extensions, renewals or modifications of the financial asset are only considered when either 1) the expected extension, renewal or modification is contained within the existing agreement and is not unconditionally cancelable, or 2) the expected extension, renewal or modification is reasonably expected to result in a TDR. The methodologies discussed above are applied to both current asset balances on the Company's Consolidated Statements of Condition and off-balance sheet commitments (i.e. unfunded lending-related commitments).
Individual Assessment
Loans with a credit risk rating of a 6 through 9 are reviewed on a monthly basis to determine if (a) an amount is deemed uncollectible (a charge-off) or (b) it is probable that the Company will be unable to collect amounts due in accordance with the original contractual terms of the loan. In cases in which collectability is not probable, the loan is considered to no longer exhibit shared risk characteristics of a pool and as a result, is individually assessed for allowance for credit losses measurement purposes. If a loan is individually assessed, the carrying amount of the loan is compared to the expected payments to be received, discounted at the loan’s original rate, or for foreclosure-probable and collateral dependent loans, to the fair value of the collateral less the estimated cost to sell, when appropriate under accounting rules. Any shortfall is recorded as a specific reserve within the allowance for credit losses.
Home Equity, Residential Real Estate and Consumer Loans
The determination of the appropriate allowance for credit losses for home equity, residential real estate and consumer loans differs from the process used for commercial and commercial real estate loans. These portfolios utilize the weighted-average remaining maturity ("WARM") methodology. The WARM methodology is an assumption-based approach that utilizes historical loss and prepayment information as the basis to estimate prepayment and credit adjusted contractual cash flows. The Company considers a qualitative factor to adjust historical information for current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts. The same credit risk rating system and Problem Loan Reporting systems are used. The only significant difference is in how the credit risk ratings are assigned to these loans.
The home equity loan portfolio is reviewed on a loan by loan basis by analyzing current FICO scores of the borrowers, line availability, recent line usage, an approaching maturity and the aging status of the loan. Certain of these factors, or combination of these factors, may cause a portion of the credit risk ratings of home equity loans across all banks to be downgraded. Similar to commercial and commercial real estate loans, once a home equity loan’s credit risk rating is downgraded to a 6 through 9, the
Company’s Managed Asset Division reviews and advises the subsidiary banks as to collateral valuations and as to the ultimate resolution of the credits that deteriorate to a non-accrual status to minimize losses.
Residential real estate loans that are downgraded to a credit risk rating of 6 through 9 also enter the problem loan reporting system and have the underlying collateral evaluated by the Managed Assets Division.
Premium Finance Receivables
The determination of the appropriate allowance for credit losses for premium finance receivables is an assumption-based approach focusing on historical loss rates in the portfolio, adjusted qualitatively for current macroeconomic conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts.
Methodology in Assessing Impairment and Charge-off Amounts
In determining the amount of reserves or charge-offs associated with collateral dependent loans, the Company values the loan generally by starting with a valuation obtained from an appraisal of the underlying collateral and then deducting estimated selling costs, if appropriate, to arrive at a net appraised value. We obtain the appraisals of the underlying collateral typically on an annual basis from one of a pre-approved list of independent, third party appraisal firms. Types of appraisal valuations include “as-is,” “as-complete,” “as-stabilized,” bulk, fair market, liquidation and “retail sellout” values.
In many cases, the Company simultaneously values the underlying collateral by marketing the property to market participants interested in purchasing properties of the same type. If the Company receives offers or indications of interest, we will analyze the price and review market conditions to assess whether in light of such information the appraised value overstates the likely price and that a lower price would be a better assessment of the market value of the property and would enable us to liquidate the collateral. Additionally, the Company takes into account the strength of any guarantees or other credit enhancements, and the ability of the borrower to provide value related to those guarantees in determining the ultimate charge-off or reserve associated with any individually assessed loans. Accordingly, the Company may charge-off a loan to a value below the net appraised value if it believes that an expeditious liquidation is desirable in the circumstance and it has legitimate offers or other indications of interest to support a value that is less than the net appraised value. Alternatively, the Company may carry a loan at a value that is in excess of the appraised value if the Company has a guarantee from a borrower or other credit enhancements that the Company believes has realizable value. In evaluating the strength of any guarantee, the Company evaluates the financial wherewithal of the guarantor, the guarantor’s reputation, and the guarantor’s willingness and desire to work with the Company. The Company then conducts a review of the strength of a guarantee on a frequency established as the circumstances and conditions of the borrower warrant.
In circumstances where the Company has received an appraisal but has no third party offers or indications of interest, the Company may enlist the input of realtors in the local market as to the highest valuation that the realtor believes would result in a liquidation of the property given a reasonable marketing period of approximately 90 days. To the extent that the realtors’ indication of market clearing price under such scenario is less than the net appraised valuation, the Company may take a charge-off on the loan to a valuation that is less than the net appraised valuation.
The Company may also charge-off a loan below the net appraised valuation if the Company holds a junior mortgage position in a piece of collateral whereby the risk to acquiring control of the property through the purchase of the senior mortgage position is deemed to potentially increase the risk of loss upon liquidation due to the amount of time to ultimately market the property and the volatile market conditions. In such cases, the Company may abandon its junior mortgage and charge-off the loan balance in full.
In other cases, the Company may allow the borrower to conduct a “short sale,” which is a sale where the Company allows the borrower to sell the property at a value less than the amount of the loan. Many times, it is possible for the current owner to receive a better price than if the property is marketed by a financial institution which the market place perceives to have a greater desire to liquidate the property at a lower price. To the extent that we allow a short sale at a price below the value indicated by an appraisal, we may take a charge-off beyond the value that an appraisal would have indicated.
Other market conditions may require a reserve to bring the carrying value of the loan below the net appraised valuation such as litigation surrounding the borrower and/or property securing our loan or other market conditions impacting the value of the collateral.
Having determined the net value based on the factors such as those noted above and compared that value to the book value of the loan, the Company arrives at a charge-off amount or a specific reserve included in the allowance for credit losses. In
summary, for collateral dependent loans, appraisals are used as the fair value starting point in the estimate of net value. Estimated costs to sell are deducted from the appraised value, when appropriate under current accounting rules, to arrive at the net appraised value. Although an external appraisal is the primary source of valuation utilized for charge-offs on collateral dependent loans, alternative sources of valuation may become available between appraisal dates. As a result, we may utilize values obtained through these alternative sources, which include purchase and sale agreements, legitimate indications of interest, negotiated short sales, realtor price opinions, sale of the note or support from guarantors, as the basis for charge-offs. These alternative sources of value are used only if deemed to be more representative of value based on updated information regarding collateral resolution. In addition, if an appraisal is not deemed current, a discount to appraised value may be utilized. Any adjustments from appraised value to net value are detailed and justified in an impairment analysis, which is reviewed and approved by the Company’s Managed Assets Division.
TDRs
At December 31, 2020, the Company had $68.2 million in loans modified in as TDRs. The $68.2 million in TDRs represents 286 credits in which economic concessions were granted to certain borrowers to better align the terms of their loans with their current ability to pay. The balance increased from $63.8 million representing 255 credits at December 31, 2019.
Concessions were granted on a case-by-case basis working with these borrowers to find modified terms that would assist them in retaining their businesses or their homes and attempt to keep these loans in an accruing status for the Company. Typical concessions include reduction of the interest rate on the loan to a rate considered lower than market and other modification of terms including forgiveness of a portion of the loan balance, extension of the maturity date, and/or modifications from principal and interest payments to interest-only payments for a certain period. See Note 5, “Allowance for Credit Losses” of Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion regarding the effectiveness of these modifications in keeping the modified loans current based upon contractual terms.
Subsequent to its restructuring, any TDR that becomes nonaccrual or more than 90 days past-due and still accruing interest will be included in the Company’s nonperforming loans. Each TDR was individually assessed when measuring the allowance for credit losses at December 31, 2020 and approximately $2.9 million was appropriately reserved for through the Company’s normal reserving methodology in the Company’s allowance for credit losses. Additionally, at December 31, 2020, the Company was committed to lend additional funds to borrowers totaling $1.1 million under the contractual terms related to TDRs compared to no commitments to lend additional funds to borrowers at December 31, 2019.
The table below presents a summary of TDRs for the respective periods, presented by loan category and accrual status:
(1)Included in total non-performing loans.
TDR Rollforward
The table below presents a summary of TDRs as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, and shows the changes in the balance during those periods:
(1)Loan was previously classified as a TDR and subsequently performed in compliance with the loan’s modified terms for a period of six months (including over a calendar year-end) at a modified interest rate which represented a market rate at the time of restructuring. Per our TDR policy, the TDR classification is removed.
On March 22, 2020 interagency guidance was issued titled “Interagency Statement on Loan Modifications and Reporting for Financial Institutions Working with Customers Affected by the Coronavirus” that encourages financial institutions to work prudently with borrowers who are or may be unable to meet their contractual payment obligations due to the effect of COVID-19. Additionally, Section 4013 of the CARES Act further provides that a qualified loan modification is exempt by law from classification as a TDR as defined by GAAP, from the period beginning March 1, 2020, until the earlier of December 31, 2020 (subsequently extended to January 1, 2022 under CAA), or the date that is 60 days after the date on which the national emergency concerning COVID-19 outbreak declared by the President of the United States under the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) terminates. Accordingly, we are offering short-term modifications made in response to COVID-19 to borrowers who are current and otherwise not past due. These include short-term, 180 days or less, modifications in the form of payment deferrals, fee waivers, extensions of repayment terms, or other delays in payment that are insignificant. Modifications qualifying for the exemption from TDR classification totaled approximately $279.6 million as of December 31, 2020.
The table below presents a summary of all COVID-19 related modified loans, including those not qualifying for the exemption under Section 4013, as of December 31, 2020, presented by loan category and type of modification:
Potential Problem Loans
Management believes that any loan where there are serious doubts as to the ability of such borrowers to comply with the present loan repayment terms should be identified as a non-performing loan and should be included in the disclosure of “Past Due Loans and Non-Performing Assets.” At the periods presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the Company has no potential problem loans as defined by SEC regulations.
Loan Concentrations
Loan concentrations are considered to exist when there are amounts loaned to multiple borrowers engaged in similar activities which would cause them to be similarly impacted by economic or other conditions. The Company had no concentrations of loans exceeding 10% of total loans at December 31, 2020, except for loans included in the specialty finance operating segment, which are diversified throughout the United States and Canada.
Other Real Estate Owned
In certain circumstances, the Company is required to take action against the real estate collateral of specific loans. The Company uses foreclosure only as a last resort for dealing with borrowers experiencing financial hardships. The Company employs extensive contact and restructuring procedures to attempt to find other solutions for our borrowers. The tables below present a summary of other real estate owned and shows the activity for the respective periods and the balance for each property type:
Deposits and Other Funding Sources
Total deposits at December 31, 2020, were $37.1 billion, increasing $7.0 billion, or 23%, compared to the $30.1 billion at December 31, 2019. Average deposit balances in 2020 were $34.0 billion, reflecting an increase of $6.6 billion, or 24%, compared to the average balances in 2019.
The increase in year end and average deposits in 2020 over 2019 is primarily attributable to additional deposits related to PPP lending and the Company's continued overall growth during 2020. Average non-interest bearing deposits increased $2.7 billion, or 41% in 2020 compared to 2019, with period end balances ending at 32% of total deposits at December 31, 2020, compared to 24% at December 31, 2019.
The following table presents the composition of average deposits by product category for each of the last three years:
Wealth management deposits are funds from the brokerage customers of Wintrust Investments, CDEC, trust and asset management customers of the Company and brokerage customers from unaffiliated companies which have been placed into deposit accounts of the banks (“wealth management deposits” in the table above). Wealth management deposits consist primarily of money market accounts. Consistent with reasonable interest rate risk parameters, these funds have generally been invested in loan production of the banks as well as other investments suitable for banks.
The following table presents average deposit balances for each bank and the relative percentage of total consolidated average deposits held by each bank during each of the past three years:
Average deposit balances for each bank as a percentage of total consolidated average deposits held by each bank remained relatively consistent between 2019 and 2020. Increase in average deposit balances were primarily attributable to additional deposits related to PPP lending and the Company's continued overall growth during 2020.
Other Funding Sources. Although deposits are the Company’s primary source of funding its interest-earning assets, the Company’s ability to manage the types and terms of deposits is somewhat limited by customer preferences and market competition. As a result, in addition to deposits and the issuance of equity securities and the retention of earnings, the Company uses several other funding sources to support its growth. These sources include short-term borrowings, notes payable, FHLB advances, subordinated debt, secured borrowings and junior subordinated debentures. The Company evaluates the terms and unique characteristics of each source, as well as its asset-liability management position, in determining the use of such funding sources.
The following table sets forth, by category, the composition of the average balances of other funding sources for the periods presented:
Notes payable balances represent the balances on a $200.0 million loan agreement (“Credit Agreement”) with unaffiliated banks consisting of a $50.0 million revolving credit facility (“Revolving Credit Facility”) and a $150.0 million term facility (“Term Facility”). Both the Revolving Credit Facility and the Term Facility are available for corporate purposes such as to provide capital to fund continued growth at existing bank subsidiaries, possible future acquisitions and for other general corporate matters. At December 31, 2020, the Company had a notes payable balance of $101.7 million under the Term Facility. At December 31, 2020, the Company had no outstanding balance under the Revolving Credit Facility. See Note 13, “Other Borrowings,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for further discussion of notes payable.
FHLB advances provide the banks with access to fixed-rate funds which are useful in mitigating interest rate risk and achieving an acceptable interest rate spread on fixed-rate loans or securities. FHLB advances to the banks totaled $1.2 billion at December 31, 2020 and $674.9 million at December 31, 2019. See Note 11, “Federal Home Loan Bank Advances,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for further discussion of the terms of these advances.
The balance of secured borrowings primarily represents a third party Canadian transaction (“Canadian Secured Borrowing”). Under the Canadian Secured Borrowing, the Company, through its subsidiary, FIFC Canada, sells an undivided co-ownership interest in all receivables owed to FIFC Canada to an unrelated third party in exchange for cash payments pursuant to a receivables purchase agreement (“Receivables Purchase Agreement”). See Note 13, “Other Borrowings,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for further discussion of these secured borrowings under this agreement. At December 31, 2020, the translated balance of the secured borrowings totaled $329.9 million.
At December 31, 2020 and 2019, subordinated notes totaled $436.5 million and $436.1 million, respectively. During 2019, the Company issued $300.0 million of subordinated notes receiving $296.7 million in proceeds, net of underwriting discount. The notes have a stated interest rate of 4.85% and mature in June 2029. During 2014, the Company issued $140.0 million of subordinated notes receiving $139.1 million in proceeds, net of underwriting discount. The notes have a stated interest rate of 5.00% and mature in June 2024. See Note 12, “Subordinated Notes,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for further discussion.
Short-term borrowings include securities sold under repurchase agreements and federal funds purchased. These borrowings totaled $11.4 million and $20.5 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Securities sold under repurchase agreements represent sweep accounts for certain customers in connection with master repurchase agreements at the banks as well as short-term borrowings from banks and brokers. This funding category typically fluctuates based on customer preferences and daily liquidity needs of the banks, their customers and the banks’ operating subsidiaries. See Note 13, “Other Borrowings,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for further discussion of these borrowings.
The Company has $253.6 million of junior subordinated debentures outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. The amounts reflected on the balance sheet represent the junior subordinated debentures issued to eleven trusts by the Company and equal the amount of the preferred and common securities issued by the trusts. See Note 14, “Junior Subordinated Debentures,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for further discussion of the Company’s junior subordinated debentures. Starting in 2016, none of the junior subordinated debentures qualified as Tier 1 regulatory capital of the Company resulting in $245.5 million of the junior subordinated debentures, net of common securities, being included in the Company's Tier 2 regulatory capital.
Other borrowings at December 31, 2020 include a fixed-rate promissory note issued by the Company in June 2017 and amended in March 2020 (“Fixed-Rate Promissory Note”) related to and secured by three office buildings owned by the Company. At December 31, 2020, the Fixed-Rate Promissory Note had a balance of $65.1 million. Under the Fixed-Rate Promissory Note, during the three months ended March 31, 2020, the Company made monthly principal payments and paid interest at a fixed rate of 3.36%. An amendment to the Fixed-Rate Promissory Note was executed on and became effective as of March 31, 2020. The amendment increased the principal amount to $66.4 million, reduced the interest rate to 3.00% and extended the maturity date to March 31, 2025. See Note 13, “Other Borrowings,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for further discussion of these borrowings.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company will continue to manage funding sources discussed above, including the utilization of availability with the FHLB and FRB and the Revolving Credit Facility with unaffiliated banks, to access needed liquidity in a timely manner.
Shareholders’ Equity. Total shareholders’ equity was $4.1 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $424.7 million from the December 31, 2019 total of $3.7 billion. The increase in 2020 was primarily a result of net income of $293.0 million, $277.6 million of net proceeds from the issuance of shares of Series E preferred stock in May 2020, $55.8 million in net unrealized gains from investment securities, net of tax, $13.7 million from the issuance of shares of the Company's common stock pursuant to various stock compensation plans, net of treasury shares, and $4.3 million of foreign currency translation adjustments, net of tax, partially offset by common stock repurchased under authorized program of $92.1 million, common stock dividends of $64.5 million and preferred stock dividends of $21.4 million, $9.9 million of net unrealized losses on cash flow hedges, net of tax, $4.9 million debited to surplus for stock-based compensation costs and a one-time cumulative effect adjustment from the adoption of ASU 2016-13, net of tax, of $26.7 million. See Note 23, “Shareholders’ Equity,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for further discussion of shareholders’ equity.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company and the banks are subject to various regulatory capital requirements established by the federal banking agencies that take into account risk attributable to balance sheet and off-balance sheet activities. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate certain mandatory - and possibly discretionary - actions by regulators, that if undertaken could have a direct material effect on the Company’s financial statements. Under capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action, the Company and the banks must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative measures of the Company’s assets, liabilities, and certain off-balance sheet items as calculated under regulatory accounting practices. The Federal Reserve’s capital guidelines require bank holding companies to maintain a minimum ratio of qualifying total capital to risk-weighted assets of 8.0%, of which at least 4.50% must be in the form of Common Equity Tier 1 capital and 6.0% must be in the form of Tier 1 capital. The Federal Reserve also requires a minimum leverage ratio of Tier 1 capital to total assets of 4.0%. In addition, the Federal Reserve continues to consider the Tier 1 leverage ratio in evaluating proposals for expansion or new activities.
The following table summarizes the capital guidelines for bank holding companies as of December 31, 2020, as well as certain ratios relating to the Company’s equity and assets as of December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018:
(1)Reflects the Capital Conservation Buffer of 2.5%.
(2)Reflects the well-capitalized standard applicable to the Company for purposes of the Federal Reserve’s Regulation Y. The Federal Reserve has not yet revised the well-capitalized standard for BHCs to reflect the higher capital requirements imposed under the U.S. Basel III Rule or to add Common Equity Tier 1 capital ratio and Tier 1 leverage ratio requirements to this standard. As a result, the Common Equity Tier 1 capital ratio and Tier 1 leverage ratio are denoted as “N/A” in this column. If the Federal Reserve were to apply the same or a very similar well-capitalized standard to BHCs as the standard applicable to our subsidiary banks, the Company’s capital ratios as of December 31, 2020 would exceed such revised well-capitalized standard.
As reflected in the table, each of the Company’s capital ratios at December 31, 2020, exceeded the well-capitalized ratios established by the Federal Reserve. Refer to Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for further information on the capital positions of the banks.
The Company’s principal sources of funds at the holding company level are dividends from its subsidiaries, borrowings under its loan agreement with unaffiliated banks and proceeds from the issuances of subordinated debt and additional equity. Refer to Notes 12, 13, 14 and 23 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for further information on the Company’s subordinated notes, other borrowings, junior subordinated debentures and shareholders’ equity, respectively. Management is committed to maintaining the Company’s capital levels above the “Well Capitalized” levels established by the Federal Reserve for bank holding companies.
In June 2015, the Company issued and sold 5,000,000 shares of fixed-to-floating non-cumulative perpetual preferred stock, Series D, liquidation preference of $25 per share (the “Series D Preferred Stock”) for $125.0 million in a public offering. When, as and if declared, dividends on the Series D Preferred Stock are payable quarterly in arrears at a rate of 6.50% per annum from the original issuance date to, but excluding, July 15, 2025, and from (and including) that date at a floating rate equal to three-month LIBOR plus a spread of 4.06% per annum. The dividend rate of such floating rate dividends will be reset quarterly. The Company received proceeds, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and related costs, of approximately $120.8 million from the issuance, which were intended to be used for general corporate purposes. The Series D Preferred Stock is listed on the NASDAQ Global Select Market under the symbol “WTFCM.” In January, April, July and October of 2020, Wintrust declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.41 per share of Series D preferred stock.
In May 2020, the Company issued 11,500 shares of fixed-rate reset non-cumulative perpetual preferred stock, Series E, liquidation preference $25,000 per share (the “Series E Preferred Stock”) as part of a $287.5 million public offering of 11,500,000 depositary shares, each representing a 1/1,000th interest in a share of Series E Preferred Stock. When, as and if declared, dividends on the Series E Preferred Stock are payable quarterly in arrears at a fixed rate of 6.875% per annum. In July and October of 2020, Wintrust declared a quarterly cash dividend of $716.15 and $429.69, respectively, per share of Series E preferred stock.
The Board approved the first semi-annual dividend on the Company’s common stock in January 2000 and continued to approve semi-annual dividends until quarterly dividends were approved starting in 2014. The payment of dividends is also subject to statutory restrictions and restrictions arising under the terms of the Company's Series D and Series E Preferred Stock, the Company’s trust preferred securities offerings units and under certain financial covenants in the Company’s revolving and term facilities. Under the terms of these separate facilities entered into on September 18, 2018, the Company is prohibited from paying dividends on any equity interests, including its common stock and preferred stock, if such payments would cause the Company to be in default under its facilities or exceed a certain threshold. In January, April, July and October of 2020, Wintrust declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.28 per common share. In January, April, July and October of 2019, Wintrust declared a
quarterly cash dividend of $0.25 per common share. In January of 2021, Wintrust declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.31 per common share. Taking into account the limitations on the payment of dividends, the final determination of timing, amount and payment of dividends is at the discretion of the Company’s Board of Directors and will depend on the Company’s earnings, financial condition, capital requirements and other relevant factors.
Banking laws impose restrictions upon the amount of dividends that can be paid to the holding company by the banks. Based on these laws, the banks could, subject to minimum capital requirements, declare dividends to the Company without obtaining regulatory approval in an amount not exceeding (a) undivided profits, and (b) the amount of net income reduced by dividends paid for the current and prior two years.
Since the banks are required to maintain their capital at the well-capitalized level (due to the Company being a financial holding company), funds otherwise available as dividends from the banks are limited to the amount that would not reduce any of the banks’ capital ratios below the well-capitalized level. During 2020, 2019 and 2018, the subsidiaries paid dividends to Wintrust totaling $253.0 million, $139.0 million, and $111.0 million, respectively. At January 1, 2021, subject to minimum capital requirements at the banks, approximately $467.1 million was available as dividends from the banks without prior regulatory approval and without compromising the banks’ well-capitalized positions.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company continues to leverage its capital management framework to assess and monitor risk when making capital decisions. The Company will continuously evaluate the adequacy of capital as a result of the uncertainty from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Liquidity management at the banks involves planning to meet anticipated funding needs at a reasonable cost. Liquidity management is guided by policies, formulated and monitored by the Company’s senior management and each Bank’s asset/liability committee, which take into account the marketability of assets, the sources and stability of funding and the level of unfunded commitments. The banks’ principal sources of funds are deposits, short-term borrowings and capital contributions from the holding company. In addition, the banks are eligible to borrow under FHLB advances and at the FRB Discount Window, another source of liquidity.
In accordance with the liquidity management noted above, deposit growth and increases in borrowings from various sources have resulted in accumulating liquidity assets in recent periods. In 2020, we increased our liquid assets to ensure that we have the balance sheet strength to serve our clients through the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, the Company believes that it has sufficient funds and access to funds to effectively manage through the COVID-19 pandemic as well as meet its working capital and other needs. The Company will continue to prudently evaluate liquidity sources, including the management of availability with the FHLB and FRB and utilization of the revolving credit facility with unaffiliated banks.
Core deposits are the most stable source of liquidity for community banks due to the nature of long-term relationships generally established with depositors and the security of deposit insurance provided by the FDIC. Core deposits are generally defined in the industry as total deposits less time deposits with balances greater than $100,000. Due to the affluent nature of many of the communities that the Company serves, management believes that many of its time deposits with balances in excess of $100,000 are also a stable source of funds. Currently, standard deposit insurance coverage is $250,000 per depositor per insured bank, for each account ownership category.
While the Company obtains a portion of its total deposits through brokered deposits, the Company does so primarily as an asset-liability management tool to assist in the management of interest rate risk, and the Company does not consider brokered deposits to be a vital component of its current liquidity resources. Historically, brokered deposits have represented a small component of the Company’s total deposits outstanding, as set forth in the table below:
(1)Brokered Deposits include certificates of deposit obtained through deposit brokers, deposits received through the Certificate of Deposit Account Registry Program, as well as wealth management deposits of brokerage customers from unaffiliated companies which have been placed into deposit accounts of the banks.
The banks routinely accept deposits from a variety of municipal entities. Typically, these municipal entities require that banks pledge marketable securities to collateralize these public deposits. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, the banks had approximately $2.4 billion and $1.7 billion, respectively, of securities collateralizing public deposits and other short-term borrowings. Public deposits requiring pledged assets are not considered to be core deposits, however they provide the Company with a reliable, lower cost, short-term funding source than what is available through many other wholesale alternatives.
Other than as discussed in this section, the Company is not aware of any known trends, commitments, events, regulatory recommendations or uncertainties that would have any material adverse effect on the Company’s capital resources, operations or liquidity.
CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS, COMMITMENTS, CONTINGENT LIABILITIES AND OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
The Company has various financial obligations, including contractual obligations and commitments that may require future cash payments.
Contractual Obligations. The following table presents, as of December 31, 2020, significant fixed and determinable contractual obligations to third parties by payment date. Further discussion of the nature of each obligation is included in the referenced note to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8:
(1)Certain advances provide the FHLB with call dates which are not reflected in the above table.
(2)Purchase obligations presented above primarily relate to certain contractual cash obligations for pending acquisitions, marketing obligations and services related to the construction of facilities, data processing and the outsourcing of certain operational activities.
The Company also enters into derivative contracts under which the Company is required to either receive cash from or pay cash to counterparties depending on changes in interest rates. Derivative contracts are carried at fair value representing the net present value of expected future cash receipts or payments based on market rates as of the balance sheet date. Because the derivative assets and liabilities recorded on the balance sheet at December 31, 2020 do not represent the amounts that may ultimately be paid under these contracts, these assets and liabilities are not included in the table of contractual obligations presented above.
Commitments. The following table presents a summary of the amounts and expected maturities of significant commitments as of December 31, 2020. Further information on these commitments is included in Note 20 of the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Our remaining commitment to fund community investments totaled $28.5 million, which includes future cash outlays for the construction and development of properties for low-income housing, support for small businesses, and historic tax credit projects that qualify for CRA purposes. These commitments are not included in the commitments table above, as the timing and amounts are based upon the financing arrangements provided in each project’s partnership or operating agreement and could change due to variances in the construction schedule, project revisions, or the cancellation of the project.
Contingencies. The Company enters into residential mortgage loan sale agreements with investors in the normal course of business. These agreements usually require certain representations concerning credit information, loan documentation, collateral and insurability. Investors have requested the Company to indemnify them against losses on certain loans or to repurchase loans which the investors believe do not comply with applicable representations. Upon completion of its own investigation, the Company generally repurchases or provides indemnification on certain loans. Indemnification requests are generally received within two years subsequent to sale. Management maintains a liability for estimated losses on loans expected to be repurchased or on which indemnification is expected to be provided and regularly evaluates the adequacy of this recourse liability based on trends in repurchase and indemnification requests, actual loss experience, known and inherent risks in the loans and current economic conditions. At December 31, 2020, the liability for estimated losses on repurchase and indemnification was $0.8 million and was included in other liabilities on the balance sheet.