Item 7.
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
OVERVIEW
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes included in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based on management’s current expectations, estimates and projections about our business, operations and financial performance. All dollar amounts are in thousands of dollars, except per share amounts.
The Company
Essential Utilities, Inc., (referred to as “Essential Utilities”, the “Company”, “we”, “us”, or “our”), a Pennsylvania corporation, is the holding company for regulated utilities providing water, wastewater, or natural gas services to what we estimate to be almost five million people in Pennsylvania, Ohio, Texas, Illinois, North Carolina, New Jersey, Indiana, Virginia, West Virginia, and Kentucky under the Aqua and Peoples brands. One of our largest operating subsidiaries is Aqua Pennsylvania, Inc., which accounted for approximately 55% of operating revenues and approximately 67% of income for our Regulated Water segment in 2020. As of December 31, 2020, Aqua Pennsylvania provided water or wastewater services to approximately one-half of the total number of water and wastewater customers we serve. Aqua Pennsylvania’s service territory is located in the suburban areas in counties north and west of the City of Philadelphia and in 27 other counties in Pennsylvania. Our other regulated water utility subsidiaries provide similar services in seven additional states. Additionally, pursuant to the Company’ growth strategy, commencing on March 16, 2020, with the completion of the Peoples Gas Acquisition, the Company began to provide natural gas distribution services to customers in western Pennsylvania, Kentucky, and West Virginia. Approximately 93% of the total number of natural gas utility customers we serve are in western Pennsylvania. Lastly, the Company’s market-based activities are conducted through Aqua Infrastructure, LLC and Aqua Resources, Inc. and certain other non-regulated subsidiaries of Peoples. Prior to our October 30, 2020 sale of our investment in a joint venture, Aqua Infrastructure provided non-utility raw water supply services for firms in the natural gas drilling industry. Aqua Resources offers through a third-party, water and sewer line protection solutions and repair services to households.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The impact of the global outbreak of the current novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) pandemic has created significant volatility in the global economy and at times have led to reduced economic activity. We are monitoring the global outbreak of COVID-19 and taking steps to mitigate the potential risks to our employees and our customers posed by its spread, as described below.
We provide a critical service to our customers, which means that it is paramount that we keep our employees who operate the business safe and informed. For example, we have taken precautions with regard to employee and facility hygiene, imposed travel restrictions on our employees and at time have directed our employees to work remotely wherever possible depending on the operating location and status of state and local regulations. We have implemented additional protocols for required work within customers’ premises to protect our employees, our customers and the public. Additionally, we have assessed and updated, where appropriate, our existing business continuity plan in the context of this pandemic, including our recent acquisition of Peoples. We also worked with our suppliers to understand the potential impacts to our supply chain. At this time, no material risks to our supply chain have been identified; however, if there were global shortages it could impact our maintenance and capital programs and the effects of any such impact cannot currently be anticipated. We continue to implement strong physical and cyber-security measures in an effort to ensure that our systems remain functional in order to both serve our operational needs with a remote workforce and maintain uninterrupted service to our customers. To maximize our financial flexibility in light of the uncertainty surrounding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we entered into a credit agreement on April 3, 2020, which provided the Company with a short-term borrowing facility of $500,000 in unsecured term loans, which was drawn, and subsequent to the Company’s $1,100,000 issuance of long-term debt on April 13, 2020, in May and June of 2020 the Company repaid $300,000 and $200,000 of the term loan, respectively, and based on the Company’s ability to access financial markets, we terminated the facility.
This continues to be a rapidly evolving situation, and we will continue to monitor developments affecting our business, workforce, and suppliers and take additional precautions as we believe are warranted. We are actively monitoring our
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
utility billings and have noticed increases in residential water customer usage offset by decreases in commercial and industrial usage. In response to concerns about customer economic hardship and affordability during the COVID-19 health crisis, our state regulators mandated the temporary curtailment of certain collection practices, such as disconnections from utility service. In addition, we are monitoring collections of customer utility accounts as to potential impacts on cash flows, and increased expenses for costs associated with workforce-related expenses, security and cleaning of company offices and operating facilities, as well as other one-time expenses above the expense amounts included in general rates. In some of the states where we operate, regulators have allowed utilities to resume disconnections from utility service for certain customers who have unpaid balances. Some public utility commission are issuing guidance for utilities to defer COVID-19 expenses in anticipation of seeking recovery in a future rate proceeding, and we are currently evaluating the impact of this guidance. We are continuing with our capital investment program, and based on the current situation, continue to believe we are able to complete the planned projects and improvements to our utility infrastructure. Despite our efforts, the ultimate impact to the Company of the COVID-19 pandemic also depends on factors beyond our knowledge or control, including the duration and severity of this pandemic as well as third party actions taken to contain its spread and mitigate its public health effects. Although we have experienced that some of our customers are facing economic hardships due to various impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and may be unable to pay for our utility services, we do not currently anticipate a significant impact to our financial position, results of operations or cash flows as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Industry Mission
The mission of the regulated utility industry is to provide quality and reliable utility service at reasonable rates to customers, while earning a fair return for shareholders. A number of challenges face the utility industry, including:
strict environmental, health and safety standards;
aging utility infrastructure and the need for substantial capital investment;
economic regulation by state, and/or, in some cases, local government;
declining consumption per customer as a result of conservation;
lawsuits and the need for insurance;
the impact of weather on natural gas sales demand; and
the impact of weather and sporadic drought conditions on water sales demand.
Economic Regulation
Most of our utility operations are subject to regulation by their respective state utility commissions, which have broad administrative power and authority to regulate billing rates, determine franchise areas and conditions of service, approve acquisitions, and authorize the issuance of securities. The utility commissions also generally establish uniform systems of accounts and approve the terms of contracts with affiliates and customers, business combinations with other utility systems, and loans and other financings. The policies of the utility commissions often differ from state to state and may change over time. A small number of our operations are subject to rate regulation by county or city government. Over time, the regulatory party in a particular state may change, as was the case for our Texas operations where, in 2014, economic regulation changed from the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality to the Public Utility Commission of Texas. The profitability of our utility operations is influenced to a great extent by the timeliness and adequacy of rate allowances in the various states in which we operate. One consideration we may undertake in evaluating on which states to focus our growth and investment strategy is whether a state provides for consolidated rates, a surcharge for replacing and rehabilitating infrastructure, fair value treatment of acquired utility systems, and other regulatory policies that promote infrastructure investment and efficiency in processing rate cases.
Rate Case Management Capability - We strive to achieve the industry’s mission by effective planning, efficient investments, and productive use of our resources. We maintain a rate case management capability to pursue timely and adequate returns on the capital investments that we make in improving our distribution system, treatment plants, information technology systems, and other infrastructure. This capital investment creates assets that are used and useful in providing utility service and is commonly referred to as rate base. Timely and adequate rate relief is important to our continued profitability and in providing a fair return to our shareholders; thus, providing access to capital markets to help fund these investments. Accordingly, the objective of our rate case management strategy is to provide that the rates of our utility operations reflect, to the extent practicable, the timely recovery of increases in costs of operations (primarily labor and employee benefits, electricity, chemicals, transportation, maintenance expenses, insurance and claims costs, and costs
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
to comply with environmental regulations), capital, and taxes. In pursuing our rate case strategy, we consider the amount of net utility plant additions and replacements made since the previous rate decision, the changes in the cost of capital, changes in our capital structure, and changes in operating and other costs. Based on these assessments, our utility operations periodically file rate increase requests with their respective state utility commissions or local regulatory authorities. In general, as a regulated enterprise, our utility rates are established to provide full recovery of utility operating costs, taxes, interest on debt used to finance capital investments, and a return on equity used to finance capital investments. Our ability to recover our expenses in a timely manner and earn a return on equity employed in the business helps determine the profitability of the Company. As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s rate base is estimated to be $8,000,000, which is comprised of:
$5,500,000 in the Regulated Water segment; and
$2,500,000 in the Regulated Natural Gas segment.
As of December 31, 2020, the regulatory status of the Company’s rate base is estimated to be as follows:
$7,000,000 filed with respective state utility commissions or local regulatory authorities; and
$1,000,000 not yet filed with respective state utility commissions or local regulatory authorities.
Our water and wastewater operations are composed of 46 rate divisions, and our natural gas operations are comprised of 5 rate divisions. Each of our utility rate divisions require a separate rate filing for the evaluation of the cost of service and recovery of investments in connection with the establishment of tariff rates for that rate division. When feasible and beneficial to our utility customers, we have sought approval from the applicable state utility commission to consolidate rate divisions to achieve a more even distribution of costs over a larger customer base. All of the eight states in which we operate water and wastewater utilities currently permit us to file a revenue requirement using some form of consolidated rates for some or all of the rate divisions in that state.
Revenue Surcharges - Seven states in which we operate water utilities, seven states in which we operate wastewater utilities, and two states in which we operate natural gas utilities permit us to add an infrastructure rehabilitation surcharge to their respective bills to offset the additional depreciation and capital costs associated with capital expenditures related to replacing and rehabilitating infrastructure systems. In our other states, utilities absorb all of the depreciation and capital costs of these projects between base rate increases without the benefit of additional revenues. The gap between the time that a capital project is completed and the recovery of its costs in rates is known as regulatory lag. This surcharge is intended to substantially reduce regulatory lag, which could act as a disincentive for utilities to rehabilitate their infrastructure. In addition, some states permit our subsidiaries to use a surcharge or credit on their bills to reflect allowable changes in costs, such as changes in state tax rates, other taxes and purchased water costs, until such time as the new costs are fully incorporated in base rates.
Effects of Inflation - Recovery of the effects of inflation through higher customer rates is dependent upon receiving adequate and timely rate increases. However, rate increases are not retroactive and often lag increases in costs caused by inflation. On occasion, our regulated utility companies may enter into rate settlement agreements, which require us to wait for a period of time to file the next base rate increase request. These agreements may result in regulatory lag whereby inflationary increases in expenses may not yet be reflected in rates, or a gap may exist between when a capital project is completed and the start of its recovery in rates. Even during periods of moderate inflation, the effects of inflation can have a negative impact on our operating results.
Growth-Through-Acquisition Strategy
Part of our strategy to meet the industry challenges is to actively explore opportunities to expand our utility operations through acquisitions of water, wastewater, natural gas, and other utilities either in areas adjacent to our existing service areas or in new service areas, and to explore acquiring market-based businesses that are complementary to our regulated utility operations. To complement our growth strategy, we routinely evaluate the operating performance of our individual utility systems, and in instances where limited economic growth opportunities exist or where we are unable to achieve favorable operating results or a return on equity that we consider acceptable, we will seek to sell the utility system and reinvest the proceeds in other utility systems. Consistent with this strategy, we are focusing our acquisitions and resources in states where we have critical mass of operations in an effort to achieve economies of scale and increased
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
efficiency. Our growth-through-acquisition strategy allows us to operate more efficiently by sharing operating expenses over more utility customers and provides new locations for future earnings growth through capital investment. Another element of our growth strategy is the consideration of opportunities to expand by acquiring other utilities, including those that may be in a new state if they provide promising economic growth opportunities and a return on equity that we consider acceptable. Our ability to successfully execute this strategy historically and to meet the industry challenges has largely been due to our core competencies, financial position, and our qualified and trained workforce, which we strive to retain by treating employees fairly and providing our employees with development and growth opportunities.
On March 16, 2020, we completed the acquisition of Peoples Natural Gas (the “Peoples Gas Acquisition”), which expanded the Company’s regulated utility business to include natural gas distribution, serving approximately 750,000 natural gas utility customers in western Pennsylvania, West Virginia, and Kentucky.
During 2020, in addition to the Peoples Gas Acquisition, we completed six acquisitions, which along with the organic growth in our existing systems, represents 24,169 new customers. During 2019, we completed eight acquisitions, which along with the organic growth in our existing systems, represents 21,613 new customers. During 2018, we completed nine acquisitions, which along with the organic growth in our existing systems, represents 22,741 new customers.
We believe that utility acquisitions, organic growth, and a potential expansion of our market-based business will continue to be the primary sources of growth for us. With approximately 50,000 public or private water utility systems in the U.S., 81% of which serve less than 3,300 customers, the water industry is the most fragmented of the major utility industries (telephone, natural gas, electric, water, and wastewater). In the states where we operate regulated water utilities, we believe there are approximately 14,000 public or private water utility systems of widely-varying size, with the majority of the population being served by government-owned water systems.
Although not as fragmented as the water industry, the wastewater industry in the U.S. also presents opportunities for consolidation. Based on the 2019 U.S. Census American Housing Survey, approximately 84% of the U.S. population relies on public or private sewer systems, and 16% of the U.S. population relies on septic tank, cesspool or other sewer options. The vast majority of wastewater facilities are government-owned rather than regulated utilities. In the states where we operate regulated water utilities, we believe there are approximately 4,000 wastewater facilities in operation, with the majority of the population being served by government-owned wastewater systems.
Because of the fragmented nature of the water and wastewater utility industries, we believe that there are many potential water and wastewater system acquisition candidates throughout the United States. We believe the factors driving the consolidation of these systems are:
the benefits of economies of scale;
the increasing cost and complexity of environmental regulations;
the need for substantial capital investment;
the need for technological and managerial expertise;
the desire to improve water quality and service;
limited access to cost-effective financing;
the monetizing of public assets to support, in some cases, the declining financial condition of municipalities; and
the use of system sale proceeds by a municipality to accomplish other public purposes.
We are actively exploring opportunities to expand our water and wastewater utility operations through regulated utility acquisitions or otherwise, including the management of publicly-owned facilities in a public-private partnership. We intend to continue to pursue acquisitions of government-owned and regulated water and wastewater utility systems that provide services in areas near our existing service territories or in new service areas. It is our intention to focus on growth opportunities in states where we have critical mass, which allows us to improve economies of scale through spreading our fixed costs over more customers - this cost efficiency should enable us to reduce the size of future rate increases. Currently, the Company seeks to acquire businesses in the U.S. regulated sector, which includes water, wastewater, and natural gas utilities and other regulated utilities, and to pursue growth ventures in market-based activities, by acquiring businesses that provide water and wastewater or other utility-related services and investing in infrastructure projects.
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
Sendout
Sendout represents the quantity of treated water delivered to our distribution systems. We use sendout as an indicator of customer demand. Weather conditions tend to impact water consumption, particularly during the late spring, summer, and early fall when discretionary and recreational use of water is at its highest. Consequently, a higher proportion of annual Regulated Water segment operating revenues are realized in the second and third quarters. In general, during this period, an extended period of hot and dry weather increases water consumption, while above-average rainfall and cool weather decreases water consumption. Conservation efforts, construction codes that require the use of low-flow plumbing fixtures, as well as mandated water use restrictions in response to drought conditions can reduce water consumption. We believe an increase in conservation awareness by our customers, including the increased use of more efficient plumbing fixtures and appliances, may continue to result in a long-term structural trend of declining water usage per customer. These gradual long-term changes are normally taken into account by the utility commissions in setting rates, whereas significant short-term changes in water usage, resulting from drought warnings, water use restrictions, or extreme weather conditions, may not be fully reflected in the rates we charge between rate proceedings. In Illinois, our operating subsidiary has adopted a revenue stability mechanism which allows us to recognize state PUC-authorized revenue for a period which is not based upon the volume of water sold during that period, and effectively lessens the impact of weather and consumption variability.
On occasion, drought warnings and water use restrictions are issued by governmental authorities for portions of our service territories in response to extended periods of dry weather conditions, regardless of our ability to meet unrestricted customer water demands. The timing and duration of the warnings and restrictions can have an impact on our water revenues and net income. In general, water consumption in the summer months is affected by drought warnings and restrictions to a higher degree because discretionary and recreational use of water is highest during the summer months, particularly in our northern service territories. At other times of the year, warnings and restrictions generally have less of an effect on water consumption. Portions of our northern and central Texas service areas have conservation water restrictions. Drought warnings and watches result in the public being asked to voluntarily reduce water consumption.
The geographic diversity of our utility customer base reduces the effect of our exposure to extreme or unusual weather conditions in any one area of the country. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our operating revenues for our Regulated Water segment were derived principally from the following states: approximately 54% in Pennsylvania, 12% in Ohio, 8% in Illinois, 8% in Texas, and 6% in North Carolina.
Performance Measures Considered by Management
We consider the following financial measures (and the period to period changes in these financial measures) to be the fundamental basis by which we evaluate our operating results:
earnings per share;
operating revenues;
gross margin;
earnings before interest, taxes, and depreciation (“EBITD”);
income adjusted to remove transaction-related expenses associated with the Peoples Gas Acquisition;
earnings before income taxes;
net income; and
the dividend rate on common stock.
In addition, we consider other key measures in evaluating our utility business performance within our Regulated Water and Natural Gas segments:
our number of utility customers;
the ratio of operations and maintenance expense compared to operating revenues (this percentage is termed “operating expense ratio”);
return on revenues (net income divided by operating revenues);
rate base growth;
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
return on equity (net income divided by stockholders’ equity); and
the ratio of capital expenditures to depreciation expense.
Some of these measures, like EBITD and gross margin, are non-GAAP financial measures. The Company believes that the non-GAAP financial measures provide management the ability to measure the Company’s financial operating performance across periods and as contrasted to historical financial results, which are more indicative of the Company’s ongoing performance and more comparable to measures reported by other companies. When the Company discloses such non-GAAP financial measures, we believe they are useful to investors as a meaningful way to compare the Company’s operating performance against its historical financial results. We believe EBITD is a relevant and useful indicator of operating performance, as we measure it for management purposes because it provides a better understanding of our results of operations by highlighting our operations and the underlying profitability of our core business. Furthermore, we review the measure of earnings before unusual items that are not directly related to our core business, such as the measure of adjusted earnings to remove the Peoples Gas Acquisition expenses, such as transaction expenses and the change in fair value of interest rate swap agreements, which were recognized in 2019 and 2018. Refer to Note 11 - Long-term Debt and Loans Payable in this Annual Report for information regarding the interest rate swap agreements.
We review these measurements regularly and compare them to historical periods, to our operating budget as approved by our Board of Directors, and to other publicly-traded utilities. Additionally, Our Regulated Natural Gas segment is affected by the cost of natural gas, which is passed through to customers using a purchased gas adjustment clause and includes commodity price, transportation and storage costs. These costs are reflected in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive income as purchased gas expenses. Therefore, fluctuations in the cost of purchased gas impact operating revenues on dollar-for-dollar basis, but does not impact gross margin. Management uses gross margin, a non-GAAP financial measure, defined as operating revenues less purchased gas expense, to analyze the financial performance of our Regulated Natural Gas segment, as management believes gross margin provides a meaningful basis for evaluating our natural gas utility operations since purchased gas expenses are included in operating revenues and passed through to customers.
Our operating expense ratio is one measure that we use to evaluate our operating efficiency and management effectiveness of our regulated operations. Our operating expense ratio is affected by a number of factors, including the following:
Regulatory lag - Our rate filings are designed to provide for the recovery of increases in costs of operations (primarily labor and employee benefits, electricity, chemicals, transportation, maintenance expenses, insurance and claim costs, and costs to comply with environmental regulations), capital, and taxes. The revenue portion of the operating expense ratio can be impacted by the timeliness of recovery of, and the return on capital investments. The operating expense ratio is further influenced by regulatory lag (increases in operations and maintenance expenses not yet recovered in rates or a gap between the time that a capital project is completed and the start of its cost recovery in rates). The operating expense ratio is also influenced by decreases in operating revenues without a commensurate decrease in operations and maintenance expense, such as changes in customer usage as impacted by adverse weather conditions, or conservation trends. Commencing in 2012, as a result of utility rates incorporating the effects of income tax benefits derived from deducting qualifying utility asset improvements for tax purposes that are capitalized for book purposes in Aqua Pennsylvania, the Company forwent operating revenue increases until its next rate case became effective in May 2019. During periods of inflation, our operations and maintenance expenses may increase, impacting the operating expense ratio, as a result of regulatory lag, since our rate cases may not be filed timely and are not retroactive.
Acquisitions - In general, acquisitions of smaller undercapitalized utility systems in some areas may initially increase our operating expense ratio if the operating revenues generated by these operations do not reflect the true cost of service and are accompanied by a higher ratio of operations and maintenance expenses as compared to other operational areas of the company that are more densely populated and have integrated operations. In these cases, the acquired operations are characterized as having relatively higher operating costs to fixed capital costs, in contrast to the majority of our operations, which generally consist of larger, interconnected systems, with higher fixed capital costs (utility plant investment) and lower operating costs per customer. For larger acquisitions, such
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
as the Peoples Gas Acquisition, we have incurred significant transaction expenses, which increase operations and maintenance expenses in periods prior to and in the period of the closing of the acquisition. In addition, we operate market-based subsidiary companies consisting of our non-regulated natural gas operations, Aqua Resources, and Aqua Infrastructure. The cost-structure of these market-based companies differs from our utility companies in that, although they may generate free cash flow, these companies may at times have a higher ratio of operations and maintenance expenses to operating revenues and a lower capital investment and, consequently, a lower ratio of fixed capital costs versus operating revenues in contrast to our regulated operations. As a result, the operating expense ratio is not comparable between the businesses. These market-based subsidiary companies are not a component of our Regulated Water or Regulated Natural Gas segments.
We continue to evaluate initiatives to help control operating costs and improve efficiencies.
‎
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
Consolidated Selected Financial and Operating Statistics
Our selected five year consolidated financial and operating statistics follow:
(1)Reflects Peoples Gas Acquisition transaction-related expenses of $20,925 ($25,573 pre-tax) in 2020, $18,246 ($22,891 pre-tax) in 2019, $11,611 ($14,184 pre-tax) in 2018; utility customer rate credits issued in 2020 of $23,004 (or $16,357 net of tax); a mark-to-market fair value adjustment expense for 2019 of $18,756 ($23,742 pre-tax) and 2018 of $47,225 ($59,779 pre-tax) associated with interest rate swap agreements entered into to mitigate interest rate risk associated with issuance of long-term debt to fund a portion of the Peoples Gas Acquisition; and in 2019 a $14,637 ($18,528 pre-tax) loss on debt extinguishment associated with the early redemption of $313,500 of the Company’s long-term debt.
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net income varies over time as a result of increases in operating income, timing of transaction expenses for acquisitions, including fluctuations in fair value adjustments for interest rate swap agreements entered into in connection with the Peoples Gas Acquisition, and other factors described below. During the past five years, our operating revenues grew at a compound rate of 12.4% and operating expenses grew at a compound rate of 15.9%. Operating expenses in 2020 grew higher than historic experience due to $25,573 of transaction-related expenses for the Peoples Gas Acquisition and the addition of Peoples’ operating expenses after the transaction closed on March 16, 2020.
Operating Segments
We have identified twelve operating segments and we have two reportable segments based on the following:
Eight segments are composed of our water and wastewater regulated utility operations in the eight states where we provide these services. These operating segments are aggregated into one reportable segment, Regulated Water, since each of these operating segments has the following similarities: economic characteristics, nature of services, production processes, customers, water distribution and/or wastewater collection methods, and the nature of the regulatory environment.
Our Regulated Natural Gas segment is composed of natural gas utility companies in three states acquired in the Peoples Gas Acquisition. These utilities provide natural gas distribution services, and their operating results subsequent to the March 16, 2020 acquisition date are reported in the Regulated Gas segment.
Three segments are not quantitatively significant to be reportable and are composed of our non-regulated natural gas operations, Aqua Resources, and Aqua Infrastructure. These segments are included as a component of “Other,” in addition to corporate costs that have not been allocated to the Regulated Water and Natural Gas segments, because they would not be recoverable as a cost of utility service, and intersegment eliminations. Corporate costs include general and administrative expenses, and interest expense.
‎
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
The following table provides the Regulated Water and Natural Gas segments and consolidated information for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
‎
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
Consolidated Results of Operations Comparison for 2020 and 2019
For the comparison of fiscal years 2019 and 2018, refer to Part II, Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for our fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, filed with the SEC on February 28, 2020. The following results of operations includes the operating results of Peoples Gas Acquisition or the Regulated Natural Gas segment for the period since the acquisition on March 16, 2020.
Operating Revenues - Operating revenues totaled $1,462,698 in 2020, $889,692 in 2019, and $838,091 in 2018. Our Regulated Water segment’s revenues totaled $938,540 in 2020, $886,430 in 2019, and $834,638 in 2018, and our Regulated Natural Gas segment’s revenues totaled $506,564 in 2020. The growth in our Regulated Water segment’s revenues over the past three years is a result of increases in our water and wastewater rates and our customer base. Rate increases implemented during the past three years have provided additional operating revenues of $32,660 in 2020, $55,658 in 2019, and $8,362 in 2018. In 2020, we experienced a decrease in water revenues of $1,402 as a result of a do not consume advisory that was initiated in mid-2019 for some of our customers served by our Illinois subsidiary, which we expect to continue into 2021. In 2019, the impact from this matter reduced water and wastewater revenues by $1,574. The number of customers increased at an annual compound rate of 22.3% over the past three years due to acquisitions and organic growth, adjusted to exclude customers associated with utility system dispositions. Acquisitions in our Regulated Water segment have provided additional water and wastewater revenues of $10,951 in 2020, $8,393 in 2019, and $3,877 in 2018. The Peoples Gas acquisition provided natural gas revenues of $520,944 in 2020, since the acquisition date.
Associated with the approval of the Peoples Gas Acquisition from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission, the Company provided $23,004 of one-time customer rate credits in 2020 to its Pennsylvania natural gas utility customers and water and wastewater customers served by Aqua Pennsylvania. Specifically, the Company granted $4,080 of customer rate credits to its water and wastewater customers in the third quarter of 2020, and $18,924 to its natural gas utility customers in the fourth quarter of 2020.
On March 31, 2020, the Company changed its method of tax accounting for certain qualifying infrastructure investments at its Peoples Natural Gas subsidiary. This change allows a tax deduction for qualifying utility asset improvement costs that were formerly capitalized for tax purposes. The Company uses flow-through accounting to record the income tax benefits of this change. In addition, the calculation of the income tax benefits for qualifying capital expenditures made prior to March 16, 2020 was completed and a regulatory liability of $160,155 was recorded to defer these tax benefits pending regulatory guidance.
In 2012, Aqua Pennsylvania changed its tax accounting method to permit the expensing of qualifying utility asset improvement costs that historically had been capitalized and depreciated for book and tax purposes. This change provided for the flow-through of income tax benefits that resulted in a substantial reduction in income tax expense and greater net income and cash flow. During 2020, 2019, and 2018, the income tax accounting change resulted in income tax benefits of $49,077, $66,816, and $64,183, that reduced the Company’s current income tax expense and increased net income. The Company recognized a tax deduction on its 2012 Federal tax return of $380,000 for qualifying capital expenditures made prior to 2012. Based on a rate case settlement agreement, beginning in 2013, the Company began to amortize these expenditures, which reduced income tax expense. In 2019, Aqua Pennsylvania filed a settlement for a base rate case, which incorporated the repair tax benefits, using a collar mechanism, and an adjusted amortization of the pre-2012 tax benefits into its cost of service. Incremental rates from this settlement of approximately $47,000 went into effect in May 2019.
Our operating subsidiaries received rate increases representing estimated annualized revenues of $4,480 in 2020 resulting from five base rate decisions, $52,974 in 2019 resulting from four base rate decisions, and $11,558 in 2018 resulting from five base rate decisions. Revenues from these increases realized in the year of grant were $1,594 in 2020, $32,287 in 2019, and $7,270 in 2018. As of December 31, 2020, our operating subsidiaries have filed two rate requests, which are being reviewed by the state utility commissions, proposing an aggregate increase of $1,766 in annual revenues. During 2021, we intend to file seven additional rate requests; the timing and extent to which our rate increase requests may be granted will vary by state.
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
Currently, Pennsylvania, Illinois, Ohio, Indiana, Virginia, North Carolina and New Jersey allow for the use of an infrastructure rehabilitation surcharge for both water and wastewater utility systems. Additionally, Pennsylvania and Kentucky allow for the use of an infrastructure rehabilitation surcharge for natural gas utility systems. The rate increases under this surcharge typically adjust periodically based on additional qualified capital expenditures completed or anticipated in a future period. This surcharge is capped as a percentage of base rates, generally at 5% to 12.75% of base rates, and is reset to zero when new base rates that reflect the costs of those additions become effective or when a utility’s earnings exceed a regulatory benchmark. These surcharges provided revenues of $13,039 in 2020, $16,007 in 2019, and $31,836 in 2018.
Our Regulated Water segment also includes operating revenues of $8,781 in 2020, $13,835 in 2019, and $9,427 in 2018 associated with revenues earned primarily from fees received from telecommunication operators that have put cellular antennas on our water towers, fees earned from municipalities for our operation of their water or wastewater treatment services or to perform billing services, and fees earned from developers for accessing our water mains, and $4,080 of one-time customer rate credits provided in 2020 associated with the regulatory approval of the Peoples Gas Acquisition.
In addition to the Regulated Water segment operating revenues, we recognized market-based revenues that are associated with our non-regulated natural gas operations (post-closing), Aqua Resources, and Aqua Infrastructure of $17,776 in 2020, $3,395 in 2019, and $3,590 in 2018.
Operations and Maintenance Expenses - Operations and maintenance expenses totaled $528,611 in 2020, $333,102 in 2019, and $308,478 in 2018. Most elements of operating costs are subject to the effects of inflation and changes in the number of customers served. Several elements are subject to the effects of changes in water consumption, weather, and the degree of water treatment required due to variations in the quality of the raw water. The principal elements of operating costs are labor and employee benefits, electricity, chemicals, transportation, maintenance expenses, insurance and claims costs, and costs to comply with environmental regulations. Electricity and chemical expenses vary in relationship to water consumption, raw water quality, and price changes. Maintenance expenses are sensitive to extremely cold weather, which can cause utility mains to rupture and natural gas service lines to freeze, resulting in additional costs to repair the affected main.
Operations and maintenance expenses increased in 2020, as compared to 2019, by 195,509 or 58.7%, primarily due to:
Operating costs of $199,851 associated with the Peoples Gas Acquisition, including expenses attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic of $8,735 primarily associated with an increase in bad debt expense of $6,551;
additional expenses of $8,518 associated with the COVID-19 pandemic for our water utility operations consisting primarily of bad debt expense of $5,980, and the purchase of personal protective equipment and disinfecting supplies of $903, which are offset by decreases in travel expenses, office supplies, and office utility expenses;
additional operating costs associated with acquired and pending acquisitions of water and wastewater utility systems of $7,202; and
transaction expenses of $25,397, compared to expenses of $22,891 incurred in the prior year, for the Peoples Gas Acquisition, primarily representing expenses associated with investment banking fees, including bridge financing, employee related expenses, obtaining regulatory approvals, legal expenses, and integration planning; offset by
insurance proceeds of $2,874 received for expenses incurred related to the advisory for some of our water utility customers served by our Illinois subsidiary;
lower expenses of $1,911 in 2020 compared to 2019 for expenses associated with remediating a do not consume advisory we initiated in 2019 for some of our customers served by our Illinois subsidiary. We expect that the expenses associated with remediating the advisory to continue into the second quarter of 2021. Further, the Company has determined that it is reasonably possible that a fine or penalty may be incurred, however, we cannot estimate the possible range of loss at this time and no liability has been accrued for these future costs.
a decrease in our self-insured employee medical plan benefits of $1,927; and
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
a stimulus payment of $1,038 received by our Ohio subsidiary from the Ohio Bureau of Workers’ Compensation as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
In order to continue the Company’s tradition of good corporate citizenship and community giving, in 2020, the Company contributed $30,000 to the Essential Foundation, a 501(c)(3) organization. This amount pre-funds our regulatory and community commitments over multiple years and furthers the charitable purposes of the Essential Foundation.
Purchased Gas - Purchased gas of $165,745 represents the cost of gas sold by Peoples during the period since the acquisition date of March 16, 2020. There were no corresponding amounts in prior periods.
Taxes Other than Income Taxes - Taxes other than income taxes totaled $76,597 in 2020, $59,955 in 2019, and $59,762 in 2018, and has increased principally due to increases in payroll taxes of $8,750 and property taxes of $4,319 resulting from additional expenses associated with acquired operations including the Peoples Gas Acquisition.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses - Depreciation expense was $251,443 in 2020, $158,179 in 2019, and $146,032 in 2018, and has increased principally as a result of the significant capital expenditures made to expand and improve our utility facilities, and our acquisitions of new utility systems. 2020 marks the inclusion of $81,672 of depreciation from the People’s Gas Acquisition since March 16, 2020.
Amortization expense (credit) was $5,616 in 2020, $(1,703) in 2019, and $641 in 2018, and increased in 2020 primarily due to the prior year effect of a favorable one-time adjustment recorded in of 2019 resulting from a rate order received for our Pennsylvania water subsidiary. 2020 marks the inclusion of $2,576 of amortization from the Peoples Gas Acquisition. Expenses associated with filing rate cases are deferred and amortized over periods that generally range from one to three years.
‎
Interest Expense - Interest expense was $188,435 in 2020, 125,383 in 2019, and $99,054 in 2018. Interest expense increased in 2020 primarily due to the following items:
an increase in average borrowings;
interest of $28,939 on debt assumed in the Peoples Gas Acquisition;
pre-acquisition interest expense of $3,959 from the issuance of $900,000 of long-term debt and $119,081 of amortizing notes in April 2019 partially for funding of the Peoples Gas Acquisition; and
interest of $1,399 on the Company’s $500,000 term loan to provide liquidity during the COVID-19 pandemic, which was repaid in May and June 2020; offset by
a decrease in our effective interest rate.
The weighted average cost of fixed rate long-term debt was 3.73% at December 31, 2020, 4.09% at December 31, 2019, and 4.31% at December 31, 2018. The weighted average cost of fixed and variable rate long-term debt was 3.56% at December 31, 2020, 4.09% at December 31, 2019, and 4.23% at December 31, 2018.
Interest Income - Interest income was $5,363 in 2020, $25,406 in 2019, and $152 in 2018. The decrease in 2020 is primarily due to the utilization of the proceeds held from our April 2019 equity and debt offerings to close the Peoples Gas Acquisition on March 16, 2020.
Allowance for Funds Used During Construction - The allowance for funds used during construction (“AFUDC”) was $12,687 in 2020, $16,172 in 2019, and $13,023 in 2018, and varies as a result of changes in the average balance of utility plant construction work in progress, to which AFUDC is applied, changes in the AFUDC rate which is based predominantly on short-term interest rates, changes in the balance of short-debt, and changes in the amount of AFUDC related to equity. The decrease in 2020 is primarily due to a decrease in the average balance of utility plant construction work in progress, to which AFUDC is applied. The amount of AFUDC related to equity was $8,253 in 2020, $11,941 in 2019, and $9,691 in 2018.
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
Change in Fair Value of Interest Rate Swap Agreements - The change in fair value of interest rate swap agreements of $23,742 for 2019 and $59,779 for 2018 represents the mark-to-market adjustment of our interest rate swap agreements that were entered into on October 23, 2018 to mitigate interest rate risk associated with an anticipated $850,000 of debt issuances to fund a portion of the Peoples Gas Acquisition. The interest rate swap agreements did not qualify for hedge accounting, and any changes in the fair value of the swaps were included in earnings. On April 24, 2019, the Company settled the interest rate swap agreements upon issuance of $900,000 of long-term debt to be used to finance $436,000 of the purchase price of the Peoples Gas Acquisition, redeem $313,500 of the Company’s existing debt, and fund other corporate expenses.
Loss on Debt Extinguishment - The loss on debt extinguishment of $18,528 results from the extinguishment of $313,500 of existing debt that was refinanced in May 2019. Further, in 2020 the Company recorded an additional regulatory asset for $3,888, as it represents an amount on which the Company expects to receive prospective rate recovery. The recognition of this regulatory asset in 2020 has been presented in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income within the line item “Other.”
Gain on Sale of Other Assets - Gain on sale of other assets totaled $661 in 2020, $923 in 2019, and $714 in 2018, and consists of the sales of property, plant and equipment.
Equity (Loss) Earnings in Joint Venture - Equity earnings (loss) in joint venture totaled $(3,374) in 2020, $2,210 in 2019, and $2,081 in 2018. The equity loss in 2020 primarily resulted from a charge of $3,700 recorded in 2020 reflecting a loss on sale of our joint venture investment realized in October 2020 and a decrease in the sale of raw water to firms in the natural gas drilling industry.
Other - Other totaled $(3,383) in 2020, $5,691 in 2019, and $1,996 in 2018, and primarily represents the non-service cost components of our net periodic pension and postretirement benefit costs and, the change in fair value of our equity investments in an employee benefit plan. The net benefit in 2020 is primarily due to a recovery of a previously incurred cost that resulted in the recognition of a regulatory asset based on the Company’s recovery in a rate case, and a decrease in the non-service cost components of our net benefit cost for pension benefits as well as the credit balance for Peoples Natural Gas which was acquired March 16, 2020.
Income Taxes - Our effective income tax rate was (7.5)% in 2020, (6.2)% in 2019, and (7.7)% in 2018. The Company’s provision for income taxes represents an income tax benefit due to the effects of tax deductions recognized for certain qualifying infrastructure improvements for Aqua Pennsylvania and Peoples Natural Gas. The effective income tax rate decreased in 2020 due to an increase in the income tax benefit recognized as a result of tax deductions for qualifying infrastructure investments of Peoples Natural Gas, offset partially by an increase in our income before income taxes of $53,445. On March 31, 2020, we changed the method of tax accounting for certain qualifying infrastructure investments at Peoples Natural Gas, our largest natural gas subsidiary in Pennsylvania, which provided for a reduction to income tax expense of $27,822 due to the flow-through treatment of the current tax repair benefits.
Summary -
The changes in diluted net income per share in 2020 over the previous year were due to the aforementioned changes.
While the importance to the future realization of improved profitability relies on continued adequate rate increases reflecting increased operating costs and new capital improvements, other factors such as transaction expenses for acquisitions will likely cause changes in operating income, net income and diluted net income per share.
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
Although we have experienced increased income in the recent past, continued adequate rate increases reflecting increased operating costs and new capital investments, are important to the future realization of improved profitability.
Fourth Quarter Results - The following table provides our fourth quarter results:
The increase in operating revenues of $247,956 was primarily due to:
natural gas revenues of $240,644 associated with the Peoples Gas Acquisition, net of customer rate credits of $18,924 granted to our natural gas customers served by Peoples in Pennsylvania;
additional revenues of $3,318 associated with a larger customer base due to utility acquisitions and organic growth; and
an increase in water and wastewater rates, net of infrastructure rehabilitation surcharges, of $5,010; offset by
a decrease in water revenues of $361 as a result of a do not consume advisory we initiated in 2019 for some of our customers served by our Illinois subsidiary. We expect this decrease in revenues to continue into 2021.
The increase in operations and maintenance expense of $71,875 was primarily due to:
operating costs of $72,615 associated with the Peoples Gas Acquisition, including expenses attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic of $1,785 primarily associated with an increase in bad debt expense of $1,357;
additional expenses of $2,570 associated with the COVID-19 pandemic for our water utility operations consisting primarily of bad debt expense of $1,812, and the purchase of personal protective equipment and disinfecting supplies of $119;
additional operating costs associated with acquired and pending utility systems of $2,866; and
expenses of $790 associated with remediating a do not consume advisory we initiated in 2019 for some of our customers served by our Illinois subsidiary, which is offset by the prior year effect of expenses of $1,217
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
recognized in the fourth quarter of 2020. We expect that the expenses associated with remediating the advisory to continue in the second quarter of 2021; offset by
the effect of transaction expenses of $1,005 incurred in the prior year quarter for the Peoples Gas Acquisition, primarily representing expenses associated with obtaining regulatory approvals, investment banking fees, legal expenses, and integration planning.
Purchased gas of $92,811 represents the cost of gas sold by Peoples. There were no corresponding amounts in prior periods.
Depreciation expense increased by $29,711 primarily due to depreciation expense of $26,293 associated with our completion of the Peoples Gas Acquisition and the utility plant placed in service since December 31, 2019.
Amortization increased by $767 primarily due to amortization expense of $548 associated with our completion of the Peoples Gas Acquisition.
Taxes other than income taxes increased by $5,256 primarily due to additional expenses of $4,475 associated with our completion of the Peoples Gas Acquisition consisting primarily of additional payroll and property taxes.
Interest expense increased by $18,643 primarily due to:
an increase in average borrowings; and
interest of $9,573 on debt assumed in the Peoples Gas Acquisition; offset by
a decrease in our effective interest rate.
Interest income decreased by $7,270 primarily due to the utilization of the proceeds held from our April 2019 equity and debt offerings to close the Peoples Gas Acquisition on March 16, 2020.
Equity loss (earnings) in joint venture decreased by $383 due to the sale of our joint venture investment in October 2020.
Other expense decreased by $1,219 primarily due to a decrease in the non-service cost components of our net benefit cost for pension benefits.
The provision for income tax benefit increased by $16,124 primarily due to income tax benefits recognized for qualifying infrastructure investments of Peoples recognized in the fourth quarter of 2020. On March 31, 2020, we changed the method of tax accounting for certain qualifying infrastructure investments at Peoples Natural Gas, our largest natural gas subsidiary in Pennsylvania. The Company’s provision for income taxes represented an income tax benefit due to the effects of tax deductions recognized for certain qualifying infrastructure improvements for Peoples Natural Gas and Aqua Pennsylvania.
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
Gross Margin - Regulated Natural Gas Segment
Our Regulated Natural Gas segment is affected by the cost of natural gas, which is passed through to customers using a purchased gas adjustment clause and includes commodity price, transportation and storage costs. These costs are reflected in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive income as purchased gas expenses. Therefore, fluctuations in the cost of purchased gas impact operating revenues on dollar-for-dollar basis but does not impact gross margin. Management uses gross margin, a non-GAAP financial measure, defined as operating revenues less purchased gas expense, to analyze the financial performance of our Regulated Natural Gas segment, as management believes gross margin provides a meaningful basis for evaluating our natural gas utility operations since purchased gas expenses are included in operating revenues and passed through to customers. The following table includes the operating results for our Regulated Natural Gas segment for the period since the acquisition date of March 16, 2020, including the reconciliation of gross margin (non-GAAP) to operating revenues (GAAP):
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Consolidated Cash Flow and Capital Expenditures
Net operating cash flows, dividends paid on common stock, capital expenditures, including allowances for funds used during construction, and expenditures for acquiring utility systems for the five years ended December 31, 2020 were as follows:
Net cash flows from operating activities increased from 2019 to 2020 primarily due to the prior year effect of the 2019 payment for the settlement of the interest rate swap agreements of $83,520, and an increase in net income. Net cash flows from operating activities decreased from 2018 to 2019 primarily due to the payment for the settlement of the interest rate swap agreements of $83,520, offset by an increase in net income. Net cash flows from operating activities decreased from 2017 to 2018 primarily due to a reduction in deferred income taxes and a change in working capital. Net income in 2018 was comparable to 2017, when excluding the after-tax effect of the change in the fair value of the interest rate swap agreements. Net cash flows from operating activities decreased from 2016 to 2017 due to an increase in pension and other postretirement benefits contributions, changes in deferred income taxes and an increase in the amount of AFUDC related to equity funds of $5,072 in 2017 compared to 2016.
Included in capital expenditures for the five year period are: expenditures for the rehabilitation of existing utility systems, the expansion of our utility systems, modernization and replacement of existing treatment facilities, meters, office facilities, information technology, vehicles, and equipment. During this five year period, we received $40,710 of customer advances and contributions in aid of construction to finance new utility mains and related facilities that are not included in the capital expenditures presented in the above table. In addition, during this period, we have made repayments of debt, which includes the net effect of borrowings and repayments under our long-term revolving credit facility, of $2,542,222 and have refunded $31,678 of customers’ advances for construction. Dividends increased during
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
the past five years as a result of annual increases in the dividends declared and paid and increases in the number of shares outstanding.
Our planned 2021 capital program, excluding the costs of new mains financed by advances and contributions in aid of construction is estimated to be approximately $1,000,000 in infrastructure improvements for the communities we serve. The 2021 capital program is expected to include $504,000 for infrastructure rehabilitation surcharge qualified projects. Our planned 2021 capital program in Pennsylvania for our water and natural gas utilities is estimated to be approximately $734,000, a portion of which is expected to be eligible as a deduction for qualifying utility asset improvements for Federal income tax purposes. Our overall 2021 capital program along with $84,353 of debt repayments and $416,381 of other contractual cash obligations, as reported in the section captioned “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Contractual Obligations”, has been, or is expected to be, financed through internally-generated funds, our revolving credit facilities, and the issuance of long-term debt.
Future utility construction in the period 2022 through 2023, including recurring programs, such as the ongoing replacement or rehabilitation of utility meters and mains, water treatment plant upgrades, storage facility renovations, pipes, service lines, and additional transmission mains to meet customer demands, excluding the costs of new mains financed by advances and contributions in aid of construction, is estimated to require aggregate expenditures of approximately $1,860,000. We anticipate that approximately less than one-half of these expenditures will require external financing. We expect to refinance $726,447 of long-term debt during this period as it becomes due with new issues of long-term debt, internally-generated funds, and our revolving credit facilities. The estimates discussed above do not include any amounts for possible future acquisitions of utility systems or the financing necessary to support them.
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows from operations (including the allowed deferral of Federal income tax payments), borrowings under various short-term lines of credit and other credit facilities, and customer advances and contributions in aid of construction. Our cash flow from operations, or internally-generated funds, is impacted by the timing of rate relief, utility consumption, and changes in Federal tax laws with respect to the reduction in the corporate income tax rate, and accelerated tax depreciation or deductions for utility construction projects. We fund our capital and typical acquisitions through internally-generated funds, supplemented by short-term lines of credit. Over time, we partially repay or pay-down our short-term lines of credit with long-term debt. We financed a portion of the Peoples Gas Acquisition purchase price, and refinanced certain debt of the Company, with a mix of common equity, equity-linked securities, and debt financing, which included senior notes issued in capital markets transactions, and credit facilities. The ability to finance our future construction programs, as well as our acquisition activities, depends on our ability to attract the necessary external debt and equity financing and maintain internally-generated funds. Timely rate orders permitting compensatory rates of return on invested capital will be required by our operating subsidiaries to achieve an adequate level of earnings and cash flow to enable them to secure the capital they will need to operate and to maintain satisfactory debt coverage ratios.
Acquisitions
Pursuant to the Company’s growth strategy, on March 16, 2020 (the “Closing Date”), the Company completed the Peoples Gas Acquisition and paid cash consideration of $3,465,344, which is subject to adjustment based upon the terms of the purchase agreement. Purchase price adjustments include the completion of a closing balance sheet, which was provided to the seller, and the finalization of an adjustment for utility capital expenditures made by the seller during the period between November 1, 2018 and the Closing Date. There is a dispute between the parties regarding this adjustment for utility capital expenditures. It is expected the matter will be resolved in accordance with the provisions of the purchase agreement or by the competent court of law with jurisdiction over the matter. Peoples is headquartered in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and serves approximately 750,000 gas utility customers in western Pennsylvania, West Virginia, and Kentucky. The estimated purchase price paid by the Company was determined based on a base price of $4,275,000, which was adjusted by $43,935 for an estimated change in working capital, certain capital expenditures of $247,500, and the assumption of $1,101,091 of indebtedness as of the Closing Date, consisting of $920,091 of senior notes and $181,000 of short-term debt. The Company financed this acquisition through the April 2019 issuances of $1,293,750 of common stock, $900,000 of senior notes (of which $436,000 was for this acquisition), $690,000 of tangible equity units, and the issuance of $750,000 of common stock through a private placement, and borrowings on our revolving credit facility. On October 22, 2018, the Company obtained the Bridge Commitment from certain banks to provide senior unsecured bridge loans in an aggregate amount of up to $5,100,000 to, among other things, backstop the Peoples Gas Acquisition purchase
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
price and the refinancing of certain debt of the Company and of Peoples. On March 16, 2020, as a result of our completion of the Peoples Gas Acquisition, we terminated the Bridge Commitment. On October 23, 2018, the Company entered into interest rate swap agreements to mitigate interest rate risk associated with our planned issuance of long-term debt to fund a portion of the Peoples Gas Acquisition. The interest rate swaps were settled in April 2019 in conjunction with the issuance of long-term debt used to finance a portion of the purchase price of this acquisition. The interest rate swap agreements did not qualify for hedge accounting and any changes in the fair value of the swaps were included in our earnings.
Prior to closing of the Peoples Gas Acquisition, in 2019 Peoples entered into agreements to build three onsite natural gas fueled energy plants on customer-owned property in the western Pennsylvania area. During 2020, construction began on the three plants and is expected to be competed in 2021. Through December 31, 2020, Peoples has invested $58,380 to construct these plants which are included in property, plant and equipment, and the construction cost is estimated to approximate $71,000. Once these plants are on-line and begin generation activity, the balance of our investment will be classified as a note receivable. Peoples has committed to design, construct, and operate each of the plants using third-party partners. For two of the projects, Peoples will receive a fixed-fee pursuant to a 20-year agreement, with both the cost of the natural gas commodity used to fuel the plants and the operating costs of the plants being passed through to the customer. For the third plant, Peoples will receive a variable fee based on the kilowatt-hours generated by the energy plant at agreed-upon prices with the customer, with any excess kilowatts of generation sold to the local regional transmission organization over the 20-year term of the agreement.
Excluding the Peoples Gas Acquisition, during the past five years, we have expended cash of $257,154 and issued 439,943 shares of common stock, valued at $12,845 at the time of acquisition, related to the acquisition of both water and wastewater utility systems.
Water and Wastewater Utility Acquisitions - Pending Completion
In January 2021, the Company entered into purchase agreements to acquire, in separate transactions, the wastewater utility system assets of East Whiteland Township, Pennsylvania and Willistown Township, Pennsylvania which consist of approximately 10,500 customers for $72,400. In December 2020, the Company entered into a purchase agreement to acquire the wastewater utility system assets of the Village of Bourbonnais, Illinois, which consists of approximately 6,500 customers for $32,100. In September 2020, the Company entered into a purchase agreement to acquire the wastewater utility system assets of Lower Makefield Township, Pennsylvania, which consists of approximately 11,000 customers for $53,000. In July 2020, the Company entered into a purchase agreement to acquire the water utility system assets of Commons Water, Texas, which consists of approximately 980 customers for $4,000.
The purchase price for our pending acquisitions are subject to certain adjustments at closing, and are subject to regulatory approval, including the final determination of the fair value of the rate base acquired. We plan to finance the purchase price of these acquisitions by utilizing our revolving credit facility until permanent debt and common equity are secured. The closings of our acquisitions of East Whiteland Township and Willistown Township are expected to occur the first quarter of 2022, closing for the Village of Bourbonnais is expected to occur before the end of 2021, and closing for Lower Makefield Township is expected to occur in the second half of 2021. Closing for our utility acquisitions are subject to the timing of the regulatory approval process.
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
In September 2019, the Company entered into a purchase agreement to acquire the wastewater utility system assets of the Delaware County Regional Water Quality Control Authority (“DELCORA”), which consist of approximately 16,000 customers, or the equivalent of 198,000 retail customers, in 42 municipalities in Southeast Pennsylvania for $276,500. In May 2020, Delaware County, Pennsylvania filed a lawsuit alleging that DELCORA does not have the legal authority to establish and fund a customer trust with the net proceeds of the transaction. In December 2020 the judge in the Delaware County Court lawsuit issued an order that (1) the County cannot interfere with the purchase agreement between DELCORA and the Company, (2) the County cannot terminate DELCORA prior to the closing of the transaction, and (3) that the establishment of the customer trust was valid. The purchase price for this pending acquisition is subject to certain adjustments at closing, and is subject to regulatory approval, including the final determination of the fair value of the rate base acquired. The administrative law judges in the regulatory approval process recommended that the Company’s application be denied. The Company provided exceptions to the recommended decision and which will be considered by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission in March. Closing of our acquisition of DELCORA is expected to occur in the first half of 2021, subject to the timing of the regulatory approval process. The Company expects to finance this acquisition with a mix of common equity and debt financing.
In addition to the Company’s pending acquisitions of DELCORA, as part of the Company’s growth-through-acquisition strategy, the Company has entered into purchase agreements to acquire the five water or wastewater utility systems described previously, which will add approximately 29,000 customers in three of the states in which the Company operates, for a total combined purchase price in cash of $161,500. We plan to finance the purchase price of these acquisitions by utilizing our revolving credit facility until permanent debt and common equity are secured. The purchase price for these pending acquisitions is subject to certain adjustments at closing, and the pending acquisitions are subject to regulatory approvals, including the final determination of the fair value of the rate base acquired. Closings for our remaining acquisitions, are expected to occur in the fourth quarter of 2021 and the first quarter 2022, respectively, subject to the timing of the regulatory approval process.
Water and Wastewater Utility Acquisitions - Completed
In December 2020, the Company acquired the wastewater utility system asset of New Garden Township, Pennsylvania, which serves 1,965 customers. The total cash purchase price for the utility system was $29,944. The purchase price allocation for this acquisition consisted primarily of property, plant and equipment. Further, in June 2020, the Company acquired the wastewater utility system assets of East Norriton Township, Pennsylvania, which serves 4,947 customers. The total cash purchase price for the utility system was $21,000. The purchase price allocation for this acquisition consisted primarily of property, plant and equipment. Additionally, during 2020, we completed four acquisitions of water and wastewater utility systems for $12,335 in cash in three of the states in which we operate, adding 3,673 customers. The operating revenues included in the consolidated financial statements of the Company during the period owned by the Company for the utility systems acquired in 2020 was $3,569.
In December 2019, the Company acquired the wastewater utility system assets of Cheltenham Township, Pennsylvania, which serves 9,887 customers. The total cash purchase price for the utility system was $50,250. The purchase price allocation for this acquisition consisted primarily of acquired property, plant and equipment of $44,558 and goodwill of $5,692. Additionally, during 2019, we completed seven acquisitions of water and wastewater utility systems for $9,437 in cash in four of the states in which we operate, adding 2,393 customers.
In July 2018, the Company acquired the wastewater utility system assets of Limerick Township, Pennsylvania which serves 5,497 customers. The total cash purchase price for the utility system was $74,836. The purchase price allocation for this acquisition consisted primarily of acquired property, plant and equipment of $64,759 and goodwill of $10,790. Additionally, during 2018, we completed seven acquisitions of water and wastewater utility systems for $42,519 in cash in three of the states in which we operate, adding 8,661 customers. Further, in December 2018, the Company acquired the Valley Creek Trunk Sewer System, serving area municipalities in Pennsylvania, from the Tredyffrin Township Municipal Authority for $28,338. The purchase price allocation for this acquisition consisted primarily of property, plant and equipment of $22,904 and goodwill of $5,434. The system receives untreated wastewater from area municipalities, which is conveyed to the Valley Forge Treatment Plan. The system consists of 49,000 linear feet of gravity sewers, pump stations, and force mains.
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
In 2017, we completed four acquisitions of water and wastewater utility systems for $5,860 in cash in two of the states in which we operate, adding 1,003 customers.
In January 2016, we acquired the water utility system assets of Superior Water Company, Inc., which provided public water service to 4,108 customers in portions of Berks, Chester, and Montgomery counties in Pennsylvania. The total purchase price for the utility system was $16,750, which consisted of the issuance of 439,943 shares of the Company’s common stock and $3,905 in cash. Additionally, during 2016, we completed 18 acquisitions of water and wastewater utility systems for $5,518 in cash in eight of the states in which we operate, adding 2,469 customers.
We continue to pursue the acquisition of water and wastewater utility systems and explore other utility acquisitions that may be in a new state. Our typical acquisitions are expected to be financed with short-term debt with subsequent repayment from the proceeds of long-term debt, retained earnings, or equity issuances.
Joint Venture
Aqua Infrastructure, LLC was a partner in a joint venture with a firm that operates natural gas pipelines and processing plants for the operation of a private pipeline system to supply raw water to natural gas well drilling operations in the Marcellus Shale in north-central Pennsylvania (the “Joint Venture”). We owned 49% of the Joint Venture. The 56 mile pipeline construction and permitted intake on the Susquehanna River cost $109,000. In October 2020, the Company sold its investment in the Joint Venture, and recorded a charge of $3,700 associated with the sale. Our 49% investment in the Joint Venture was an unconsolidated affiliate and was accounted for under the equity method of accounting. Our initial investment was carried at cost. Subsequently, the carrying amount of our investment was adjusted to reflect capital contributions or distributions, our equity in earnings and losses since the commencement of the system’s operations, and a decline in the fair value of our investment.
Dispositions
We routinely review and evaluate areas of our business and operating divisions and, over time, may sell utility systems or portions of systems. In 2020, the Company sold a water system in Texas that served approximately 265 customers, which resulted in proceeds of $395, and recognized a loss on sale of $469, of which $450 was previously reserved for in 2017. In 2019, the Company sold a water system in Virginia that served approximately 500 customers, which resulted in proceeds of $1,882, and recognized a gain on sale of $405. In 2017, the Company sold two business units within Aqua Resources, which resulted in total proceeds of $867, and recognized a net loss of $324. In 2016, the Company sold two business units within Aqua Resources, which resulted in total proceeds of $4,459, and recognized a net loss of $543.
Sources of Capital
Since net operating cash flow plus advances and contributions in aid of construction have not been sufficient to fully fund our cash requirements including capital expenditures and our growth through acquisitions program, which included financings for a portion of the Peoples Gas Acquisition, we issued $6,505,870 of long-term debt, and obtained other short-term borrowings during the past five years. At December 31, 2020, we have a $1,000,000 long-term revolving credit facility that expires in December 2023, of which $23,457 was designated for letter of credit usage, $591,543 was available for borrowing, and $385,000 of borrowings were outstanding at December 31, 2020. In addition, we have short-term lines of credit of $235,500 of which $157,302 was available as of December 31, 2020. Included in the short-term lines of credit is a Peoples Natural Gas $100,000 364 day unsecured revolving credit facility with two banks that was originated in November 2020. These short-term lines of credit are subject to renewal on an annual basis. Although we believe we will be able to renew these facilities, there is no assurance that they will be renewed, or what the terms of any such renewal will be.
In August 2020, we entered into a forward equity sale agreement for 6,700,000 shares of common stock with affiliates of a certain underwriter (“forward purchaser”). In connection with the forward equity sale agreement, the forward purchaser borrowed an equal number of shares of our common stock from stock lenders and sold the borrowed shares to the public. We will not receive any proceeds from the sale of our common stock by the forward purchaser until settlement of all or a portion of the forward equity sale agreement. The actual proceeds to be received by us will vary depending upon the settlement date, the number of shares designated for settlement on that settlement date, and the method of settlement. We
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
intend to use any proceeds received by us upon settlement of the forward equity sale agreement for general corporate purposes, including for water and wastewater utility acquisitions, working capital and capital expenditures.
On April 13, 2020, the Company issued $1,100,000 of long-term debt, of which $500,000 is due in 2030, and $600,000 is due in 2050 with interest rates of 2.704% and 3.351%, respectively. The Company used the proceeds from this issuance to repay in full the borrowings of $181,000 of short-term debt assumed in the Peoples Gas Acquisition, $150,000 of short-term debt issued by the Company on March 13, 2020, and to repay a portion of the borrowings under our existing five year unsecured revolving credit agreement.
On April 3, 2020, the Company entered into a 364 day credit agreement that provided the Company with a short-term borrowing facility of $500,000 in unsecured term loans, which was drawn. The Company used the proceeds from the term loans to strengthen its liquidity and cash position and maximize its financial flexibility in light of the uncertainty surrounding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. In May and June 2020, the Company repaid $300,000 and $200,000 of the term loan, respectively, and based on the Company’s ability to access financial markets, we terminated the facility.
In October 2018, we entered into a $5,100,000 syndicated, committed bridge facility to support our agreement to acquire Peoples. On March 16, 2020, as a result of our completion of the Peoples Gas Acquisition, the Company terminated the Bridge Commitment.
We financed the purchase price of the Peoples Gas Acquisition and refinanced certain debt with a mix of common equity, mandatory convertible equity units, debt financing, which included senior notes issued in capital markets transactions, and credit facilities. The estimated purchase price paid by the Company for this acquisition was determined based on a base price of $4,275,000, which was adjusted by $43,935 for an estimated change in working capital, certain capital expenditures of $247,500, and the assumption of $1,101,091 of indebtedness as of the Closing Date, consisting of $920,091 of senior notes and $181,000 of short-term debt.
As a result of the proceeds raised from the April 2019 financings that were being held to fund the Peoples Gas Acquisition the Company had a positive working capital position as of December 31, 2019. However, historically, our consolidated balance sheet has had a negative working capital position, whereby routinely our current liabilities exceed our current assets. Management believes that internally-generated funds along with existing credit facilities and the proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt and common equity will be adequate to provide sufficient working capital to maintain normal operations and to meet our financing requirements for at least the next twelve months.
Our loan and debt agreements require us to comply with certain financial covenants, which among other things, subject to specific exceptions, limit the Company’s ratio of consolidated total indebtedness to consolidated total capitalization, and require a minimum level of earnings coverage over interest expense. During 2020, we were in compliance with our debt covenants under our credit facilities. Failure to comply with our debt covenants could result in an event of default, which could result in us being required to repay or refinance our borrowings before their due date, possibly limiting our future borrowings, and increasing our borrowing costs.
The Company has a universal “pay as you go” shelf registration statement, filed with the SEC in February 2018, which allows for the potential future offer and sale by us, from time to time, in one or more public offerings, of an indeterminate amount of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, and other securities specified therein at indeterminate prices. The registration statement expired in February 2021, and we intend to file a new three-year universal shelf registration statement. In April 2019, March 2020 and August 2020, we have issued common stock, including common stock in connection with a forward equity sale agreement, long-term debt and tangible equity units in several offerings under this shelf registration statement. Refer to Note 11 - Long-term Debt and Loans Payable and Note 13 - Stockholders’ Equity for further information regarding these financings.
In addition, we have an acquisition shelf registration statement, which was filed with the SEC on February 27, 2015, to permit the offering from time to time of an aggregate of $500,000 of our common stock and shares of preferred stock in connection with acquisitions. During 2016, we issued 439,943 shares of common stock totaling $12,845 to acquire a water system. The balance remaining available for use under the acquisition shelf registration as of December 31, 2020 is $487,155.
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
We will determine the form and terms of any further securities issued under the universal shelf registration statement and the acquisition shelf registration statement at the time of issuance.
In May 2020, the Company amended its Articles of Incorporation to increase the number of authorized shares of common stock from 300,000,000 to 600,000,000 shares.
We offer a Dividend Reinvestment and Direct Stock Purchase Plan (the “Plan”) that provides a convenient and economical way to purchase shares of the Company. Under the direct stock purchase portion of the Plan, shares are issued throughout the year. The dividend reinvestment portion of the Plan offers a five percent discount on the purchase of shares of common stock with reinvested dividends. As of the December 2020 dividend payment, holders of 6.2% of the common shares outstanding participated in the dividend reinvestment portion of the Plan. The shares issued under the Plan are either original issue shares or shares purchased by the Company’s transfer agent in the open-market. During the past five years, we have sold 876,448 original issue shares of common stock for net proceeds of $33,485 through the dividend reinvestment portion of the Plan, and we used the proceeds to invest in our operating subsidiaries, to repay short-term debt, and for general corporate purposes. In 2020 and 2019, we sold 388,978 and 236,666 original issues shares of common stock for net proceeds of $16,522 and 8,959, respectively, through the dividend reinvestment portion of the plan. In 2019, and 2018, 183,731, and 321,585 shares of common stock were purchased under the dividend reinvestment portion of the Plan by the Company’s transfer agent in the open-market for $7,777, and $11,343, respectively.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We do not engage in any off-balance sheet financing arrangements. We do not have any interest in entities referred to as variable interest entities, which includes special purpose entities and other structured finance entities. For risk management purposes, the Company has used interest rate swap agreements. Refer to Note 11 - Long-term Debt and Loans Payable for further information regarding these agreements.
‎
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual cash obligations as of December 31, 2020:
(1)Represents interest payable on fixed rate, long-term debt. Amounts reported may differ from actual due to future refinancing of debt.
(2)Represents operating leases that are noncancelable, before expiration, for the lease of motor vehicles, buildings, land and other equipment.
(3)Represents our commitment to purchase minimum quantities of water as stipulated in agreements with other water purveyors. We use purchased water to supplement our water supply, particularly during periods of peak customer demand. Our actual purchases may exceed the minimum required levels.
(4)Represents our commitment to purchase minimum quantities of natural gas stipulated in agreements with various producers of natural gas to meet regulated customers’ natural gas requirements.
(5)Represents an approximation of the open purchase orders for goods and services purchased in the ordinary course of business.
(6)Represents contributions to be made to the Company’s retirement plans.
(7)Represents expenditures estimated to be required under legal and binding contractual obligations.
In addition to the contractual obligations table above, we have the following obligations:
Refunds of customer’s advances for construction - We pay refunds on customers’ advances for construction over a specific period of time based on operating revenues related to developer-installed utility mains or as new customers are connected to and take service from such mains. After all refunds are paid, any remaining balance is transferred to contributions in aid of construction. The refund amounts are not included in the above table because the refund amounts and timing are dependent upon several variables, including new customer connections, customer consumption levels and future rate increases, which cannot be accurately estimated. Portions of these refund amounts are payable annually through 2030 and amounts not paid by the contract expiration dates become non-refundable.
Asset Retirement Obligations - We recognize asset retirement obligations associated with retirements of production, storage wells and other pipeline components at fair value, as incurred, or when sufficient information becomes available to determine a reasonable estimate of the fair value of the retirement activities to be performed. Expected obligations are not included in the above table because the amounts and timing are dependent upon several variables, which cannot be accurately estimated.
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
Uncertain tax positions - We have uncertain tax positions of $19,194. Although we believe our tax positions comply with applicable law, we have made judgments as to the sustainability of each uncertain tax position based on its technical merits. Due to the uncertainty of future cash outflows, if any, associated with our uncertain tax positions, we are unable to make a reasonable estimate of the timing or amounts that may be paid. See Note 7 - Income Taxes in this Annual Report for further information on our uncertain tax positions.
We will fund these contractual obligations with cash flows from operations and liquidity sources held by or available to us.
The Company is routinely involved in legal matters, including both asserted and unasserted legal claims, during the ordinary course of business. See Note 9 - Commitments and Contingencies in this Annual Report for a discussion of the Company’s legal matters. It is not always possible for management to make a meaningful estimate of the potential loss or range of loss associated with such litigation. Also, unanticipated changes in circumstances and/or revisions to the assessed probability of the outcomes of legal matters could result in expenses being incurred in future periods as well as an increase in actual cash required to resolve the legal matter.
Capitalization
The following table summarizes our capitalization during the past five years:
(1)Includes current portion, as well as our borrowings under a variable rate revolving credit agreement of $385,000 at December 31, 2020, $0 at December 31, 2019, $370,000 at December 31, 2018, $60,000 at December 31, 2017, and $25,000 at December 31, 2016.
Over the past five years, the changes in the capitalization ratios primarily resulted from the issuance of debt to finance our acquisitions and capital program, changes in net income, the issuance of common stock, and the declaration of dividends.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our financial condition and results of operations are impacted by the methods, assumptions, and estimates used in the application of critical accounting policies. The following accounting policies are particularly important to our financial condition or results of operations and require estimates or other judgments of matters of uncertainty. Changes in the estimates or other judgments included within these accounting policies could result in a significant change to the financial statements. We believe our most critical accounting policies include the use of regulatory assets and liabilities, revenue recognition, the valuation of our long-lived assets (which consist primarily of utility plant in service, regulatory assets, and goodwill) our accounting for post-retirement benefits, and our accounting for income taxes. We have discussed the selection and development of our critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
Regulatory Assets and Liabilities ─ We defer costs and credits on the balance sheet as regulatory assets and liabilities when it is probable that these costs and credits will be recognized in the rate-making process in a period different from when the costs and credits were incurred. These deferred amounts, both assets and liabilities, are then recognized in the consolidated statement of operations in the same period that they are reflected in our rates charged for utility service. We make significant judgments and estimates to record regulatory assets and liabilities, such as for amounts related to income taxes, pension and postretirement benefits, acquisitions and capital projects. For each regulatory jurisdiction with regulated operations, we evaluate at the end of each reporting period, whether the regulatory assets and liabilities continue to meet the probable criteria for future recovery or refund. The evaluation considers factors such as regulatory orders or guidelines, in the same regulatory jurisdiction, of a specific matter or a similar matter, as provided to us in the past or to other regulated utilities. In addition, the evaluation may be impacted by changes in the regulatory environment and
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
pending or new legislation that could impact the ability to recover costs through regulated rates. There may be multiple participants to rate or transactional regulatory proceedings who might offer different views on various aspects of such proceedings, and in these instances may challenge our prudence of business policies and practices, seek cost disallowances or request other relief.
In the event that our assessment as to the probability of the inclusion in the rate-making process is incorrect, the associated regulatory asset or liability would be adjusted to reflect the change in our assessment or change in regulatory approval.
Revenue Recognition ─ Our utility revenues recognized in an accounting period include amounts billed to customers on a cycle basis and unbilled amounts based on estimated usage from the last billing to the end of the accounting period. The estimated usage is based on our judgment and assumptions; our actual results could differ from these estimates, which would result in operating revenues being adjusted in the period that the revision to our estimates is determined.
In Virginia, North Carolina, and Kentucky we may bill our utility customers, in certain circumstances, in accordance with a rate filing that is pending before the respective regulatory commission, which would allow interim rates before the final commission rate order is issued. The revenue recognized reflects an estimate based on our judgment of the final outcome of the commission’s ruling. We monitor the applicable facts and circumstances regularly and revise the estimate as required. The revenue billed and collected prior to the final ruling is subject to refund based on the commission’s final ruling.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets, Goodwill and Intangible Assets ─ We review our long-lived assets for impairment, including utility plant in service and investment in joint venture. We also review regulatory assets for the continued application of the FASB accounting guidance for regulated operations. Our review determines whether there have been changes in circumstances or events, such as regulatory disallowances, or abandonments, that have occurred that require adjustments to the carrying value of these assets. Adjustments to the carrying value of these assets would be made in instances where their inclusion in the rate-making process is unlikely. For utility plant in service, we would recognize an impairment loss for any amount disallowed by the respective utility commission.
Our long-lived assets, which consist primarily of utility plant in service and regulatory assets, are reviewed for impairment when changes in circumstances or events occur. These circumstances or events could include a decline in the market value or physical condition of a long-lived asset, an adverse change in the manner in which long-lived assets are used or planned to be used, a change in historical trends, operating cash flows associated with the long-lived assets, changes in macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, or overall financial performance. When these circumstances or events occur, we determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of those assets is less than their carrying amount. If we determine that it is more likely than not (that is, the likelihood of more than 50 percent), we would recognize an impairment charge if it is determined that the carrying amount of an asset exceeds the sum of the undiscounted estimated cash flows. In this circumstance, we would recognize an impairment charge equal to the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset. Fair value is estimated to be the present value of future net cash flows associated with the asset, discounted using a discount rate commensurate with the risk and remaining life of the asset. This assessment requires significant management judgment and estimates that are based on budgets, general strategic business plans, historical trends and other data and relevant factors. These estimates include significant inherent uncertainties, since they involve forecasting future events. If changes in circumstances or events occur, or estimates and assumptions that were used in this review are changed, we may be required to record an impairment charge on our long-lived assets.
We had an investment in a joint venture, for which we owned 49%, and used the equity method of accounting to account for this joint venture. In October 2020, the Company sold its investment in the joint venture. The joint venture operated a private pipeline system to supply raw water to natural gas well drilling operations in the Marcellus Shale in north central Pennsylvania. Refer to Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Property, Plant and Equipment and Depreciation, and Investment in Joint Venture in this Annual Report for additional information regarding the review of long-lived assets for impairment.
We test the goodwill attributable for each of our reporting units for impairment at least annually on July 31, or more often, if circumstances indicate a possible impairment may exist. When testing goodwill for impairment, we may assess qualitative factors, including macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, overall
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
financial performance, and entity specific events, for some or all of our reporting units to determine whether it’s more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. Alternatively, based on our assessment of the qualitative factors previously noted, we may perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test by determining the fair value of a reporting unit based on a discounted cash flow analysis. If we perform a quantitative test and determine that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, we would record an impairment loss for the amount by which a reporting unit’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill. The assessment requires significant management judgment and estimates that are based on budgets, general strategic business plans, historical trends and other data and relevant factors. If changes in circumstances or events occur, or estimates and assumptions that were used in our impairment test change, we may be required to record an impairment charge for goodwill. Refer to Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Goodwill in this Annual Report for information regarding the results of our annual impairment test.
Accounting for Post-Retirement Benefits ─ We maintain a qualified and a non-qualified defined benefit pension plan and plans that provide for post-retirement benefits other than pensions. Accounting for pension and other post-retirement benefits requires an extensive use of assumptions including the discount rate, expected return on plan assets, the rate of future compensation increases received by our employees, mortality, turnover and medical costs. Each assumption is reviewed annually with assistance from our actuarial consultant, who provides guidance in establishing the assumptions. The assumptions are selected to represent the average expected experience over time and may differ in any one year from actual experience due to changes in capital markets and the overall economy. These differences will impact the amount of pension and other post-retirement benefits expense that we recognize.
Our discount rate assumption, which is used to calculate the present value of the projected benefit payments of our post-retirement benefits, was determined by selecting a hypothetical portfolio of high quality corporate bonds appropriate to match the projected benefit payments of the plans. The selected bond portfolio was derived from a universe of Aa-graded corporate bonds. The discount rate was then developed as the rate that equates the market value of the bonds purchased to the discounted value of the projected benefit payments of the plans. A decrease in the discount rate would generally increase our post-retirement benefits expense and benefit obligation. After reviewing the hypothetical portfolio of bonds, we selected a discount rate of 2.57% for our pension plan, and 2.68% for our other post-retirement benefit plans as of December 31, 2020, which represent a 78 and 74 basis-point decrease as compared to the discount rates selected at December 31, 2019, respectively. Our post-retirement benefits expense under these plans is determined using the discount rate as of the beginning of the year, which was 3.35% for our pension plan and 3.42% for our other-postretirement benefit plan for 2020, and will be 2.57% for our pension plan, and 2.68% for our other post-retirement benefit plans for 2021.
Our expected return on plan assets is determined by evaluating the asset class return expectations with our advisors as well as actual, long-term, historical results of our asset returns. The Company’s market-related value of plan assets is equal to the fair value of the plans’ assets as of the last day of its fiscal year and is a determinant for the expected return on plan assets, which is a component of post-retirement benefits expense. The allocation of our plans’ assets impacts our expected return on plan assets. The expected return on plan assets is based on a targeted allocation of 50% to 70% return seeking assets and 30% to 50% liability hedging assets. Our post-retirement benefits expense increases as the expected return on plan assets decreases. We believe that our actual long-term asset allocations on average will approximate our targeted allocations. Our targeted allocations are driven by our investment strategy to earn a reasonable rate of return while maintaining risk at acceptable levels through the diversification of investments across and within various asset categories. For 2020, we used a 6.0% expected return on plan assets assumption which will not change for 2021.
Funding requirements for qualified defined benefit pension plans are determined by government regulations and not by accounting pronouncements. In accordance with funding rules and our funding policy, during 2021 our pension contribution is expected to be $14,775. Future years’ contributions will be subject to economic conditions, plan participant data and the funding rules in effect at such time as the funding calculations are performed, though we expect future changes in the amount of contributions and expense recognized to be generally included in customer rates.
Accounting for Income Taxes ─ We estimate the amount of income tax payable or refundable for the current year and the deferred income tax liabilities and assets that results from estimating temporary differences resulting from the treatment of specific items, such as depreciation, for tax and financial statement reporting. Generally, these differences result in the
(In thousands of dollars, except per share amounts)
recognition of a deferred tax asset or liability on our consolidated balance sheet and require us to make judgments regarding the probability of the ultimate tax impact of the various transactions we enter into. Based on these judgments, we may record tax reserves or adjustments to valuation allowances on deferred tax assets to reflect the expected realization of future tax benefits. Actual income taxes could vary from these estimates and changes in these estimates can increase income tax expense in the period that these changes in estimates occur.
Our determination of what qualifies as a capital cost versus a tax deduction, for qualifying utility asset improvements, as it relates to our income tax accounting method, is subject to subsequent adjustment as well as IRS audits, changes in income tax laws, including regulations regarding tax-basis depreciation as it applies to our capital expenditures, or qualifying utility asset improvements, the expiration of a statute of limitations, or other unforeseen matters could impact the tax benefits that have already been recognized. We establish reserves for uncertain tax positions based upon management’s judgment as to the sustainability of these positions. These accounting estimates related to the uncertain tax position reserve require judgments to be made as to the sustainability of each uncertain tax position based on its technical merits. We believe our tax positions comply with applicable law and that we have adequately recorded
reserves as required. However, to the extent the final tax outcome of these matters is different than our estimates recorded, we would then need to adjust our tax reserves which could result in additional income tax expense or benefits in the period that this information is known.
IMPACT OF RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
We describe the impact of recent accounting pronouncements in Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in this Annual Report.