Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
The Company is a global designer and manufacturer of advanced RF, microwave and millimeter wave components, modules, systems and instruments. Serving the wireless, telecommunication, satellite, military, aerospace, semiconductor and medical industries, Wireless Telecom Group products enable innovation across a wide range of traditional and emerging wireless technologies. With a unique set of high-performance products including peak power meters, signal analyzers, signal generators, phase noise analyzers, signal processing modules, LTE and 5G physical layer and stack software, power splitters and combiners, GPS repeaters, public safety monitors, noise sources, and programmable noise generators, Wireless Telecom Group supports the development, testing and deployment of wireless technologies around the globe.
Key 2020 Developments and Financial Results
Fiscal 2020 was one of the most challenging years in the Company’s recent history. We began 2020 with an expectation of significantly reduced demand from our formerly largest customer for our CommAgility signal processing hardware cards. Accordingly, we adjusted our costs and expenses to help offset the impact of the reduced revenues. These adjustments included headcount reductions at our Parsippany N.J. headquarters and various discretionary cost and expense reductions. We also carefully managed our capital expenditures throughout 2020 in order to preserve liquidity. Despite the expected reduction of the top line for our CommAgility hardware cards, the Company successfully completed the acquisition of Holzworth on February 7, 2020, which was financed through our new term loan facility with Muzinich BDC. In 2020, Holzworth exceeded our revenue and profitability expectations.
In March 2020, one month after the close of the Holzworth acquisition, the unforeseen impact of the COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted the Company’s operations and outlook. Throughout 2020 all of our locations and brands were challenged with travel bans, quarantines, and shelter-in-place orders as authorities implemented measures to contain the COVID-19 virus. We implemented new cleaning, monitoring and distancing measures to ensure additional procedures and preventative actions were taken in accordance with CDC and local government guidelines to help protect the health and well-being of our employees, customers, partners and communities. The Company was able to continue operations at our manufacturing facilities in Parsippany, N.J. and Boulder, Colorado locations as an “essential business” due to the industries and customers we serve including critical telecommunications infrastructure, the U.S. government and numerous global aerospace and defense subcontractors that supply the U.S. government.
All employees that do not have critical in-person functions have been working remotely since March 16, 2020. For those employees working in our facilities we instituted measures during 2020 including flexible work arrangements, increased distancing of workstations, enhanced cleaning protocols, required completion of daily health screening forms for all employees and visitors entering our facilities and other safety precautions. In March 2020 we formed a COVID-19 task force made up of various members of the management team including operations, finance and sales. The task force meets regularly to monitor COVID-19 developments and ensure the Company reacts quickly to help protect the well-being of its employees. The task force is also planning our return to normal strategy that will be based on data, facts and advice of federal, state and local government leaders in the jurisdictions in which we operate as well as medical professionals. Under our current plans, the Company expects to continue to have the majority of our workforce working remotely until May 1, 2021, at which time we will begin a phased re-entry plan, meaning that employees will begin working in the office on a limited basis. However, this timeline may be adjusted based on the facts and circumstances of each jurisdiction in which we operate.
We believe our 2020 financial results were adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic because we experienced a decrease in orders related to our Boonton and Noisecom brands as customers closed facilities, slowed orders and instituted capital expenditure freezes due to the pandemic. We also saw a significant decline in Microlab orders throughout our second, third and fourth quarters due primarily to large venue project delays and cancellations. We believe this was caused by the uncertainty of reopening guidelines from states, as well as the uncertainty of conventions, college and professional sports, and college and university return to campus schedules for students. Further, we believe certain project timelines and decisions on large private network projects on which our CommAgility brand has bids were delayed given the economic uncertainty driven by the pandemic.
Despite the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic our research and development efforts continued throughout 2020 most notably CommAgility’s progression on the 5G roadmap and our collaboration with NXP Semiconductors. Additionally, among other product releases, we announced Ultra-Wide Band Microlab products for 5G network deployment and densification and launched our new PMX 40 Boonton Power Meter.
On May 4, 2020, the Company received $2.0 million pursuant to a loan under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) of the 2020 Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) administered by the Small Business Association (see description in Liquidity and Capital Resources below). The Company’s covered period as defined by the terms of the PPP loan ended on October 19, 2020. The Company used the funds for those purposes as defined under the terms of the PPP loan, most notably payroll expenses for our U.S. based employees. The Company filed for forgiveness in the fourth quarter of 2020 and is awaiting a decision from the Small Business Association. The Company can provide no assurance that the loan will be forgiven in whole or in part.
The financial information presented herein includes: (i) Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2020 and 2019; (ii) Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income/(Loss) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019; (iii) Consolidated Statement of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019; and (iv) Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Critical Accounting Policies
Management’s discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations are based upon the consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires the Company to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses for each period. The following represents a summary of the Company’s critical accounting policies, defined as those policies that the Company believes are: (a) the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations, and (b) that require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain. Estimates and assumptions are made by management to assess the overall likelihood that an accounting estimate or assumption may require adjustment. It is reasonably possible that these estimates may ultimately differ materially from actual results. See Note 1 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K for a description of all of our significant accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
Effective January 1, 2018 the Company adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), (“Topic 606”) using the “modified retrospective” method, meaning the standard is applied only to the most current period presented in the financial statements. Topic 606 requires the Company to identify the performance obligations in our revenue arrangements - that is, those promised goods and services (or bundles of promised goods or services) that are distinct - and allocate the transaction price of the revenue arrangement to those performance obligations on the basis of estimated standalone selling prices (“SSP’s”).
Sales of hardware which include sales of radio frequency solutions, digital signal processing hardware, power meters, analyzers, noise/signal generators, phase noise analyzers and other components generally consist of one performance obligation which is satisfied upon shipment to the customer. When contract terms require transfer of control upon delivery at a customer’s location, revenue is recognized on the date of delivery. Sales of hardware to distributors that include a limited right of return are recorded net of expected returns.
Sale of software licenses in the CommAgility brand may involve multiple performance obligations including multiple software releases and consultancy services. In these cases transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation on the basis of SSP and revenue is recognized when the distinct performance obligation is satisfied. The company determines performance obligations and SSP’s in arrangements with multiple performance obligations in accordance with Topic 606 which requires significant judgement.
Services arrangements involving repairs and calibrations of the Company’s products are generally considered a single performance obligation and revenue is recognized as the services are rendered.
Certain software arrangements in the CommAgility brand may involve the transfer of software along with significant customization services. In these cases the customization services and software licenses are combined as one distinct performance obligation and revenue is recognized over time as the project is completed. The duration of these performance obligations are typically one year or less.
Leases
We lease office space and certain equipment under non-cancelable lease agreements. Prior to January 1, 2019, we applied the accounting guidance in ASC 840, Leases, to our lease agreements. The leases were reviewed for classification as operating or capital leases. For operating leases, rent was recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease period. For capital leases, we recorded the leased asset with a corresponding liability and amortized the asset over the lease term. Payments were recorded as reductions to the liability with an appropriate interest charge recorded based on the then-outstanding remaining liability.
Effective January 1, 2019, we adopted ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) using the modified retrospective transition method and established our lease accounting policy pursuant to this new standard. We initially applied the transition provisions at January 1, 2019, which allowed us to continue to apply the legacy guidance in ASC 840 for periods prior to 2019. Based on the new guidance, we assess all arrangements, that convey the right to control the use of property, plant and equipment, at inception, to determine if it is, or contains, a lease based on the unique facts and circumstances present in that arrangement. For those leases identified, we determine the lease classification, recognition, and measurement at the lease commencement date. For arrangements that contain a lease we: (i) identify lease and non-lease components; (ii) determine the consideration in the contract; (iii) determine whether the lease is an operating or financing lease; and (iv) recognize lease Right of Use (“ROU”) assets and corresponding lease liabilities. Lease liabilities are recorded based on the present value of lease payments over the expected lease term. The corresponding ROU asset is measured from the initial lease liability, adjusted by (i) accrued or prepaid rents; (ii) remaining unamortized initial direct costs and lease incentives; and (iii) any impairments of the ROU asset. The interest rate implicit in our lease contracts is typically not readily determinable and as such, we use our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at the lease commencement date, which represents an internally developed rate that would be incurred to borrow, on a collateralized basis, over a similar term, an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment.
Business Combinations
The Company uses the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations which requires the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed to be recorded at their respective fair market value as of the acquisition date. Goodwill represents the excess of the consideration transferred over the fair value of the net assets acquired. The fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed are determined based upon the Company’s valuation and involves making significant estimates and assumptions based on facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date. The Company uses a measurement period following the acquisition date to gather information that existed as of the acquisition date that is needed to determine the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. The measurement period ends once all information is obtained, but no later than one year from the acquisition date.
Valuation of Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the aggregate purchase price over the fair value of the net assets acquired in a purchase business combination. Goodwill is evaluated for impairment annually, or more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that would indicate that goodwill might be impaired, by first performing a qualitative evaluation of events and circumstances impacting the reporting unit to determine the likelihood of goodwill impairment. Based on that qualitative evaluation, if we determine it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, no further evaluation is necessary. Otherwise we perform a quantitative impairment test.
The Company has three reporting units with goodwill - Holzworth, Microlab and CommAgility. The Company performed a qualitative assessment in the fourth quarter of 2020 of each reporting unit. The qualitative assessment of Holzworth and Microlab did not indicate any impairment of goodwill. As a result of declining demand of CommAgility’s signal processing hardware cards from a single customer and the particularly high uncertainty associated with the ultimate trajectory of the pandemic, including the degree to which governments would continue to restrict business and personal activities, and the impact that uncertainty has on the growth of new software license and services revenue to offset the signal processing hardware sales decline, the Company performed a quantitative impairment test of the goodwill of the CommAgility reporting unit.
For goodwill impairment testing using the quantitative approach, the Company estimates the fair value of the selected reporting unit using the income approach and the market approach. Fair value under the income approach is derived primarily through the use of a discounted cash flow model based on our best estimate of amounts and timing of future revenues and cash flows and our most recent business and strategic plans. Fair value under the market approach is derived by applying a multiple to our best estimate of future revenue. The Company applies equal weighting to the income approach and the market approach to arrive at an estimated fair value. The estimated fair value is compared to the carrying value of the reporting unit, including goodwill. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value, no impairment charge is recorded. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds the fair value an impairment charge is recorded to goodwill in the amount by which carrying value exceeds fair value. Both the income approach and market approach require judgmental assumptions about projected revenue growth, future operating margins, discount rates and terminal values over a multi-year period. There are inherent uncertainties related to these assumptions and management’s judgment in applying them to the analysis of goodwill impairment. While the Company believes it has made reasonable estimates and assumptions to calculate the fair value of its reporting units, it is possible a material change could occur.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $4.7 million related to the CommAgility reporting unit. The non-cash impairment charge was due to a number of factors that arose as part of our quantitative assessment, including an assessment of our historical results and the significant decline in hardware sales in 2020, the difficulty of predicting future customer demand, the uncertainty of future sales of 4G hardware cards, the uncertainty of the growth of 5G software and services revenues due to the early stages of 5G adoption for new technology and expectations for 5G deployments, the uncertainty of the continued future impacts of the COVID 19 pandemic on customer spending, and the potential for a more prolonged recovery for enterprise spending and longer-term investment. Despite the asset impairment charge, the Company believes the markets in which CommAgility operates, specifically LTE and 5G private networks, have long-term growth potential and the Company is committed to growing the revenue and profitability of the reporting unit.
Due to the many variables inherent in the estimation of a reporting unit’s fair value and the relative size of our recorded goodwill, differences in assumptions may have a material effect on the results of our impairment analysis. After recording the 2020 goodwill impairment charge, the Company’s consolidated goodwill balance as of December 31, 2020 was comprised of $1.4 million related to the Microlab reporting unit, $6.0 million related to the Holzworth reporting unit and $4.1 million related to the CommAgility reporting unit.
As of December 31, 2019, the Company’s consolidated goodwill balance of $10.1 million was comprised of $1.4 million related to the Microlab reporting unit and $8.7 million related to the CommAgility reporting unit. Management’s qualitative assessment performed in the fourth quarter of 2019 did not indicate any impairment of goodwill.
Intangible and Long-lived Assets
Intangible assets include acquired technology, patents, non-competition agreements, customer relationships and tradenames. Intangible assets with finite lives are amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated economic lives of the assets, which range from three to twelve years. Long-lived assets, including intangible assets with finite lives, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. Determination of recoverability is based on an estimate of undiscounted future cash flows resulting from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition. Measurement of an impairment loss for long-lived assets that management expects to hold and use is based on the estimated fair value of the asset. Long-lived assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of carrying amount or estimated fair value less costs to sell. The estimated useful lives of intangible and long-lived assets are based on many factors including assumptions regarding the effects of obsolescence, demand, competition and other economic factors, expectations regarding the future use of the asset, and our historical experience with similar assets. The assumptions used to determine the estimated useful lives could change due to numerous factors including product demand, market conditions, technological developments, economic conditions and competition. Intangible assets determined to have indefinite useful lives are not amortized but are tested for impairment annually and more frequently if events occur or circumstances change that indicate an asset may be impaired.
Income taxes
The Company records deferred taxes in accordance with ASC 740, “Accounting for Income Taxes.” ASC 740 requires recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for temporary differences between tax basis of assets and liabilities and the amounts at which they are carried in the financial statements, based upon the enacted rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The Company establishes a valuation allowance when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. The Company periodically assesses the value of its deferred tax assets and determines the necessity for a valuation allowance.
Realization of the Company’s deferred tax assets is dependent upon the Company generating sufficient taxable income in the appropriate tax jurisdictions in future years to obtain benefit from the reversal of net deductible temporary differences and from utilization of net operating losses. The amount of deferred tax assets considered realizable is subject to adjustment in future periods if estimates of future taxable income are changed.
Uncertain tax positions
Under ASC 740, the Company must recognize and disclose uncertain tax positions only if it is more-likely-than-not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authority, based on the technical merits of the position. The amounts recognized in the financial statements attributable to such position, if any, are recorded if there is a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon the ultimate resolution of the position.
The Company has analyzed its filing positions in all of the jurisdictions where it is required to file income tax returns. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company has identified its federal tax return and its state tax return in New Jersey as “major” tax jurisdictions, as defined in ASC 740, in which it is required to file income tax returns. As a result of our acquisition of Holzworth on February 7, 2020, Colorado is a “major” tax jurisdiction for fiscal year 2020. Additionally, the Company has identified the United Kingdom as a “major” tax jurisdiction as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. Based on the evaluations noted above, the Company has concluded that there are no significant uncertain tax positions requiring recognition or disclosure in its consolidated financial statements.
Based on a review of tax positions for all open years and contingencies as set out in the Company’s Notes to the consolidated financial statements, no reserves for uncertain income tax positions have been recorded pursuant to ASC 740 during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and the Company does not anticipate that it is reasonably possible that any material increase or decrease in its unrecognized tax benefits will occur within the next twelve months.
Stock-based compensation
The Company follows the provisions of ASC 718, “Compensation - Stock Compensation” which requires that compensation expense be recognized based on the fair value of equity awards on the date of grant. The fair value of restricted share awards and restricted stock unit awards is determined using the market value of our common stock on the date of the grant. The fair value of stock options at the date of grant is estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. When stock options are granted, the Company takes into consideration guidance under ASC 718 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107 (SAB 107) when determining assumptions. The expected option life is derived from assumed exercise rates based upon historical exercise patterns and represents the period of time that options granted are expected to be outstanding. The expected volatility is based upon historical volatility of our shares using daily price observations over an observation period that approximates the expected life of the options. The risk-free rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve rate in effect at the time of grant for periods similar to the expected option life. The Company accounts for forfeitures for all equity awards when they occur.
Management estimates are necessary in determining compensation expense for stock options with performance-based vesting criteria. Compensation expense for this type of stock-based award is recognized over the period from the date the performance conditions are determined to be probable of occurring through the date the applicable conditions are expected to be met. If the performance conditions are not considered probable of being achieved, no expense is recognized until such time as the performance conditions are considered probable of being met, if ever. Management evaluates whether performance conditions are probable of occurring on a quarterly basis.
Inventories and Inventory Valuation
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost (average cost) or net realizable value. The Company reviews inventory for excess and obsolescence based on best estimates of future demand, product lifecycle status and product development plans.
Allowances for doubtful accounts
The Company maintains allowances for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability of its customers to make required payments. A key consideration in estimating the allowance for doubtful accounts has been, and will continue to be, our customer’s payment history and aging of our accounts receivable balance.
Impairment of long-lived assets
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. Determination of recoverability is based on an estimate of undiscounted cash flows resulting from the use of the assets and their eventual disposition. Measurement of an impairment loss for long-lived assets that management expects to hold for sale is based on the fair value of the assets. Long-lived assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell.
Warranties
The Company generally offers standard warranties against product defects. We estimate future warranty costs to be incurred based on historical warranty claims experience including estimates of material and service costs over the warranty period.
Comparison of the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 with the year ended December 31, 2019
Net Revenues (in thousands)
Consolidated revenues declined $7.2 million or 14.7% due primarily to lower sales in our RBS product group of our digital signal processing hardware cards. Sales of the RBS hardware cards declined $10.7 million from the prior year. The loss was only partially offset by higher sales of our higher margin RBS software and services. Additionally, the acquisition of Holzworth on February 7, 2020 contributed $8.8 million in revenue to our T&M product group in 2020. This acquisition helped offset declines in our Boonton and Noisecom brands, which experienced lower sales from the prior year primarily due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on capital expenditure spending of our customers. Our RFC product group revenue declined $4.2 million or 19.1% due to lower sales of our passive components as wireless carriers delayed buildouts and upgrades of in-building wireless systems due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross Profit (in thousands)
Consolidated gross profit declined $1.3 million or 5.9% from the prior year. The decrease was primarily due to lower volumes at our RBS and RFC product groups which were only partially offset by the revenue and gross margin contribution of Holzworth. Our gross margin as a percentage of sales increased from 45.6% to 50.2% due to the higher margin software and services sales at our RBS product group, the contribution of higher margin product sales from Holzworth and cost savings initiatives at our RFC product group.
Operating Expenses (in thousands)
Research and development expenses increased $472,000 or 8% from the prior year period due to the acquisition of Holzworth which contributed $545,000 in expenses in 2020 and an increase in third party research and development expenses of $500,000 from the prior year primarily related to 5G roadmap development and product development in our Boonton brand. The increase was partially offset by declines in salaries and benefits and other discretionary expenses of approximately $600,000 due primarily to expense reductions including headcount reductions.
Sales and marketing expenses decreased $722,000 from the prior year period due to a decline in salaries and benefits due to expense reduction initiatives including headcount reductions, a decline in external and internal commissions due to lower order and sales volumes and declines in marketing expenses and travel expenses caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. These decreases from the prior year period totaled $1.9 million and were partially offset by the acquisition of Holzworth which contributed $1.2 million in sales and marketing expenses in 2020.
General and administrative expenses decreased $267,000 as increases from the addition of Holzworth of $795,000 and the recognition of $255,000 of deferred Form S-3 costs were offset by decreases in merger and acquisition expenses and other discretionary expenses that declined due to expense reduction initiatives.
The goodwill impairment charge of $4.7 million relates to our CommAgility reporting unit and is the result of our annual goodwill impairment analysis which indicated that the estimated fair value of the CommAgility reporting unit was lower than the carrying value as of the valuation date.
The loss on change in fair value of contingent consideration of $1.1 million relates primarily to the earn-out consideration to be paid in connection with the Holzworth acquisition for the 2020 calendar year. Our estimate of the earn-out payment was increased from our original estimate recorded at the time of the acquisition due to the improved financial results of Holzworth.
Other income/expense
Other income increased $189,000 due primarily to an increase in gains on sales of assets and foreign currency exchange gains.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased $680,000 due to the interest on our new term loan facility with Muzinich and the amortization of debt issuance costs related to securing the new term loan facility.
Tax
The Company’s consolidated tax benefit decreased $563,000 from the prior year due primarily to taxable income in the US jurisdiction driven primarily by the acquisition of Holzworth.
Net Loss
Net loss increased from $414,000 to $8.1 million due primarily to lower gross profit on lower revenues, the goodwill impairment charge recorded at the CommAgility reporting unit, recognition of the loss on change in fair value of contingent consideration and the increase in interest expense due to our new term loan.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company has two credit facilities - an asset based revolving loan which is subject to a borrowing base calculation (as defined) with Bank of America, N.A. (the “Credit Facility” or the “Revolver”) and a term loan facility dated February 7, 2020 with Muzinich BDC Inc. (“Muzinich”) to finance the Holzworth Acquisition in the amount of $8.4 million (the “Term Loan Facility”). Additionally, on May 4, 2020 the Company received $2.0 million pursuant to a loan under the PPP of the 2020 CARES Act administered by the Small Business Association.
Revolver
On February 16, 2017 the Company entered into the Credit Facility which provided for a term loan in the aggregate principal amount of $760,000 (the “BOA Term Loan”) and the Revolver which has a maximum availability of up to $9.0 million subject to a borrowing base calculation applicable to the Company’s assets. The proceeds of the Term Loan and Revolver were used to finance the acquisition of CommAgility. On February 26, 2019 the Company entered into Amendment No. 3 to the Credit Facility which extended the term of the Revolver to March 31, 2020, and on November 8, 2019 the Company entered into Amendment No. 4 to the Credit Facility which extended the maturity date of the Term Loan to March 31, 2020 to coincide with that of the Revolver. On February 7, 2020, in connection with the Holzworth acquisition, the Company entered into Amendment No. 5 to the Credit Facility which, inter alia, extended the Revolver maturity date to March 31, 2023. Additionally, the Company prepaid the remaining principal balance of the BOA Term Loan in the amount of $340,000.
By entering into Amendment No. 5, Holzworth and CommAgility, became borrowers under the Credit Facility. The obligations of the borrowers under the Credit Facility are guaranteed by Wireless Telecom Group, Ltd. CommAgility Limited and Wireless Telecom Group, Ltd. are both wholly owned subsidiaries of the Company.
Amendment No. 5 (a) modified certain provisions of the Credit Facility to accommodate the Holzworth acquisition, the Company’s incurrence of the Term Loan Facility and the granting of the related liens and security interests, (b) subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions precedent, made available to CommAgility an asset based revolving loan, subject to a borrowing base calculation applicable to CommAgility’s assets, of up to a maximum availability of $5.0 million (the “UK Revolver Commitment”), (c) reduced the interest rate margin applicable to revolving loans made under the Credit Facility from a range of 2.75% to 3.25% to a range of 2.00% to 2.50%, based on the Borrowers’ Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Facility) of the most recently completed fiscal quarter, (d) extended the Revolver Termination Date to March 31, 2023 and (e) conditioned the Borrowers’ ability to make certain debt payments under the Term Loan Facility (described below) upon compliance with a liquidity test.
Effectiveness of Amendment No. 5 was conditioned upon, among other things, the prepayment of the remaining principal balance ($304,000) of the $760,000 term loan made available under the Credit Facility and the payment of a closing fee in the amount of $25,000. The borrowers satisfied all such conditions on February 7, 2020.
On May 4, 2020, the Company, its subsidiaries and Bank of America entered into Amendment No. 6 which, among other things, amended the definition of “Debt” to include the PPP loan as long as the proceeds are used for allowable purposes under the CARES Act and the Company promptly submits an application for forgiveness and substantially all of the loan is forgiven.
On February 25, 2021, the Company, its subsidiaries and Bank of America entered into Amendment No. 7 which revised the Credit Facility to accommodate the changes to the deferred purchase price payments to and notes with the Holzworth sellers as described below and provided Bank of America’s consent to the Company entering into the Muzinich Second Amendment, as described below. In all other material respects, the Credit Facility remains unchanged.
Any exercise of remedies by Bank of America, N.A. under the Credit Facility is subject to compliance with the intercreditor agreement entered into at the closing of Amendment No. 5 among the Company, Muzinich, as lender under the Term Loan Facility, and Bank of America, N.A.
Term Loan Facility
In connection with the Holzworth acquisition, on February 7, 2020, the Company, as borrower, and its subsidiaries, as guarantors, and Muzinich, entered into the Term Loan Facility, which provides for a term loan in the principal amount of $8.4 million (“Initial Term Loan”), all of which was used to fund the cash portion of the purchase price and related debt and closing fees for the Holzworth acquisition. Principal payments on the Initial Term Loan are $21,000 per quarter with a balloon payment at maturity on February 7, 2025. The Term Loan Facility includes an upfront fee of 2.50% of the aggregate principal amount. The Term Loan Facility provides for an additional $11.6 million term loan (the “Second Term Loan”) to be used for a second unannounced acquisition opportunity (the “Additional Acquisition”). There can be no assurance that the Additional Acquisition will be completed. In the event the Additional Acquisition is completed, the Second Term Loan will be made available to the Company on the same terms and conditions as the Initial Term Loan, including interest rate, amortization schedule and financial covenants, subject to the payment of an additional upfront fee and satisfaction of customary conditions to funding.
The Company may prepay the Initial Term Loan at any time. Prepayments made prior to (a) February 7, 2022 are subject to a prepayment premium in the amount of 2.0% of the prepaid principal amount and (b) February 7, 2023 are subject to a prepayment premium in the amount of 1.0% of the prepaid principal amount. The Company is required to make prepayments of the Initial Term Loan with the proceeds of certain asset dispositions, insurance recoveries and extraordinary receipts, subject to specified reinvestment rights. The Company is also required to make prepayments of the Initial Term Loan upon the issuance of certain indebtedness and to make an annual prepayment based upon the Company’s excess cash flow. Mandatory prepayments with asset sale, insurance or condemnation proceeds and excess cash flow may be made without penalty. Mandatory prepayments with the proceeds of indebtedness are subject to the same prepayment penalties as are applicable to voluntary prepayments.
The Term Loan Facility is secured by liens on substantially all of the Company’s and its subsidiaries’ assets including a pledge of the equity interests in the Company’s subsidiaries. The Term Loan Facility contains customary affirmative and negative covenants for a transaction of this type, including, among others, the provision of annual, quarterly and monthly financial statements and compliance certificates, maintenance of property, insurance, compliance with laws and environmental matters, restrictions on incurrence of indebtedness, granting of liens, making investments and acquisitions, paying dividends, entering into affiliate transactions and asset sales. In addition, the Company must maintain certain financial covenants typical for this type of arrangement, including a consolidated leverage ratio, a consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio and minimum liquidity of its foreign subsidiaries. The consolidated leverage ratio is defined as the ratio of total consolidated indebtedness, as defined, to consolidated EBITDA, as defined. Prior to Amendment 2 described below, the required leverage ratio started at 4.75 to 1.0 for the twelve month periods ended March 31, 2020 and June 30, 2020, and decreased in various increments to 3.75 to 1.0 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, 2.75 to 1.0 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2.0 to 1.0 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2022 and thereafter. The consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio is the ratio of consolidated EBITDA, as defined, less consolidated capital expenditures and cash income taxes paid to consolidated fixed charges, as defined, calculated on a twelve-month basis. The consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio for the twelve month periods ended March 31, 2020, June 30 2020 and September 30, 2020 must be 1.35 to 1 and increases in various increments on a quarterly basis to 1.5 to 1.0 for the twelve month period ended December 31, 2020 and 2021, and to 1.75 to 1.0 for the 12 months ending December 31, 2022 and thereafter. Lastly, the Company must maintain minimum liquidity, defined as cash and availability under the UK borrowing base, as defined, of $1.0 million over any trailing four-week period until such time as the foreign subsidiary has positive EBITDA, as defined, for three consecutive quarters and the Holzworth deferred purchase price has been paid in full. The Term Loan Facility also provides for a number of events of default, including, among others, nonpayment, bankruptcy, inaccuracy of representations and warranties, breach of covenant, change in control, entry of final judgement or order, breach of material contracts, and as long as the Company’s consolidated leverage ratio is greater than 1.0 to 1.0 (as calculated in accordance with the terms of the Term Loan Facility), the cessation of service of any two of Tim Whelan, Michael Kandell or Daniel Monopoli as Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer or Chief Technology Officer, respectively, of the Company without acceptable replacements within 60 days. Any exercise of remedies by Muzinich is subject to compliance with the intercreditor agreement entered into at the closing of the Term Loan Facility among the Company, Muzinich and Bank of America, N.A., as lender under the Credit Facility referenced below.
On May 4, 2020, the Company entered into the First Amendment to the Term Loan Facility which, among other things, amended the definition of “Indebtedness” to include the PPP loan as long as the proceeds are used for allowable purposes under the CARES Act, the receipt of the loan does not violate the Credit Facility and the Company submits an application for forgiveness and substantially all of the loan is forgiven.
On February 25, 2021, the Company, its subsidiaries and Muzinich entered into the Second Amendment to the Credit Agreement and Limited Waiver (“Amendment 2”) in which Muzinich agreed to waive the Company’s obligation to comply with the consolidated leverage ratio and fixed charge coverage ratio financial covenants in the Term Loan Facility for the fiscal quarter ending December 31, 2020. We were not in compliance with such covenants primarily as a result of the impact the COVID-19 pandemic had on our consolidated financial results. Amendment 2, among other things, amended the definition of consolidated EBITDA to include certain cash tax benefits related to our UK tax jurisdiction and reduced our consolidated leverage ratio for the twelve month periods ended September 30, 2021 from 3.00 to 2.75, December 31, 2021 from 2.75 to 2.25, March 31, 2022 from 2.50 to 2.00 and June 30, 2022 from 2.25 to 2.00. Additionally, the interest rate margin was increased from 7.25% to 9.25% effective January 1, 2021 and will step down to 8.50% and 7.25% upon the Company achieving consolidated EBITDA on a trailing twelve-month basis of $4.0 million and $6.3 million, respectively. Muzinich and the Company also agreed on an excess cash flow payment of $428,000 and Muzinich provided consent for the Company to change the deferred purchase price payments to and enter into notes with the Holzworth sellers in the amount of $750,000, as described below.
PPP Loan
On May 4, 2020, the Company received $2.0 million pursuant to a loan from Bank of America N.A. under the PPP program of the 2020 CARES Act administered by the Small Business Association (“SBA”). The loan has an interest rate of 1% and a term of 24 months. A repayment schedule has not yet been provided by Bank of America. Accordingly, the full amount of the term loan has been shown as due in May 2022. Funds from the loan may only be used for certain purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities. The CARES Act and the PPP provide a mechanism for forgiveness of up to the full amount of the loan upon application to the SBA for forgiveness by the Company. The loan is evidenced by a promissory note, which contains customary events of default relating to, among other things, payment defaults and breaches of representations and warranties. The Company may prepay the loan at any time prior to maturity with no prepayment penalties. The Company applied for forgiveness of the loan in the fourth quarter of 2020 and has elected to account for the loan in accordance with ASC 470 Debt unless and until such time that forgiveness is approved by the SBA. The Company can provide no assurance that the loan will be forgiven in whole or in part.
Sources and Uses of Cash
As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s consolidated cash balance was $4.9 million as compared to $4.2 million as of the prior year. No funds were drawn on our Revolver and we had availability under our borrowing base of $7.2 million as of December 31, 2020. The outstanding balances of our Term Loan Facility and PPP Loan were $8.3 million and $2.0 million, respectively.
Our primary sources of cash were the receipt of the Term Loan Facility in the amount of $8.4 million which was used to pay the cash portion of the Holzworth purchase price and related debt and transaction fees, receipt of the PPP loan in the amount of $2.0 million which was used to fund operating payroll during the covered period and cash generated from operations of $3.0 million which was primarily the result of a decrease in net working capital from the prior year (net of the impact of the Holzworth acquired working capital).
Operating Activities
Cash from operations increased from $80,000 in the prior year to $3.0 million in 2020. The increase was due to cash generated from a decrease in working capital from the prior year, net of the acquired working capital of Holzworth. The working capital decrease was primarily due to receipt of the UK tax refund and increased accrued expenses.
Investing Activities
Cash used by investing activities increased from $818,000 in the prior year to $8.6 million in 2020 which includes $8.2 million of cash paid related to the Holzworth acquisition in February 2020 representing $7.2 million in cash paid at close, $750,000 related to the first deferred purchase price payment, and $600,000 in indemnification holdback payments offset by a $292,000 working capital adjustment in the Company’s favor. Capital expenditures were flat at $364,000 in 2020 as compared to $392,000 in the prior year.
Financing Activities
Cash from financing activities increased from a use of cash of $212,000 in the prior year to cash generated of $6.3 million due primarily to the receipt of the Term Loan Facility, net of debt issuance costs and the receipt of the PPP loan.
Holzworth Deferred Purchase Price and Earnout
On February 19, 2021, the Company entered into the Second Amendment with Holzworth and Sellers. The Second Amendment, among other things, converts the second deferred purchase price of $750,000 into unsecured seller notes with interest at an annual rate of 6.5% starting from April 1, 2021 until final payment. The payment date has been changed from March 31, 2021 to three equal installments of $250,000, plus accrued interest, due on July 1, 2021, October 1, 2021 and January 1, 2022.
Additionally, the parties amended the payment dates of the earnout consideration. The payment date of the first earnout payment based on the financial results of the calendar year ended 2020 (“Year 1 Earnout”) has been amended from March 31, 2021 to (i) six (6) equal quarterly installments of 10% of the Year 1 Earnout payable on the last business day of each calendar quarter between June 30, 2021 and September 30, 2022 and (ii) one (1) installment payment equal to 40% of the Year 1 Earnout on December 31, 2022. The Year 1 Earnout is payable in cash or shares of the Company’s common stock based on the 90 trading day volume weighted average price immediately preceding final determination of the Year 1 Earnout or $2.19 per share. The estimated payment for the Year 1 Earnout is $3.4 million. The payment date for the second earnout payment which is based on the financial results of the calendar year ended 2021 (“Year 2 Earnout”) has been amended from March 31, 2022 to four equal quarterly installments payable on the last business day of each calendar quarter between March 31, 2022 and December 31, 2022. The Year 2 Earnout is also payable in cash or stock at the Company’s discretion. The aggregate earnout payments of the Year 1 Earnout and the Year 2 Earnout cannot exceed $7.0 million.
The parties also amended the provisions with respect to restrictions on transfer to adjust for the change in timing of earnout payments, as described above. Finally, the parties added a requirement that any earned but unpaid earnout consideration will be accelerated in the event the Company desires to enter into a material asset or equity acquisition in the future.
We expect borrowings available to us under our Credit Facility, our existing cash balance and cash generated by operations will be sufficient to meet our liquidity needs for the next twelve months. Our ability to meet our cash requirements will depend on our ability to generate cash in the future, which is subject to general economic, financial, competitive, legislative, regulatory and other factors that are beyond our control, including the COVID-19 pandemic and the significantly decreased demand from our formerly largest customer for our digital signal processing cards and ongoing low sales to that customer due to reduced demand, as well as delayed decisions on large private network projects that we believe are caused by economic uncertainty driven by the pandemic. We expect these uncertainties to extend to our business in the first two quarters of 2021, as sales, deliveries, cash collections, our supply chain and our business partners could be adversely affected.
The Company expects to realize tax benefits in future periods due to the available net operating loss carryforwards resulting from the disposition of a former wholly owned subsidiary in 2010. Accordingly, future taxable income is expected to be offset by the utilization of operating loss carryforwards and as a result will increase the Company’s liquidity as cash needed to pay federal and state income taxes will be substantially reduced. Additionally, CommAgility benefits from a research and development deduction which significantly reduces the cash needed to pay taxes in the UK.
On August 27, 2018 the Company filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 which was declared effective on September 17, 2018. The Form S-3 will permit the Company to issue and sell, from time to time, up to $40 million in aggregate value of shares of its common stock through one or more methods of distribution, subject to applicable SEC limits on the value of securities that the Company, as a smaller reporting company, may sell during an applicable period, market conditions, and the Company’s capital desires and needs.
The terms of any offering of the Company’s common stock, and the intended use of the net proceeds resulting therefrom, will be established at the times of the offerings and will be described in prospectus supplements filed with the SEC at the times of the offerings. The shelf registration statement is intended to provide financial flexibility to access capital in a competitive and expeditious manner when market conditions are appropriate. The shelf registration statement expires on September 17, 2021. The Company intends to update the registration statement prior to expiration.
Purchase obligations consist of inventory that arises in the normal course of business operations. Future obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020 consisted of the following:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Other than contractual obligations incurred in the normal course of business, the Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Effects of Inflation and Changing Prices
The Company does not anticipate that inflation or other expected changes in prices will significantly impact its business.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Affecting the Company
A discussion of recent accounting pronouncements is included in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.