ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements based on our current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors as described under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a leading provider of comprehensive water-management and chemical solutions to the oil and gas industry in the United States (“U.S.”). We also develop, manufacture and deliver a full suite of chemical products for use in oil and gas well completion and production operations. As a leader in the water solutions industry, we place the utmost importance on safe, environmentally responsible management of oilfield water throughout the lifecycle of a well. Additionally, we believe that responsibly managing water resources through our operations to help conserve and protect the environment in the communities in which we operate is paramount to our continued success.
In many regions of the country, there has been growing concern about the volumes of water required for new oil and gas well completions. Working with our customers and local communities, we strive to be an industry leader in the development of cost-effective alternatives to fresh water. Specifically, we offer services that enable our E&P customers to treat and reuse produced water, thereby reducing the demand for fresh water while also reducing the volumes of saltwater that must be disposed by injection. In many areas, we have also acquired sources of non-potable water, such as brackish water or municipal or industrial effluent. Through our expertise in chemical technologies and our FluidMatch™ design solutions, we provide water profiling and fluid assessment services for our customers to support the optimization of their fluid systems, enabling the economic use of these alternative sources. We also work with our E&P customers to reduce the environmental footprint of their operations through the use of temporary hose and permanent pipeline systems, which are supported by extensive monitoring and automation technology solutions that provide safer and more efficient water resource management. These solutions significantly reduce the demand for trucking operations, thereby reducing gasoline and diesel exhaust emissions, increasing safety and decreasing traffic congestion in nearby communities.
Recent Trends and Outlook
Significant challenges that emerged during the year ended December 31, 2020, and that are expected to continue, have had and will likely continue to have a negative impact on our results of operations. The COVID-19 pandemic has caused significant disruptions in global oil demand and impacted economic growth in the U.S. as well as internationally. In response, volatility in financial markets has also significantly increased, making it more difficult for companies to access capital at a reasonable cost. As a result of these market disruptions, oilfield activity has declined significantly, and our 2020 results have been negatively impacted. With continued production cuts from OPEC, combined with some recovery in oil demand during the second half of 2020, the average West Texas Intermediate (“WTI”) price per barrel increased from $36.58 during the first half of 2020 to an average price of $41.70 per barrel in the second half of 2020 and $48.35 at 2020 year-end. In conjunction with improved oil prices, we began to see improving activity levels throughout the second half of 2020 and anticipate continued activity improvements in 2021 relative to the levels seen in the second half of 2020. However, we do not anticipate an immediate recovery to the pre-pandemic levels of 2019, and can make no assurance that any further recovery will continue into the future.
We believe the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations have had, and will likely continue to have, a material negative impact on our financial results, and such negative impact may continue well beyond the containment of the pandemic until economies, associated oil demand and resulting oilfield activity recovers. We believe global oil demand is expected to remain challenged at least until the COVID-19 pandemic can be contained, and any material increases to oil supply in the near-term could further challenge oil prices and subsequently the activity
levels of our customers and the resulting demand for our services. We cannot provide assurance that our assumptions used to estimate our future financial results will be correct given the unpredictable nature of the current market environment after the rapid decline in the demand for oil and demand for our services. As a consequence, our ability to accurately forecast our activity and profitability is uncertain.
The magnitude and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic is also uncertain. Therefore, we cannot estimate the impact on our business, financial condition or near- or longer-term financial or operational results with reasonable certainty. We have taken further actions to protect our balance sheet and maintain our liquidity, including significantly decreasing our operating expenses by reducing headcount, reducing salaries and director compensation, closing yard locations, idling facilities, reducing third-party expenses and streamlining operations, as well as reducing capital expenditures. We are also deferring employer payroll tax payments in accordance with the provisions of the CARES Act, and may take advantage of future legislation passed by the United States Congress in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. In this environment, the duration of which remains uncertain, the Company has planned for a range of scenarios and has taken a number of actions. To protect our workforce during the COVID-19 pandemic, we have taken steps to support our people who are affected by the disease, manage work-from-home scheduling as appropriate, limit on-site visitors, and monitor and consistently communicate with those who are required to be at a work location, while also providing these employees with additional personal protective equipment.
Based on our current cash and cash equivalents balance, operating cash flow, available borrowings under our Credit Agreement and the ongoing actions discussed above, we believe that we will be able to maintain sufficient liquidity to satisfy our obligations and remain in compliance with our existing debt covenants for the next twelve months, prior to giving effect to any future financing that may occur.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the average spot price of WTI crude oil was $39.16 versus an average price of $56.98 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The average Henry Hub natural gas spot price during the year ended December 31, 2020, was $2.04 versus an average of $2.57 for the year ended December 31, 2019. The significant decline in oil and gas prices in 2020 relative to 2019, as well as the oil pricing volatility driven by market dislocation, has been driven largely by decreased demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as increased utilization of existing storage capacity, which has resulted in many of our E&P customers being forced to shut-in production for some time period. Much of this shut-in production has since come back online during the second half of 2020.
Many of our customers have also pledged to prioritize managing their capital spending to within cash flow from operations, with some targeting reinvestment rates below 80% of their 2019 budgets, and this trend may extend beyond 2020. Consolidation among our customers and decreases in our customers’ capital budgeting can impact the size of our market in the near term and the resulting demand for our services. In light of these factors, combined with the downward revisions made to many of our customers’ respective annual capital budgets and financial outlooks, this has led to decreased activity for us relative to prior-year levels. Additionally, the current market environment may make it challenging for distressed oil and gas companies to resolve their debt covenant and liquidity challenges in the near-term, potentially resulting in a number of restructuring activities, including bankruptcies, in the industry. While we see no immediate need for additional capital given our liquidity position, this difficulty in accessing capital markets may negatively impact some of our highly leveraged customers and competitors.
Outside of the macroeconomic challenges, from an operational standpoint, many of the recent trends still apply to ongoing unconventional oil and gas development. For example, while we believe leading-edge lateral lengths and proppant use are plateauing, the average operator continues to catch up to this leading edge and many smaller operators with less robust completion designs may be challenged in this environment. The continued trend towards multi-well pad development, executed within a limited time frame, has increased the overall complexity of well completions, while increasing frac efficiency and the use of lower-cost in-basin sand, all of which has decreased total costs for our customers.
This multi-well pad development, combined with recent upstream acreage consolidation and the emerging trends around the reuse applications of produced water, particularly in the Permian Basin, provides significant opportunity for companies like us that can deliver increasingly complex solutions for our E&P customers across the full
completion and production lifecycle of wells. However, we note the continued efficiency gains in the well completions process can limit the days we spend on the wellsite and therefore, negatively impact the total revenue opportunity for certain of our services utilizing day-rate pricing models.
The trend of increased use of produced water will require additional chemical treatment solutions, which we are well positioned to provide given our water treatment capabilities, our WCS team and our knowledge base within our Oilfield Chemicals segment. This trend also supports more complex “on the fly” solutions that treat, proportion, and blend various streams of water and chemicals at the wellsite. This complexity favors service companies able to provide advanced technology solutions that are able to economically compete with alternative historical solutions.
Regardless of these operational trends, the current environment is one of the most challenging in decades for the oilfield services industry due to the large and sudden decline in oil demand and consequent decline in oil prices. Many operators are prioritizing decreases in their activity levels and pursuing near-term cost savings, which negatively impacts the demand and pricing for our services.
Our Segments
Our services are offered through three reportable segments: (i) Water Services; (ii) Water Infrastructure; and (iii) Oilfield Chemicals.
● Water Services. The Water Services segment consists of the Company’s services businesses, including water transfer, flowback and well testing, fluids hauling, water containment and water network automation, primarily serving E&P companies. Additionally, this segment includes the operations of our accommodations and rentals business.
● Water Infrastructure. The Water Infrastructure segment consists of the Company’s infrastructure assets, including operations associated with our water sourcing and pipeline infrastructure, our water recycling solutions and infrastructure, and our produced water gathering systems and saltwater disposal wells, primarily serving E&P companies.
● Oilfield Chemicals. The Oilfield Chemicals segment provides technical solutions and expertise related to chemical applications in the oil and gas industry. We also have significant capabilities in supplying logistics for chemical applications. We develop, manufacture and provide a full suite of chemicals used in hydraulic fracturing, stimulation, cementing, production, pipelines and well completions. Given the breadth of chemicals and application expertise we provide, our customers range from pressure pumpers to major integrated and independent U.S. and international oil and gas producers. This segment also utilizes its chemical experience and lab testing capabilities to customize tailored water treatment solutions designed to maximize the effectiveness of and optimize the efficiencies of the fracturing fluid system in conjunction with the quality of water used in well completions.
The results of our divested service lines that were previously a part of our former Wellsite Services segment, including the operations of our Affirm subsidiary, our sand hauling operations and our Canadian operations are combined in the “Other” category. As of December 31, 2019, these operations have ceased.
How We Generate Revenue
We currently generate the majority of our revenue through our water-management services associated with hydraulic fracturing, provided through our Water Services and Water Infrastructure segments. The majority of this revenue is realized through customer agreements with fixed pricing terms and is recognized when delivery of services is provided, generally at our customers’ sites. While we have some long-term pricing arrangements, particularly in our Water Infrastructure segment, most of our water and water-related services are priced based on prevailing market conditions, giving due consideration to the specific requirements of the customer.
We also generate revenue by providing completion, specialty chemicals and production chemicals through our Oilfield Chemicals segment. We invoice the majority of our Oilfield Chemicals customers for services provided based on the quantity of chemicals used or pursuant to short-term contracts as the customers’ needs arise.
Costs of Conducting Our Business
The principal expenses involved in conducting our business are labor costs, vehicle and equipment costs (including depreciation, repair, rental and maintenance and leasing costs), raw materials and water sourcing costs and fuel costs. Our fixed costs are relatively low. Most of the costs of serving our customers are variable, i.e., they are only incurred when we provide water and water-related services or chemicals and chemical-related services to our customers.
Labor costs associated with our employees and contract labor comprise the largest portion of our cost of doing business. We incurred labor and labor-related costs of $243.6 million, $477.9 million and $545.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The majority of our recurring labor costs are variable and are incurred only while we are providing operational services. We also incur costs to employ personnel to sell and supervise our services and perform maintenance on our assets, which is not directly tied to our level of business activity. Additionally, we incur selling, general and administrative costs for compensation of our administrative personnel at our field sites and in our operational and corporate headquarters. In light of the challenging activity and pricing trends, management took direct action during the year ended December 31, 2020, to reduce operating and equipment costs, as well as selling, general and administrative costs, in order to proactively manage these expenses as a percentage of revenue.
We incur significant vehicle and equipment costs in connection with the services we provide, including depreciation, repair and maintenance, rental and leasing costs. We incurred vehicle and equipment costs of $157.6 million, $245.9 million and $284.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Due to current market conditions and the decreased demand for our services, we took significant direct action during the year ended December 31, 2020 to reduce ongoing rental and leasing costs.
We incur raw material costs in manufacturing our chemical products, as well as for water that we source for our customers. We incurred raw material costs of $154.2 million, $274.1 million and $283.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
We incur variable transportation costs associated with our service lines, predominately fuel and freight. We incurred fuel and freight costs of $35.6 million, $81.3 million and $97.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Fuel prices impact our transportation costs, which affect the pricing and demand for our services and therefore our results of operations.
Public Company Costs
General and administrative expenses related to being a publicly-traded company include: Exchange Act reporting expenses; expenses associated with compliance with Sarbanes-Oxley; expenses associated with maintaining our listing on the NYSE; incremental independent auditor fees; incremental legal fees; investor relations expenses; registrar and transfer agent fees; incremental director and officer liability insurance costs; and director compensation. We expect that general and administrative expenses related to being a publicly-traded company will remain generally consistent with costs incurred during 2020. Costs incurred by us for corporate and other overhead expenses will be reimbursed by SES Holdings pursuant to the SES Holdings LLC Agreement.
How We Evaluate Our Operations
We use a variety of operational and financial metrics to assess our performance. Among other measures, management considers each of the following:
● Revenue;
● Gross Profit;
● Gross Margins;
● EBITDA; and
● Adjusted EBITDA.
Revenue
We analyze our revenue and assess our performance by comparing actual monthly revenue to our internal projections and across periods. We also assess incremental changes in revenue compared to incremental changes in direct operating costs and selling, general and administrative expenses across our reportable segments to identify potential areas for improvement, as well as to determine whether segment performance is meeting management’s expectations.
Gross Profit
To measure our financial performance, we analyze our gross profit, which we define as revenues less direct operating expenses (including depreciation and amortization expenses). We believe gross profit provides insight into profitability and true operating performance of our assets. We also compare gross profit to prior periods and across segments to identify trends as well as underperforming segments.
Gross Margins
Gross margins provide an important gauge of how effective we are at converting revenue into profits. This metric works in tandem with gross profit to ensure that we do not increase gross profit at the expense of lower margins, nor pursue higher gross margins at the expense of declining gross profits. We track gross margins by segment and service line and compare them across prior periods and across segments and service lines to identify trends as well as underperforming segments.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
We view EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as important indicators of performance. We define EBITDA as net income/(loss), plus interest expense, income taxes, and depreciation and amortization. We define Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA plus/(minus) loss/(income) from discontinued operations, plus any impairment charges or asset write-offs pursuant to GAAP, plus non-cash losses on the sale of assets or subsidiaries, non-recurring compensation expense, non-cash compensation expense, and non-recurring or unusual expenses or charges, including severance expenses, transaction costs, or facilities-related exit and disposal-related expenditures and plus/(minus) foreign currency losses/(gains). The adjustments to EBITDA are generally consistent with such adjustments described in our Credit Facility. See “-Comparison of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information and a reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss), the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
Factors Affecting the Comparability of Our Results of Operations to Our Historical Results of Operations
Our future results of operations may not be comparable to our historical results of operations for the periods presented, primarily for the reasons described below.
Acquisition and Divestiture Activity
As described above, we are continuously evaluating potential investments. To the extent we consummate acquisitions, any incremental revenues or expenses from such transactions are not included in our historical results of operations.
Well Chemical Services Acquisition
On September 30, 2019, we completed our acquisition of WCS. Our historical financial statements for periods prior to September 30, 2019, do not include the results of operations of WCS.
Pro Well Acquisition
On November 20, 2018, we completed our acquisition of the assets of Pro Well. Our historical financial statements for periods prior to November 20, 2018, do not include the results of operations of Pro Well.
Affirm Divestitures
We sold the Affirm crane and field services businesses on February 26, 2019 and June 28, 2019, respectively. Affirm accounted for $21.8 million and $58.9 million of revenue during 2019 and 2018, respectively. Following the two divestitures, the divested operations were not included in the consolidated results of operations.
Canadian Operations Divestitures
On March 19, 2019, we sold over half of our Canadian operations and on April 1, 2019, we sold and wound down the rest of the Canadian operations. Canadian operations accounted for $8.2 million and $48.6 million of revenue during 2019 and 2018, respectively. Following the divestitures, the divested Canadian operations were not included in the consolidated results of operations.
Sand Hauling Wind Down
During 2019, we wound down our sand hauling operations and sold certain of our sand hauling property and equipment. Sand hauling accounted for $3.3 million and $37.0 million of revenue during 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Proceeds received from Divestitures and Wind Down
During 2019, we received $30.1 million from divestitures and fixed asset sales activity in connection with the sale and wind down of our Affirm subsidiary and the sand hauling and Canadian operations.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our results of operations, including revenue by segment, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 is set forth in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 under the caption “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
Our revenue decreased $686.5 million, or 53.2%, to $605.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was driven by a $452.5 million decline in Water Services revenue, a $96.2 million decline in Water Infrastructure revenue, and a $108.6 million decline in Oilfield Chemicals revenue. These declines were primarily due to lower demand for our services resulting from a reduction in drilling and completions activity, lower oil prices and the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as reduced pricing for some of our services. Also impacting the decline was $29.1 million lower revenue from the combination of our Affirm subsidiary, sand hauling operations and Canadian operations, all of which were fully divested and wound down during 2019. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our Water Services, Water Infrastructure, Oilfield Chemicals and Other segments constituted 52.9%, 20.7 %, 26.4 % and 0.0% of our total revenue, respectively, compared to 59.8%, 17.2%, 20.8% and 2.2%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The revenue changes by reportable segment are as follows:
Water Services. Revenue decreased $452.5 million, or 58.6%, to $319.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $772.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower demand for our services resulting from a reduction in drilling and completions activity, lower oil prices and the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as reduced pricing for some of our services.
Water Infrastructure. Revenue decreased by $96.2 million, or 43.4%, to $125.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $221.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower demand for our services resulting from a reduction in completions activity, lower oil prices and the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by a full year of operations from our New Mexico pipeline.
Oilfield Chemicals. Revenue decreased $108.6 million, or 40.4%, to $160.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $268.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower demand for our products and services resulting from a reduction in completions activity, lower oil prices and the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as reduced pricing for some of our services, partially offset by incremental revenue from the WCS acquisition.
Other. There was no Other revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $29.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, as our Affirm subsidiary, sand hauling operations and Canadian operations were divested and wound down during 2019.
Costs of Revenue
Costs of revenue decreased $508.5 million, or 44.5%, to $634.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a $306.7 million decline in Water Services costs, a $67.4 million decline in Water Infrastructure costs, and a $86.9 million decline in Oilfield Chemicals costs due to lower revenue discussed above. Also contributing to the decline was $29.5 million lower combined costs from our Affirm subsidiary, sand hauling operations and Canadian operations, all of which were divested and wound down during 2019. Further, depreciation and amortization expense decreased by $18.0 million, primarily due to the 2019 divestitures and lower capital expenditures in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Water Services. Cost of revenue decreased $306.7 million, or 51.2 %, to $291.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $598.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cost of revenue decreased due to reduced customer drilling and completions activity levels in the year ended December 31, 2020. Costs of revenue as a percent of revenue increased to 91.2% from 77.5% due to significant reductions in revenue-generating activity and pricing reductions we could not fully offset with cost reductions as well as yard closure costs in connection with our efforts to reduce and consolidate operational yards. Additionally, in conjunction with certain cost savings measures that were implemented during the year ended December 31, 2020, in response to market conditions, costs of revenue were impacted during the year ended December 31, 2020, by certain one-time costs totaling $5.6 million, including severance and yard closure costs.
Water Infrastructure. Cost of revenue decreased $67.4 million, or 40.4%, to $99.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $167.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cost of revenue as a percent of revenue increased to 79.4% from 75.3% primarily due to decreased pricing on non-pipeline water sources as well as the acceleration of certain prepaid expenses relating to water rights secured for a customer, due to the bankruptcy of such customer. Additionally, in conjunction with certain cost savings measures that were implemented during the year ended December 31, 2020, in response to market conditions, costs of revenue were impacted during the year ended December 31, 2020 by certain one-time costs totaling $0.5 million, including severance and yard closure costs.
Oilfield Chemicals. Costs of revenue decreased $86.9 million, or 37.7%, to $143.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $230.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Cost of revenue as a percent of revenue increased to 89.7% from 85.8% primarily due to significant reductions in revenue-generating activity we could not fully offset with cost reductions. Additionally, in conjunction with certain cost savings measures that were implemented during the year ended December 31, 2020, in response to market conditions, costs of revenue were impacted during the year ended December 31, 2020, by inventory adjustments and reserve additions of $0.6 million, non-recurring severance costs of $0.6 million, and yard closure and equipment rental return costs of $0.5 million, including costs associated with idling our Tyler, Texas manufacturing facility to consolidate production in Midland, Texas.
Other. Other costs were nominal for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $30.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the 2019 divestitures discussed above.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense decreased $18.0 million, or 15.4%, to $98.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $116.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a significant reduction in capital expenditures during recent quarters as well as a $1.7 million decrease related to the 2019 divestitures discussed above.
Gross (Loss) Profit
Gross profit decreased by $178.0 million, or 119.7%, to a gross loss of $29.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a gross profit of $148.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to lower revenue in all three segments resulting from decreased activity levels combined with decreased pricing that could not be fully offset with reductions in costs. Also impacting the decrease was $4.0 million of severance expenses and $3.0 million of yard closure costs as a result of reduced activity levels. Gross profit decreased by $145.9 million, $28.8 million and $21.7 million in our Water Services, Water Infrastructure and Oilfield Chemicals segments, respectively. This was partially offset by a $18.0 million decrease in depreciation and amortization expense. Gross margin as a percent of revenue was (4.8%) and 11.5% during the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $37.3 million, or 33.4%, to $74.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $111.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to reductions in wages and associated payroll taxes of $14.4 million driven by both terminations and wage reductions, plus reductions of $9.7 million in equity-based compensation costs, $6.8 million in incentive compensation costs, $4.3 million in travel, meals and entertainment costs, $3.6 million in professional fees and $5.5 million of other expenses from cost cutting measures in response to lower oil prices. The decrease was partially offset by a $3.8 million increase in bad debt expense and $3.2 million of severance expense associated with employee terminations and other cost savings measures implemented in response to market conditions.
Impairment
Goodwill and trademark impairment costs were $276.0 million and $4.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, all of our goodwill was impaired due to the significant decline in oil prices during the first quarter of 2020, coupled with the uncertainty associated with the future
recovery. We also recorded a $9.1 million partial impairment of our Rockwater trademark. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred $4.4 million of goodwill impairment in connection with divesting Affirm.
Impairment and abandonment of property and equipment costs were $7.9 million and $3.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020, impairment costs were comprised of leasehold improvements related to abandoned facilities, abandonment of certain saltwater and freshwater wells and obsolete machinery and equipment. For the year ended December 31, 2019, impairment costs were comprised of $1.1 million of pipelines with low utilization, $1.0 million of layflat hose considered obsolete, $0.9 million related to divested Canadian fixed assets, and $0.6 million related to an owned facility for sale.
Lease Abandonment Costs
Lease abandonment costs were $4.4 million and $2.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, lease abandonment costs were primarily related to newly abandoned properties associated with realignment and combining operational activity on fewer leased properties. Costs incurred in 2019 were comprised of lease terminations in connection with divesting and winding down Canadian and Affirm operations, two facility lease abandonments and accretion of expenses for previously abandoned facilities.
Net Interest Expense
Net interest expense decreased by $0.6 million, or 20.5%, to $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $2.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to lower average borrowings resulting from the repayment of all remaining borrowings on our credit facility during 2019.
Net (Loss) Income
Net income decreased by $405.9 million to a net loss of $401.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net income of $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to goodwill, trademark and fixed asset impairments and abandonments increasing $275.8 million and lower gross profit. This was partially offset by lower selling, general and administrative costs, lower losses on sales of property and equipment and lower interest expense.
Comparison of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We view EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as important indicators of performance. We define EBITDA as net income (loss), plus interest expense, income taxes, and depreciation and amortization. We define Adjusted EBITDA, as EBITDA plus/(minus) loss/(income) from discontinued operations, plus any impairment charges or asset write-offs pursuant to GAAP, plus non-cash losses on the sale of assets or subsidiaries, non-recurring compensation expense, non-cash compensation expense, and non-recurring or unusual expenses or charges, including severance expenses, transaction costs, or facilities-related exit and disposal-related expenditures and plus/(minus) foreign currency losses/(gains). The adjustments to EBITDA are generally consistent with such adjustments described in our Credit Facility. See “-Note Regarding Non-GAAP Financial Measures-EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA” for more information and a reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss), the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
Our board of directors, management and investors use EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to assess our financial performance because it allows them to compare our operating performance on a consistent basis across periods by removing the effects of our capital structure (such as varying levels of interest expense), asset base (such as depreciation and amortization) and items outside the control of our management team. We present EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA because we believe they provide useful information regarding the factors and trends affecting our business in addition to measures calculated under GAAP.
Note Regarding Non-GAAP Financial Measures
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not financial measures presented in accordance with GAAP. We believe that the presentation of these non-GAAP financial measures will provide useful information to investors in assessing our financial performance and results of operations. Net income is the GAAP measure most directly comparable to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA. Our non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered as alternatives to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure. Each of these non-GAAP financial measures has important limitations as an analytical tool due to exclusion of some but not all items that affect the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures. You should not consider EBITDA or Adjusted EBITDA in isolation or as substitutes for an analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Because EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA may be defined differently by other companies in our industry, our definitions of these non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies, thereby diminishing their utility. For further discussion, please see “Item 6. Selected Financial Data.”
The following table sets forth our reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to our net (loss) income, which is the most directly comparable GAAP measure, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 is set forth in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 under the caption “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
(1) For 2020, these costs were due to the significant adverse change to the demand for the Company’s services in connection with a sharp decline in the price of oil. For 2019, these costs were due primarily to the dissolution of our divested service lines.
(2) For 2020, the losses were primarily due to sales of underutilized or obsolete property and equipment. For 2019, these costs primarily related to losses on divestitures and related sales of property and equipment in connection with the wind-down of former services lines.
(3) For 2020, these costs were primarily related to certain subsidiaries acquired in the Rockwater Merger as well as legal related due diligence costs. For 2019, these costs primarily related to the dissolution of our divested service lines as well as certain rebranding costs.
EBITDA was ($299.4) million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $129.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Adjusted EBITDA was $20.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $182.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decreases in EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA resulted from a decrease in our revenues and gross profit, as discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
The impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on oil prices and the resulting sharp decline in U.S. onshore drilling and completion activity, and the uncertainty about the timing of a recovery, have had, and will likely continue to have, a negative impact on our financial results in the coming quarters. We have taken and continue to take actions to manage costs and cash, including but not limited to significantly reducing headcount, cutting salaries, closing operational yards,
reducing capital expenditures, streamlining operational and back-office functions, selling excess equipment, deferring payroll tax payments in accordance with the CARES Act and deferring applicable lease payments.
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash on hand, borrowing capacity under our current Credit Agreement and cash flows from operations. Our primary uses of capital have been to maintain our asset base, implement technological advancements, make capital expenditures to support organic growth, fund acquisitions, and when appropriate, repurchase shares of Class A common stock in the open market. Depending on market conditions and other factors, we may also issue debt and equity securities if needed.
As of December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding bank debt and a positive net cash position. We prioritize sustained positive free cash flow and a strong balance sheet, and evaluate potential acquisitions and investments in the context of those priorities, in addition to the economics of the opportunity. We believe this approach provides us with additional flexibility to evaluate larger investments as well as improved resilience in a sustained downturn versus many of our peers.
We intend to finance most of our capital expenditures, contractual obligations and working capital needs with cash on hand, cash generated from operations and borrowings under our Credit Agreement. For a discussion of the Credit Agreement, see “-Credit Agreement” below. Although we cannot provide any assurance, we believe that our current cash balance, operating cash flow and available borrowings under our Credit Agreement will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next twelve months.
As of December 31, 2020, cash and cash equivalents totaled $169.0 million and we had approximately $80.8 million of available borrowing capacity under our Credit Agreement. As of December 31, 2020, the borrowing base under the Credit Agreement was $96.4 million, we had no outstanding borrowings, and outstanding letters of credit totaled $15.6 million. The significant reduction in our borrowing base since December 31, 2019 was primarily driven by the meaningful reductions in our accounts receivable, which represent the primary collateral for the borrowing base, due to largely successful collections efforts combined with significantly reduced revenue levels. As of February 22, 2021, we had no outstanding borrowings, the borrowing base under the Credit Agreement was $121.1 million, the outstanding letters of credit totaled $15.6 million, and the available borrowing capacity under the Credit Agreement was $105.5 million.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019. The summary of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 is set forth in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 under the caption “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
Cash Flow Changes Between the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Operating Activities. Net cash provided by operating activities was $105.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $203.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $98.1 million decrease in net cash provided by operating activities related primarily to
decreased net income resulting from the adverse change to the demand for the Company’s services in connection with a significant decline in the price of oil, partially offset by increased cash inflows from reduced working capital balances.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $77.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $72.0 million decrease in net cash used in investing activities was primarily due to an $88.9 million reduction in purchases of property and equipment, a $10.0 million reduction in acquisitions and a $1.2 million increase in proceeds received from sales of property and equipment partially offset by a $24.7 million decrease of proceeds primarily related to the divestiture and wind-down of our Affirm subsidiary and the sand hauling and Canadian operations and a $3.0 million investment in note receivable in 2020.
Financing Activities. Net cash used in financing activities was $10.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash used in financing activities of $64.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $54.0 million decrease in net cash used in financing activities was primarily due to $45.0 million of net debt repayments in the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to zero in the year ended December 31, 2020, and a $7.7 million decrease in repurchases of shares of Class A Common Stock during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Credit Agreement
On November 1, 2017, in connection with the closing of the Rockwater Merger (the “Closing”), SES Holdings and Select LLC entered into a $300.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility (the “Credit Agreement”), by and among SES Holdings, as parent, Select LLC, as borrower, certain of SES Holdings’ subsidiaries, as guarantors, each of the lenders party thereto and Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as administrative agent, issuing lender and swingline lender (the “Administrative Agent”). The Credit Agreement has a sublimit of $40.0 million for letters of credit and a sublimit of $30.0 million for swingline loans. The maturity date of the Credit Agreement is the earlier of (a) November 1, 2022, and (b) the termination in whole of the Commitments pursuant to Section 2.1(b) of Article VII of the Credit Agreement.
The Credit Agreement permits extensions of credit up to the lesser of $300.0 million and a borrowing base that is determined by calculating the amount equal to the sum of (i) 85.0% of the Eligible Billed Receivables (as defined in the Credit Agreement), plus (ii) 75.0% of Eligible Unbilled Receivables (as defined in the Credit Agreement), provided that this amount will not equal more than 35.0% of the borrowing base, plus (iii) the lesser of (A) the product of 70.0% multiplied by the value of Eligible Inventory (as defined in the Credit Agreement) at such time and (B) the product of 85.0% multiplied by the Net Recovery Percentage (as defined in the Credit Agreement) identified in the most recent Acceptable Appraisal of Inventory (as defined in the Credit Agreement), multiplied by the value of Eligible Inventory at such time, provided that this amount will not equal more than 30.0% of the borrowing base, minus (iv) the aggregate amount of Reserves (as defined in the Credit Agreement), if any, established by the Administrative Agent from time to time, including, if any, the amount of the Dilution Reserve (as defined in the Credit Agreement). The borrowing base is calculated on a monthly basis pursuant to a borrowing base certificate delivered by Select LLC to the Administrative Agent.
Borrowings under the Credit Agreement bear interest, at Select LLC’s election, at either the (a) one-, two-, three- or six-month LIBOR (“Eurocurrency Rate”) or (b) the greatest of (i) the federal funds rate plus 0.5%, (ii) the one-month Eurocurrency Rate plus 1.0% and (iii) the Administrative Agent’s prime rate (the “Base Rate”), in each case plus an applicable margin, and interest shall be payable monthly in arrears. The applicable margin for Eurocurrency Rate loans ranges from 1.50% to 2.00% and the applicable margin for Base Rate loans ranges from 0.50% to 1.00%, in each case, depending on Select LLC’s average excess availability under the Credit Agreement. During the continuance of a bankruptcy event of default, automatically and during the continuance of any other default, upon the Administrative Agent’s or the required lenders’ election, all outstanding amounts under the Credit Agreement will bear interest at 2.00% plus the otherwise applicable interest rate.
The obligations under the Credit Agreement are guaranteed by SES Holdings and certain subsidiaries of SES Holdings and Select LLC and secured by a security interest in substantially all of the personal property assets of SES Holdings, Select LLC and their domestic subsidiaries.
The Credit Agreement contains certain customary representations and warranties, affirmative and negative covenants and events of default. If an event of default occurs and is continuing, the lenders may declare all amounts outstanding under the Credit Agreement to be immediately due and payable.
In addition, the Credit Agreement restricts SES Holdings’ and Select LLC’s ability to make distributions on, or redeem or repurchase, its equity interests, except for certain distributions, including distributions of cash so long as, both at the time of the distribution and after giving effect to the distribution, no default exists under the Credit Agreement and either (a) excess availability at all times during the preceding 30 consecutive days, on a pro forma basis and after giving effect to such distribution, is not less than the greater of (1) 25.0% of the lesser of (A) the maximum revolver amount and (B) the then-effective borrowing base and (2) $37.5 million or (b) if SES Holdings’ fixed charge coverage ratio is at least 1.0 to 1.0 on a pro forma basis, and excess availability at all times during the preceding 30 consecutive days, on a pro forma basis and after giving effect to such distribution, is not less than the greater of (1) 20.0% of the lesser of (A) the maximum revolver amount and (B) the then-effective borrowing base and (2) $30.0 million. Additionally, the Credit Agreement generally permits Select LLC to make distributions to allow the Company to make payments required under the existing Tax Receivable Agreements.
The Credit Agreement also requires SES Holdings to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio of at least 1.0 to 1.0 at any time availability under the Credit Agreement is less than the greater of (i) 10.0% of the lesser of (A) the maximum revolver amount and (B) the then-effective borrowing base and (ii) $15.0 million and continuing through and including the first day after such time that availability under the Credit Agreement has equaled or exceeded the greater of (i) 10.0% of the lesser of (A) the maximum revolver amount and (B) the then-effective borrowing base and (ii) $15.0 million for 60 consecutive calendar days.
We were in compliance with all debt covenants as of December 31, 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we had no material off-balance sheet arrangements. As such, we are not exposed to any material financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in such financing arrangements.
Contractual Obligations
The table below provides estimates of the timing of future payments that we are obligated to make based on agreements in place at December 31, 2020.
Tax Receivable Agreements
We intend to fund any obligation under the Tax Receivable Agreements with cash from operations or borrowings under our Credit Agreement. With respect to obligations under each of our Tax Receivable Agreements (except in cases where we elect to terminate the Tax Receivable Agreements early, the Tax Receivable Agreements are terminated early due to certain mergers or other changes of control or we have available cash but fail to make payments when due), generally we may elect to defer payments due under the Tax Receivable Agreements if we do not have available cash to satisfy our payment obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreements or if our contractual obligations limit our ability to make these payments. Any such deferred payments under the Tax Receivable Agreements generally will accrue interest.
We intend to account for any amounts payable under the Tax Receivable Agreements in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 450, Contingent Consideration. For further discussion regarding such an acceleration and its potential impact, please read “Item 1A. Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Organizational Structure-In certain cases, payments under the Tax Receivable Agreements may be accelerated and/or significantly exceed the actual benefits, if any, we realize in respect of the tax attributes subject to the Tax Receivable Agreements.”
We have assessed the amount of any liability under the Tax Receivable Agreements required under the provisions of ASC 450 in connection with preparing the consolidated financial statements. We determined that there was no liability related to the Tax Receivable Agreements arising from the corporate reorganization and subsequent exchanges as of December 31, 2020, due to there not being any payments under the Tax Receivable Agreements that are probable under the provisions of ASC 450 within the foreseeable future. The Company would generally expect to recognize the liability under the Tax Receivable Agreements as probable in conjunction with the conclusion that deferred tax assets are more likely than not to be realized and, therefore, part or all of the valuation allowance on the deferred tax assets is released. We believe this correlation is appropriate given the relationship between the likelihood of realization of deferred tax assets and the probability of utilization of certain tax benefits that are subject to the Tax Receivable Agreements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures about any contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Our critical accounting policies are described below to provide a better understanding of how we develop our assumptions and judgments about future events and related estimations and how they can impact our financial statements. The following accounting policies involve critical accounting estimates because they are dependent on our judgment and assumptions about matters that are inherently uncertain.
We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable according to the current facts and circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Estimates and assumptions about future events and their effects are subject to uncertainty and, accordingly, these estimates may change as new events occur, as more experience is acquired, as additional information is obtained, and as the business environment in which we operate changes. We believe the current assumptions, judgments and estimates used to determine amounts reflected in our consolidated financial statements are appropriate, however, actual results may differ under different conditions. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this Annual Report.
Goodwill and other intangible assets: The purchase price of acquired businesses is allocated to its identifiable assets and liabilities based upon estimated fair values as of the acquisition date. Goodwill and other intangible assets are initially recorded at their fair values. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price of acquisitions over the fair value of the net assets acquired in a business combination. Our goodwill at December 31, 2020 and 2019, totaled zero and $266.9 million, respectively. Goodwill and other intangible assets not subject to amortization are tested for
impairment annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. Intangible assets with finite useful lives are amortized either on a straight-line basis over the asset’s estimated useful life or on a basis that reflects the pattern in which the economic benefits of the intangible assets are realized.
Impairment of goodwill, long-lived assets and intangible assets: Long-lived assets, such as property and equipment and finite-lived intangible assets, are evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying value may not be recoverable. Recoverability is measured by a comparison of their carrying amount to the estimated undiscounted cash flows to be generated by those assets. If the undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying amount, we record impairment losses for the excess of their carrying value over the estimated fair value. Fair value is determined, in part, by the estimated cash flows to be generated by those assets. Our cash flow estimates are based upon, among other things, historical results adjusted to reflect our best estimate of future market rates, utilization levels, and operating performance. Development of future cash flows also requires management to make assumptions and to apply judgment, including the timing of future expected cash flows, using the appropriate discount rates and determining salvage values. The estimate of fair value represents our best estimates of these factors based on current industry trends and reference to market transactions and is subject to variability. Assets are generally grouped at the lowest level of identifiable cash flows. We operate within the oilfield service industry, and the cyclical nature of the oil and gas industry that we serve and our estimates of the period over which future cash flows will be generated, as well as the predictability of these cash flows, can have a significant impact on the estimated fair value of these assets and, in periods of prolonged down cycles, may result in impairment charges. Changes to our key assumptions related to future performance, market conditions and other economic factors could adversely affect our impairment valuation. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we impaired $7.9 million of property and equipment because the carrying values were deemed not recoverable and were comprised of leasehold improvements related to abandoned facilities, abandonment of certain saltwater and fresh water wells and obsolete machinery and equipment. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we impaired $3.7 million of property and equipment as the carrying values were deemed not recoverable, including $1.1 million of pipelines with low utilization, $1.0 million of layflat hose considered obsolete, $0.9 million related to divesting Canadian fixed assets, and $0.6 million related to an owned facility for sale.
We conduct our annual goodwill impairment tests in the fourth quarter of each year, and whenever impairment indicators arise, by examining relevant events and circumstances which could have a negative impact on our goodwill, such as macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors that have a negative effect on earnings and cash flows, overall financial performance, acquisitions and divestitures and other relevant entity-specific events. If a qualitative assessment indicates that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then we would be required to perform a quantitative impairment test for goodwill comparing the reporting unit’s carrying value to its fair value. The Company’s reporting units are based on its organizational and reporting structure. In determining fair values for the reporting units, the Company relies primarily on the income, market and cost approaches for valuation. In the income approach, the Company discounts predicted future cash flows using a weighted-average cost of capital calculation based on publicly-traded peer companies. In the market approach, valuation multiples are developed from both publicly-traded peer companies as well as other company transactions. The cost approach considers replacement cost as the primary indicator of value.
If the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, impairment is calculated based on the difference between the fair value and carrying value in accordance with our early adoption of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU “) 2017-04- Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment. Application of the goodwill impairment test requires judgment, including the identification of reporting units, allocation of assets (including goodwill) and liabilities to reporting units and determining the fair value. The determination of reporting unit fair value relies upon certain estimates and assumptions that are complex and are affected by numerous factors, including the general economic environment and levels of E&P activity of oil and gas companies, our financial performance and trends and our strategies and business plans, among others. Unanticipated changes, including immaterial revisions, to these assumptions could result in a provision for impairment in a future period. Given the nature of these evaluations and their application to specific assets and time frames, it is not possible to reasonably quantify the impact of changes in these assumptions. During the first quarter of 2020, we recorded $266.9 million of goodwill impairment due to the significant decline in oil prices coupled with the uncertainty associated with future recovery. This impairment brought our goodwill balance to zero. During the first quarter of 2019, we recorded $4.4 million of goodwill impairment in connection with divesting and
winding down our Affirm subsidiary. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the fair values of our reporting units were greater than the carrying values resulting in no additional impairment. Although we believe the historical assumptions and estimates we have made are reasonable and appropriate, different assumptions and estimates could materially impact our reported financial results.
Self-insurance: We self-insure, through deductibles and retentions, up to certain levels for losses related to general liability, workers’ compensation and employer’s liability, vehicle liability, and effective June 1, 2020, health insurance. Our exposure (i.e. the retention or deductible) per occurrence is $2.0 million for general liability, $1.0 million for workers’ compensation and employer’s liability, $2.0 million for vehicle liability and $0.2 million for health insurance. We also have an excess loss policy over these coverages with a limit of $100.0 million in the aggregate. Management regularly reviews its estimates of reported and unreported claims and provides for losses through reserves. We use actuarial estimates to record our liability for future periods. If the number of claims or the costs associated with those claims were to increase significantly over our estimates, additional charges to earnings could be necessary to cover required payments. As of December 31, 2020, we estimate the range of exposure to be from $12.9 million to $14.9 million and have recorded liabilities of $13.9 million, which represents management’s best estimate of probable loss related to workers’ compensation and employer’s liability, and vehicle liability. Additionally, as of December 31, 2020, accrued health insurance and accrued general liabilities were $1.7 million and $0.5 million, respectively.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recent accounting pronouncements: In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which amends GAAP by introducing a new impairment model for financial instruments that is based on expected credit losses rather than incurred credit losses. The new impairment model applies to most financial assets, including trade accounts receivable. The amendments are effective for interim and annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2019 and requires a modified retrospective transition approach. After reviewing the new standard and reexamining current and prior year bad debt expense from trade receivables, as well as updating future expectations, the adoption of the new standard in the first quarter of 2020 did not have a material impact to the Company’s financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, “Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes” (“ASU 2019-12”), which simplifies the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and also clarifies and amends existing guidance to improve consistent application. We adopted ASU 2019-12 in the third quarter of 2020 and elected all aspects of this standard as of the beginning of 2020. The adoption did not have a material impact to the Company’s financial statements.