Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following management discussion and analysis focuses on those factors that had a material effect on the Company’s financial results of operations and financial condition during 2020 and 2019 and should be read in conjunction with the Company’s audited financial statements and notes thereto for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, included herein.
Impact of the COVID --19 Pandemic
The Company is closely monitoring the novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic and the impact on its business. The outbreak and continuing spread of COVID-19 has resulted in a substantial curtailment of business activities worldwide and is causing weakened economic conditions, both nationally and globally. As part of efforts to contain the spread of COVID-19, federal, state, local and foreign governments have imposed various restrictions on the conduct of business and travel. Government restrictions, such as stay-at-home orders and quarantines and company remote work policies have led to a significant number of business closures and slowdowns. These business closures and slowdowns have already adversely impacted and will likely continue to adversely impact the Company directly, as well as cause its customers and suppliers to slow or stop production, which will likely significantly disrupt the Company's sales, production and supply chain. For example, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company began to experience decreased demand for its products and services during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The Company anticipates a decrease in global demand for its products and services will continue in 2021 and beyond. This significant decrease in demand will likely have a material adverse impact on the Company's business, operating results and financial condition. The Company’s facilities continue to operate and are doing so safely, having implemented social distancing and enhanced health, safety and sanitization measures. The Company's leadership continues to address the situation and is adjusting as necessary. The Company has also implemented necessary procedures to enable a significant portion of its employee base to work remotely. As the situation continues to evolve into a more prolonged pandemic, the Company expects the COVID-19 pandemic to have a significant adverse effect on economies and financial markets globally, potentially leading to a significant worldwide economic downturn, which could have a significant adverse effect on the Company's business, operating results and financial condition. However, the duration of these trends and the magnitude of such impacts cannot be precisely estimated at this time, as they are affected by a number of factors (some of which are outside management’s control), including those presented in Part II, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” above. To partially mitigate the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company implemented cost reduction efforts including reducing the Company's workforce by approximately 30%, temporary reductions in board and officer compensation, temporary suspension of the Company’s contribution to its 401(k) retirement plan and the elimination of all non-essential expenditures.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The Company prepares its financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America. Therefore, the Company is required to make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions that the Company believes are reasonable based upon the information available. These estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. The accounting policies and estimates which IKONICS believes are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating its reported financial results include the following:
Revenue recognition. Revenue is measured based on consideration specified in the contract with a customer, adjusted for any applicable estimates of variable consideration and other factors affecting the transaction price, including noncash consideration, consideration paid or payable to customers and significant financing components. While most of the Company’s revenue is contracted with customers through one-time purchase orders and short-term contracts, the Company does have long-term arrangements with certain customers. Revenue from all customers is recognized when a performance obligation is satisfied by transferring control of a distinct good or service to a customer.
Individually promised goods and services in a contract are considered a distinct performance obligation and accounted for separately if the customer can benefit from the individual good or service on its own or with other resources that are readily available to the customer and the good or service is separately identifiable from other promises in the arrangement. When an arrangement includes multiple performance obligations, the consideration is allocated between the performance obligations in proportion to their estimated standalone selling price. Costs related to products delivered are recognized in the period incurred, unless criteria for capitalization of costs are met. Costs of revenues consist primarily of direct labor, manufacturing overhead, materials and components. The Company does not incur significant upfront costs to obtain a contract. If costs to obtain a contract were to become material, the costs would be recorded as an asset and amortized to expense in a manner consistent with the related recognition of revenue.
The Company excludes governmental assessed and imposed taxes on revenue transactions that are invoiced to customers from revenue. The Company includes freight billed to customers in revenue. Shipping and handling costs associated with outbound freight after control over a product has transferred to a customer are accounted for as a fulfillment cost and are included in cost of goods sold.
The timing of revenue recognition, billings and cash collections results in accounts receivable on the balance sheet.
Performance obligations. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer. A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation in proportion to its standalone selling price and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. The Company’s various performance obligations and the timing or method of revenue recognition are discussed below:
The Company sells its products to both distributors and end-users. Each unit of product delivered under a customer order represents a distinct and separate performance obligation as the customer can benefit from each unit on its own or with other resources that are readily available to the customer and each unit of product is separately identifiable from other products in the arrangement.
The transaction price for the Company’s products is the invoiced amount. The Company does not have variable consideration in the form of refunds, credits, rebates, price concessions, pricing incentives or other items impacting transaction price. The purchase order pricing in arrangements with customers is deemed to approximate standalone selling price; therefore, the Company does not need to allocate proceeds on a relative standalone selling price allocation between performance obligations. The Company does not disclose information about remaining performance obligations that have original expected durations of one year or less. There are no material obligations that extend beyond one year.
Revenue is recognized when transfer of control occurs as defined by the terms in the customer agreement. The Company immediately recognizes incidental items that are immaterial in the context of the contract. The Company does not have any significant financing components in its customer arrangements as payment is received at or shortly after the point of sale, generally thirty to ninety days.
The Company estimates returns based on an analysis of historical experience if the right to return products is granted to its customers. The Company does not record a return asset as non-conforming products are generally not returned. The Company’s return policy does not vary by geography. The customer has no rotation or price protection rights.
Trade receivables. Trade receivables include amounts invoiced and currently due from customers. The amounts due are stated at their net estimated realizable value. The Company records an allowance for doubtful accounts to provide for the estimated amount of receivables that will not be collected. The allowance is based on a review of all outstanding amounts on an on-going basis. Management determines the allowance for doubtful accounts by regularly evaluating individual customer receivables and considers a customer’s financial condition, credit history, and current economic conditions. Trade receivables are written off when deemed uncollectible. Recoveries of trade receivables previously written off are recorded when received. Accounts are considered past due if payment is not received according to agreed-upon terms.
Sales commissions. Sales commissions paid to sales representatives are eligible for capitalization as they are incremental costs that would not have been incurred without entering into a specific sales arrangement and are recoverable through the expected margin on the transaction. The Company has elected to apply the practical expedient provided by ASC 340-40-25-4 and recognize the incremental costs of obtaining contracts as an expense when incurred, as the amortization period of the assets that would have otherwise been recognized is one year or less. The Company records these costs in selling, general, and administrative expense.
Product warranties. The Company offers warranties on various products and services. These warranties are assurance type warranties that are not sold on a standalone basis; therefore, they are not considered distinct performance obligations. The Company estimates the costs that may be incurred under its warranties and records a liability in the amount of such costs at the time the revenue is recognized for the product sale.
International revenue. The Company markets its products to numerous countries in North America, Europe, Latin America, Asia and other parts of the world. Foreign sales were approximately 29.7% of total sales in 2020 and 29.4% of total sales in 2019.
Inventories. Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value using the last in, first out (LIFO) method. The Company monitors its inventory for obsolescence and records reductions from cost when required.
Income Taxes. Deferred taxes are provided on a liability method whereby deferred tax assets are recognized for deductible temporary differences and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards and deferred tax liabilities are recognized for taxable temporary differences. Temporary differences are the differences between the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax basis. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted for the effects of changes in tax laws and rates on the date of enactment.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Sales. Sales decreased 23.8% in 2020 to $13.4 million from $17.6 million in 2019 due to the slowdown in economic activity related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Chromaline 2020 sales of $8.5 million decreased by 26.1% from the 2019 sales of $11.5 million. IKONICS Imaging 2020 sales of $3.7 million were $482,000, or 11.5%, lower than 2019 sales. AMS sales decreased from $1.6 million in 2019 to $952,000 in 2020, a 39.0% decrease. DTX sales also decreased in 2020 from $394,000 in 2019 to $295,000 in 2020. IKONICS anticipates that the COVID-19 outbreak will continue to adversely impact sales in all of its divisions for most of 2021 due to decreasing demand for its products and services.
Gross Profit. Gross profit was $3.9 million, or 29.1% of sales, in 2020 compared to $5.4 million, or 30.6%, of sales in 2019. Lower sales and production volume, resulted in the Chromaline gross margin decreasing from 26.9% in 2019 to 26.6% in 2020. A decrease in sales volumes also resulted in the AMS gross margin decreasing to a negative 25.1% in 2020 from 10.3% in 2019. A large portion of the AMS cost structure is fixed, causing sales volumes to have a significant impact on its gross margin. The IKONICS Imaging 2020 gross margin improved from 45.8% in 2019 to 46.8% in 2020 as a more favorable sales mix offset the negative impact of lower sales and production volumes while the DTX gross margin decreased from 60.0% in 2019 to 52.2% in 2020. IKONICS anticipates that the COVID-19 outbreak will continue to adversely impact gross margins for most of 2021 due to lower sales volumes and production output.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses were $5.0 million, or 37.4% of sales, in 2020 compared to $5.5 million, or 31.1% of sales, in 2019. Selling, general and administrative expenses in 2020 decreased primarily from the Company's cost reduction initiative resulting in fewer personnel, travel, trade show, and promotional expenses. These cost savings were partially offset by the one-time expense incurred in 2020 of $365,000 related to the Chief Executive Officer transition. The transition costs include severance payments to the former CEO, a signing bonus, relocation expenses and executive search consulting expenses.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses for 2020 were $671,000, or 5.0% of sales, versus $870,000, or 4.9%, of sales in 2019. Research and development expenses in 2019 were unfavorably impacted by a $93,000 write off of patent application costs that were previously recorded as an asset as the Company determined that it would no longer continue to pursue those patent applications. Research and Development expenses in 2020 were also lower due to staffing reductions or other cost reduction efforts
Interest Expense. Interest expense for 2020 and 2019 was $87,000 and $90,000, respectively.
Other Income. Other Income for 2020 was $1.2 million due to forgiveness of its Paycheck Protection, or PPP, loan under the CARES Act compared to $61,000 in 2019. On April 18, 2020, the Company executed a promissory note in favor of BMO Harris Bank evidencing an unsecured loan in the aggregate principal amount of $1,214,500, which was made pursuant to the PPP. The PPP was established under the CARES Act, which was enacted on March 27, 2020, and is administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration, or the SBA. All the funds under the loan were disbursed to the Company on April 22, 2020. The Company used all proceeds from the loan to retain employees, maintain payroll and make utility payments. Under the initial terms of the CARES Act, loan recipients could apply for and be granted forgiveness for all or a portion of the loans granted under the PPP. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company submitted an application for 100% forgiveness of the PPP Loan and upon approval by the SBA and the Lender, the Company received forgiveness for 100% of the $1,214,500 loan.
Income Taxes. For 2020, the effective tax rate was a benefit of 32.3%, compared to a benefit of 17.5% for 2019. The primary driver of the change in the Company’s effective tax rate is attributable to a tax benefit in the current period to recognize a net operating loss carryback claim. The Company recorded an income tax benefit of $210,000 and $172,000 for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Outside of the 2016 building expansion, for which $3.4 million in financing was obtained, and the PPP loan, the Company has financed its operations principally with funds generated from operations. These funds have been sufficient to cover the Company’s normal operating expenditures, annual capital requirements, and research and development expenditures.
Cash and cash equivalents were $3.7 million and $964,000 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In addition to its cash, the Company held $2.2 million of short-term investments as of December 31, 2019. There were no short-term investments as of December 31, 2020. The Company used $399,000 in cash from operating activities during 2020, compared to using $477,000 of cash from operating activities in 2019. Cash provided by operating activities is primarily the result of the net loss adjusted for non-cash depreciation and amortization, deferred taxes, loan forgiveness and certain changes in working capital components discussed in the following paragraph.
During 2020, trade receivables decreased by $316,000. This decrease was due primarily to a slowdown in sales of products and services in 2020 as a result of the aforementioned COVID-19 pandemic. The Company believes that the quality of its receivables is high and that strong internal controls are in place to maintain proper collections. Inventories decreased by $536,000 as the Company tightened inventory levels in response to the decrease in demand for its products. Prepaid expenses and other assets decreased by $781,000 reflecting a decrease in a receivable related to the reimbursement of 2019 medical insurance costs the Company received from its stop-loss insurance carrier. Accrued expenses decreased by $592,000, reflecting a decrease in the accrual for health insurance costs. Accounts payable decreased by $302,000 due to the Company's costs reduction efforts and a reduction in raw material purchases in anticipation of lower sales volume. Income taxes receivable increased by $218,000 as the Company recognized an income tax benefit attributable to a net operating loss carryback claim.
During 2019, an increase in sales during the fourth quarter of 2019 resulted in a $220,000 trade receivables increase. Inventories increased by $134,000 mainly due to higher levels of IKONICS Imaging equipment inventory compared to 2018. Accounts payable increased from 2018 to 2019 by $114,000 due to the timing of payments to and purchases from vendors. Prepaid expenses and other assets increased $532,000 from 2018 to 2019. The increase is mainly due to a receivable related to the reimbursement of 2019 medical insurance costs that the Company will receive from its stop-loss insurance carrier. Compared to 2018, accrued expenses increased $513,000 reflecting an increase in accrued medical insurance costs. Income taxes receivables decreased $1,000 due to the timing of estimated 2019 tax payments compared to the calculated 2019 tax liability.
During 2020, cash provided by investing activities was $2.1 million. Nine certificates of deposits totaling $2.2 million matured during the year. The Company's purchases of equipment of $150,000 were mainly for improvements to production and process capabilities and to replace a vehicle. The Company received $18,000 in proceeds from the sale of vehicle. Also, during 2020, the Company incurred $15,000 in patent application costs that the Company records as an asset and amortizes upon successful completion of the application process.
During 2019, cash provided by investing activities was $8,000. The Company purchased seventeen certificates of deposits totaling $5.6 million. Twenty two certificates of deposits totaling $6.1 million matured during 2019. The Company’s purchases of property and equipment of $478,000 in 2019 were mainly for
improvements to production and process capabilities and to replace two vehicles. The Company received $16,000 in proceeds from the sale of two vehicles and equipment. Also, during 2019, the Company incurred $20,000 in patent application costs that the Company records as an asset and amortizes upon successful completion of the application process.
For 2020, net cash provided by investing activities was $1.1 million compared to $190,000 of cash used in financing activities during 2019. The $1.2 million proceeds from debt in 2020 reflects the receipt of the PPP loan discussed below. Related to the Company's financing agreement, the Company made principal payments of $144,000 and $140,000 during 2020 and 2019, respectively. During 2019, the Company purchased 7,199 shares of its own stock for $50,000.
On April 18, 2020, the Company entered into a loan pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program under the CARES Act, as administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (the “SBA”). The loan, in the principal amount of $1,214,500 (the “PPP Loan”), was disbursed by BMO Harris Bank National Association (“Lender”) on April 22, 2020, pursuant to a Paycheck Protection Program Promissory Note and Agreement (the “Note and Agreement”).
Under the initial terms of the PPP Loan, the loan would have matured on the two-year anniversary of the funding date, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.00% per annum. Monthly principal and interest payments, less the amount of any potential forgiveness (discussed below), would commence after the six-month anniversary of the funding date. The Company did not provide any collateral or guarantees in connection with the PPP Loan, nor did the Company pay any facility charge to obtain the PPP Loan. The Note and Agreement provided for customary events of default, including those relating to failure to make payment, bankruptcy, breaches of representations and material adverse effects. The Company could have prepaid the principal of the PPP Loan at any time without incurring any prepayment charges. All or a portion of the PPP Loan was eligible to be forgiven by the SBA and the Lender upon application by the Company. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company submitted an application for 100% forgiveness of the PPP Loan. Prior to end of 2020, both the Lender and the SBA forgave 100% of the Company's PPP loan.
On April 1, 2016, the Company entered into a financing agreement (the “Financing Agreement”) under which the Duluth Economic Development Authority (the “Issuer”) agreed to sell $3,415,000 of its Tax Exempt Industrial Revenue Bonds, Series 2016 (IKONICS Project) (the “Bonds”) to Wells Fargo Bank, National Association (the “Bank”), and the Bank agreed to lend to the Company the proceeds received from the sale of the Bonds (the “Loan”). Related to the Company’s Loan, the Company made principal payments of $144,000 and $140,000 during 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The Company is subject to certain customary covenants set forth in the Loan, including a requirement that the Company maintain a debt service coverage ratio of not less than 1.25 to 1.00. As of December 31, 2020 the Company was in compliance with the debt service coverage ratio loan covenant, however, as of December 31, 2019 the Company was out of compliance with the debt service coverage ratio but obtained a waiver for the covenant violation. There is no certainty that a waiver can be obtained in the future if similar violations occur. The Company amended the covenant terms in February of 2020 to change the debt service coverage ratio calculation from a rolling quarterly calculation to an annual calculation beginning December 31, 2020. If the Company has future violations of its covenants, and is unable to obtain appropriate waivers, it could have a significant adverse effect on the Company's liquidity. Subsequent to December 31, 2020, the Company was notified by the bank that per the loan agreement the bank will recall the loan on April 1, 2021. The Company believes that any adverse effect of the loan recall is mitigated by its strong working capital including cash and cash equivalents of $3.7 million along with the Company's $2.0 million available line of credit as of December 31, 2020. However, the Company cannot reasonably estimate the future financial impact on its operations or working capital position given the recent downturn in business due to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.
A bank line of credit providing for borrowings of up to $2,050,000 expires August 30, 2021. The line of credit is collateralized by the Company’s assets and bears interest at 1.8 percentage points over the 30-day LIBOR rate. The Company did not utilize this line of credit during 2020 or 2019, and there were no borrowings outstanding as of December 31, 2020 or December 31, 2019. There are no financial covenants related to the line of credit, and the Company expects that it will secure a similar line of credit when the current line of credit expires.
The Company believes that current financial resources, its line of credit, and cash generated from operations, along with the Company’s capacity for additional debt and/or equity financing will be sufficient to fund current and anticipated business operations. However, the full extent of the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s customers, supply chain and business cannot be reasonably assessed at this time and the Company expects its full year 2021 results of operations to be adversely affected. The Company has developed a plan to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 which includes permanent reductions to the Company's workforce, temporary reductions in board and officer compensation, temporary suspension of the Company’s contribution to its 401(k) retirement plan and the elimination of all non-essential expenditures. The impact of COVID-19 on the Company’s operating results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including governmental and business reactions to the pandemic.
Capital Expenditures
In 2020, the Company incurred $150,000 of capital expenditures mainly for improvements to production and process capabilities and to replace a vehicle. In 2019, the Company incurred $478,000 of capital expenditures which were mainly for improvements to production and process capabilities and to replace two vehicles.
The Company expects capital expenditures in 2021 of approximately $220,000. The planned expenditures primarily will be to upgrade some of the Company's production and research equipment. These commitments are expected to be funded with cash generated from operating activities or cash on hand.
International Activity
The Company markets its products in numerous countries in various regions of the world, including North America, Europe, Latin America, and Asia. The Company’s 2020 foreign sales of $4.0 million were approximately 29.7% of total sales, compared to the 2019 foreign sales of $5.2 million, which were 29.4% of total sales.
The Company’s foreign transactions are primarily negotiated, invoiced and paid in U.S. dollars, though a portion is transacted in Euros. IKONICS has not implemented an economic hedging strategy to reduce the risk of foreign currency translation exposures, which management does not believe to be significant based on the scope and geographic diversity of the Company’s foreign operations. Furthermore, the impact of foreign exchange on the Company’s balance sheet and operating results was not material in either 2020 or 2019.
Future Outlook
See the discussion under the heading “Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic” above for the Company’s discussion of the COVID-19 pandemic.
IKONICS has spent an average of approximately 5% of annual sales in research and development and has made capital expenditures related to new products and programs. The Company plans to maintain its efforts in these areas to expedite internal product development as well as to form technological alliances with outside entities to commercialize new product opportunities.
The Company is also continuing to pursue DTX-related business initiatives. In addition to making efforts towards growing the inkjet technology business, the Company offers a range of products for creating texture surfaces and has introduced a fluid for use in prototyping. The Company is currently working on production improvements as part of its joint development agreement with AKK, a German manufacturer of high quality printers, to enhance its customer offerings. The Company has been awarded European, Japanese, and United States patents on its DTX technologies. The Company has also modified its DTX technology to facilitate entry into the market for prototyping.
The Company continues to make progress on its AMS business. The Company has three long-term sales agreements in place for its technology with major aerospace companies. However, based on customer communications, the Company anticipates reduced order volume for 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Both the Chromaline and IKONICS Imaging units operate in mature markets. Although these business units require aggressive strategies to grow market share, both are developing new products and business relationships that the Company believes will contribute to growth. Early in 2019, the Company introduced its new IKONART® product to positive reviews and is generating sales. IKONART® provides a new way to make custom reusable stencils for the creative arts markets. In addition to its traditional emphasis on domestic markets, the Company will continue efforts to grow its business internationally by attempting to develop new markets and expanding market share where it has already established a presence. However, the strong U.S. dollar has made international growth challenging.
Other future activities undertaken to expand the Company’s business may include strategic partnerships, acquisitions, building improvements, equipment additions, new product development and marketing opportunities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which revises guidance for the accounting for credit losses on financial instruments within its scope, and in November 2018, issued ASU No. 2018-19 and in April 2019, issued ASU No. 2019-04 and in May 2019, issued ASU No. 2019-05, and in November 2019, issued ASU No. 2019-11, which amended the standard. The new standard introduces an approach, based on expected losses, to estimate credit losses on certain types of financial instruments and modifies the impairment model for available-for-sale debt securities. The new approach to estimating credit losses (referred to as the current expected credit losses model) applies to most financial assets measured at amortized cost and certain other instruments, including trade and other receivables, loans, held-to-maturity debt securities, net investments in leases and off-balance-sheet credit exposures. This ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. Entities are required to apply the standard’s provisions as a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the beginning of the first reporting period in which the guidance is adopted. The Company is still evaluating the impact of this ASU.