Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019 is presented below. Discussions of fiscal 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found under Item 7 of Part II of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, as filed with the SEC on February 7, 2020.
You should read the following discussion in conjunction with the audited Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report.
Our operations are organized around the following principal activities:
Media:
The Media segment reflects the production and monetization of long-form and short-form video content across various platforms, including WWE Network, broadcast and pay television, digital and social media, as well as filmed entertainment. Across these platforms, revenues principally consist of content rights fees associated with the distribution of our programming content, subscriptions to WWE Network, and advertising and sponsorships.
Live Events:
Live events provide ongoing content for our media platforms. Live Event segment revenues consist primarily of ticket sales, including primary and secondary distribution, revenues from events for which we receive a fixed fee, as well as the sale of travel packages associated with the Company’s global live events.
Consumer Products:
The Consumer Products segment engages in the merchandising of WWE branded products, such as video games, toys and apparel, through licensing arrangements and direct-to-consumer sales. Revenues principally consist of royalties and licensee fees related to WWE branded products, and sales of merchandise distributed at our live events and through eCommerce platforms.
Results of Operations
The Company presents Adjusted OIBDA as the primary measure of segment profit (loss). The Company defines Adjusted OIBDA as operating income before depreciation and amortization, excluding stock-based compensation, certain impairment charges and other non-recurring material items. Adjusted OIBDA includes depreciation and amortization expenses directly related to supporting the operations of our segments, including content production asset amortization, depreciation and amortization of costs related to content delivery and technology assets utilized for WWE Network, as well as amortization of right-of-use assets related to finance leases of equipment used to produce and broadcast our live events. The Company believes the presentation of Adjusted OIBDA is relevant and useful for investors because it allows investors to view our segment performance in the same manner as the primary method used by management to evaluate segment performance and make decisions about allocating resources. Additionally, we believe that Adjusted OIBDA is a primary measure used by media investors, analysts and peers for comparative purposes.
Adjusted OIBDA is a non-GAAP financial measure and may be different than similarly-titled non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies. A limitation of Adjusted OIBDA is that it excludes depreciation and amortization, which represents the periodic charge for certain fixed assets and intangible assets used in our business. Additionally, Adjusted OIBDA excludes stock-based compensation, a non-cash expense that may vary between periods with limited correlation to underlying operating performance, as well as other non-recurring material items. Adjusted OIBDA should not be regarded as an alternative to operating income or net income as an indicator of operating performance, or to the statement of cash flows as a measure of liquidity, nor should it be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. We believe that operating income is the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure to Adjusted OIBDA.
Unallocated corporate general and administrative expenses largely relate to corporate functions such as finance, legal, human resources, facilities and information technology. These unallocated corporate general and administrative expenses will be shown, as applicable, as a reconciling item in tables where segment and consolidated results are both shown.
Summary
In December 2019, an outbreak of a new strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) began in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains and created significant volatility and disruption of financial markets. COVID-19 has resulted in restrictions, postponements and cancellations of various events, such as the relocation of WrestleMania 36 and the cancellation of ticketed events due to public health concerns. The impact of COVID-19 to our 2020 results had a greater impact on our live events and consumer products segments, which are highly dependent on ticket sales and purchases of merchandise by consumers at our live events. Our Media segment was impacted to a lesser extent since a large portion of these revenues are derived from contractual rights fees from our domestic and international distribution arrangements, as well as subscriber fees from WWE Network. We continue to deliver the weekly wrestling content associated with these arrangements (e.g. RAW, SmackDown and NXT) without ticketed live audiences, and continue to provide programming on WWE Network. We will monitor the developments of COVID-19 and actively manage our business to respond to the potential impacts. Additionally, please refer to Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors, which provides a discussion of risk factors related to COVID-19.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
(dollars in millions, except where noted)
The following tables present our consolidated results followed by our Adjusted OIBDA results:
(1)Our consolidated net revenues increased by $13.8 million, or 1%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. This increase was driven by $189.7 million in incremental core content rights fees revenues primarily associated with the October 2019 renewal of our key domestic distribution agreements of our flagship programs, Raw and SmackDown. This increase was partially offset by $112.8 million of lower ticket and merchandise sales from our live events due to the cancellation of ticketed events, coupled with the absence of a second large-scale international event, both due to public health concerns as a result of COVID-19. Additionally, $11.3 million of incremental ecommerce revenues driven by increased orders were mostly offset by a reduction in revenues of $10.3 million driven by the timing of our reality-based programming. For further analysis, refer to Management’s Discussion and Analysis of our business segments.
(2)Our consolidated operating expenses decreased by $88.7 million, or 14%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. This decrease was primarily driven by $81.8 million of lower event related and content creation costs due the cancellation of ticketed events and the absence of a second large-scale international event resulting from COVID-19. 2020 also includes $9.7 million of lower production costs associated with the timing of our reality-based programming, $5.8 million of lower costs associated with the delivery of content to WWE Network, and the impact of various short-term cost reductions that were implemented as a result of COVID-19. These declines were partially offset by an increase of $10.8 million in management incentive compensation costs. For further analysis, refer to Management’s Discussion and Analysis of our business segments.
(3)Our consolidated marketing and selling expenses decreased by $13.4 million, or 16%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. This decrease was primarily driven by $5.7 million of lower advertising and promotional costs due to the cancellation of ticketed events resulting from COVID-19, coupled with a decline of $2.4 million in management incentive compensation costs. 2020 also includes the impact of various short-term cost reductions that were implemented as a result of COVID-19. For further analysis, refer to Management’s Discussion and Analysis of our business segments.
(4)Our consolidated general and administrative expenses increased by $15.3 million, or 18%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. This increase was primarily driven by $9.2 million of additional staff related costs due, in part, to $7.0 million of severance expenses associated with the reduction in our workforce as a result of COVID-19, coupled with $3.7 million of higher legal expenses resulting from ongoing litigation. For further analysis, refer to Management’s Discussion and Analysis of our business segments.
(1)Other adjustments in 2020 include severance expenses associated with a reduction in our workforce as a result of COVID-19.
Media
The following tables present the performance results and key drivers for our Media segment:
(1)Core content rights fees consist primarily of licensing revenues earned from the distribution of our flagship programs, Raw and SmackDown, as well as our NXT programming, through global broadcast, pay television and digital platforms.
(2)Other revenues within our Media segment reflect revenues earned from the distribution of other WWE content, including, but not limited to, certain live in-ring programming content in international markets, scripted, reality and other programming, as well as theatrical and direct-to-home video releases.
(3)Metrics reflect subscribers who are direct customers of WWE Network and estimated subscribers who subscribe to WWE Network under licensed partner agreements, which have different economic terms for WWE Network.
Media revenues increased by $125.1 million, or 17%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. Our core content rights fees increased by $189.7 million, or 54%, driven primarily by the October 2019 renewal of our key domestic distribution agreements of our flagship programs, Raw and SmackDown. This increase was partially offset by a decline in Other revenues of $58.6 million, or 43%, driven by the absence of a second large-scale international event due to COVID-19, coupled with $10.3 million related to the timing of our reality-based programming. Media revenues also reflected lower sales of advertising and sponsorships of $7.1 million, or 10%, primarily driven by fewer television sponsorships and talent appearances as a result of COVID-19.
Media Adjusted OIBDA as a percentage of revenues increased in 2020 as compared to 2019. This increase was driven by increased revenues of $189.7 million, primarily due to the renewals of our key domestic distribution agreements, partially offset by decreased revenues driven by the absence of a second large-scale international event. Additionally, Media Adjusted OIBDA includes $13.9 million of lower content creation costs, primarily due to the absence of a second large-scale international event, and $5.8 million of lower costs associated with the delivery of content to WWE Network, partially offset by and an increase of $7.5 million in management incentive compensation costs.
Live Events
The following tables present the performance results and key drivers for our Live Events segment:
(1)Other revenues within our Live Events segment primarily consists of the sale of travel packages associated with the Company’s global live events and commissions earned through secondary ticketing, as well as revenues from events for which the Company receives a fixed fee.
(2)Metrics exclude the events for our domestic and United Kingdom NXT brands. These are our developmental brands that typically conduct their events in smaller venues with lower ticket prices. We conducted 44 ticketed NXT events with paid attendance of 40,900 and average ticket prices of $37.36 in 2020 as compared to 203 events with paid attendance of 156,500 and average ticket prices of $41.51 in 2019.
Live events revenues, which include revenues from ticket sales and travel packages, decreased by $105.7 million, or 84%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. Revenues from our North American and international ticket sales decreased by $97.4 million, or 86%, due to the impact of 268 fewer events in the current year, largely driven by the cancellation of ticketed events as a result of COVID-19. Other revenues declined by $6.6 million, or 62%, primarily driven by the absence of sales from travel packages due to the aforementioned cancellation of events.
Live Events Adjusted OIBDA as a percentage of revenues decreased in 2020 as compared to 2019. This decrease was primarily driven by the impact of fewer events as a result of COVID-19.
Consumer Products
The following tables present the performance results and key drivers for our Consumer Products segment:
Consumer Products revenues decreased by $5.6 million, or 6%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. Venue merchandise revenues decreased by $15.4 million, or 83%, primarily driven by the cancellation of ticketed events in the current year due to public health concerns as a result of COVID-19. This decline was partially offset by increased eCommerce revenues of $11.3 million, or 38%, primarily due to a 17% increase in the volume of online merchandise orders, coupled with a 20% increase in average revenue per order, which was driven, in part, by the release of new replica title belts and changes in consumer spending habits as a result of COVID-19.
Consumer Products Adjusted OIBDA as a percentage of revenues remained flat in 2020 as compared to 2019.
Corporate
Unallocated corporate general and administrative expenses largely relate to corporate administrative functions, including finance, investor relations, community relations, corporate communications, information technology, legal, human resources and our Board of Directors. The Company does not allocate these general and administrative expenses to its business segments.
(1)Other adjustments in 2020 include severance expenses associated with a reduction in our workforce as a result of COVID-19. Our policy is to record Company-wide severance expenses as unallocated corporate general and administrative expenses.
Corporate Adjusted OIBDA as a percentage of total revenues remained flat in 2020 as compared to 2019. The decrease in Corporate Adjusted OIBDA of $8.6 million, or 10%, was primarily driven by $3.7 million of higher legal expenses resulting from ongoing litigation, coupled with $2.2 million of staff related expenses primarily associated with increased medical benefit costs.
Depreciation and Amortization
(dollars in millions)
Depreciation and amortization expense increased by $8.5 million, or 25%, in 2020 as compared to 2019. This increase was primarily driven by additional expenses of $5.9 million associated with the Company’s workplace strategy plan, which includes the amortization related to the right-of-use asset for the Company’s new global headquarters lease. The remaining increase is attributable to the impact of other prior year capital expenditures.
Interest Expense
(dollars in millions)
Interest expense increased by $9.5 million in 2020 as compared to 2019, primarily driven by expense of $8.9 million associated with the Company’s new global headquarters lease, which commenced on July 1, 2019 and is accounted for as a finance lease. The current year also includes $2.6 million associated with the amount outstanding under the Company’s Revolving Credit Facility. The prior year included additional nonrecurring interest expense of $1.4 million related to our Convertible Notes. The remaining portion of interest expense relates primarily to interest and amortization associated with our Convertible Notes, the Revolving Credit Facility, other finance leases, mortgage and aircraft financing.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
(dollars in millions)
Other (expense) income, net, which is comprised of interest income, gains and losses recorded on our equity investments, realized translation gains and losses, and rental income, decreased by $6.2 million in 2020 as compared to 2019. This decrease is primarily driven by a $2.9 million reduction in interest income, coupled with an incremental net loss of $2.4 million associated with impairment charges and valuation adjustments related to our equity investments.
Income Taxes
(dollars in millions)
The increase in the effective tax rate in 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily driven by a reduction in excess tax benefits relating to share-based compensation. The current year includes $0.4 million of excess tax expenses related to the Company’s share-based compensation awards at vesting, as compared to $9.4 million of excess tax benefits in the prior year. The tax expense and benefit are driven by the change in the Company’s stock price between when the Company granted the awards and the subsequent vesting dates.
Discrete tax items, including the aforementioned excess tax expenses and benefits, resulted in a net tax benefit of $0.4 million in the current year as compared to $7.9 million in the prior year. Excluding these items, our effective tax rate was 23% in the current year as compared to 27% in the prior year, which was driven by an increase in foreign derived investment income deductions.
‎
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments of $593.4 million and $250.5 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our short-term investments consist primarily of U.S. Treasury securities, corporate bonds, municipal bonds, and government agency bonds. Our debt balance totaled $316.8 million and $214.4 million as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and includes the carrying value of $194.7 and $188.7 million related to our convertible senior notes due 2023 as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted business operations and created significant volatility and disruption to financial markets. Significant uncertainty remains as to the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations, and on the global economy as a whole. The extent and duration of the pandemic could continue to disrupt global markets and may affect our ability to generate cash from operations. Additionally, please refer to Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors, which provides a discussion of risk factors related to COVID-19.
In order to preserve sufficient liquidity during these uncertain times, the Company delayed construction on its new headquarters office space during 2020. The Company did not make any repurchases of common stock under our approved $500.0 million share repurchase program, which was suspended throughout 2020, largely as a result of COVID-19. We may resume repurchases under this program, with any such repurchases being executed opportunistically, subject to the Company’s business outlook and liquidity at such time as well as our determination that share repurchases compare favorably to other capital allocation alternatives. To further strengthen the Company’s liquidity, as a precautionary measure, in April 2020, the Company borrowed $200.0 million under its Revolving Credit Facility. In December 2020, the Company repaid $100.0 million of the borrowings, and in January 2021, the Company repaid the remaining $100.0 million. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents and short-term investment balances, along with cash generated from operations and available liquidity under our Revolving Credit Facility, will be sufficient to meet our ongoing operating requirements for at least the next twelve months, inclusive of dividend payments, debt service, content production activities and planned capital expenditures.
We recently announced a multi-year agreement with Peacock TV LLC, an affiliate of NBC Universal (“NBCU”) which operates the Peacock paid streaming service (“Peacock)”. This agreement grants, among other things, the exclusive domestic streaming and video-on-demand rights to WWE Network content via Peacock, as well as certain WWE Network subscriber data. Beginning on March 18, 2021, the content licensed via Peacock will include WWE’s pay-per-view content, second runs of our in-ring television programming, original and archival content, as well as new WWE Network content.
As it relates to our Convertible Notes (defined below), which pursuant to the terms are currently convertible, we believe that if note holders elected to convert their notes within the next twelve months, the Company has sufficient means to settle the Convertible Notes using any combination of existing cash and cash equivalents and investment balances, borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility, cash generated from operations or through the issuance of shares.
Debt Summary and Borrowing Capacity
The Company has $215.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.375% convertible senior notes (the "Convertible Notes") due December 15, 2023. See Note 11, Convertible Debt, and Note 3, Earnings Per Share, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on the Convertible Notes, including the dilutive nature of the Convertible Notes.
In May 2019, the Company entered into an amended and restated $200.0 million senior unsecured revolving credit facility with a syndicated group of banks, with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. acting as Administrative Agent (the "Revolving Credit Facility"). The Revolving Credit Facility has a maturity date of May 24, 2024. In April 2020, to further strengthen liquidity due to the uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company borrowed $200.0 million under its Revolving Credit Facility. In December 2020, the Company repaid $100.0 million of the borrowings, and in January 2021, the Company repaid the remaining $100.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with the provisions of our Revolving Credit Facility, there was $100.0 million outstanding, and the Company had available capacity under the terms of the facility of $100.0 million.
In September 2016, the Company acquired land and a building located in Stamford, Connecticut adjacent to our production facility. In connection with the acquisition, we assumed future obligations under a loan agreement, in the principal amount of $23.0 million, which loan is secured by a mortgage on the property. Pursuant to the loan agreement, the assets of WWE Real Estate, a subsidiary of the Company, represent collateral for the underlying mortgage, therefore these assets will not be available to satisfy debts and obligations due to any other creditors of the Company. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the amounts outstanding of the mortgage were $22.1 million and $22.5 million, respectively.
In 2013, the Company entered into a $31.6 million promissory note (the “Aircraft Note”) with Citizens Asset Finance, Inc., for the purchase of a 2007 Bombardier Global 5000 aircraft and refurbishments. The Aircraft Note matured on August 7, 2020 and was fully
repaid. As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under the Aircraft Note. As of December 31, 2019, the amount outstanding under the Aircraft Note was $3.2 million.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash generated from operating activities was $319.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $121.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The $198.2 million increase in the current year was driven by the timing of collections associated with our large-scale international events, coupled with improved operating performance, including the renewal of our key domestic distribution agreements of our flagship programs, RAW and SmackDown, and the reduction in the payout of management incentive compensation.
During 2020, the Company spent $25.6 million on content production activities, including Total Bellas, Miz & Mrs., The Quest for Lost WWE Treasures, and various programs for WWE Network, as compared to $34.3 million in 2019. We anticipate spending approximately $20 million to $30 million on content production during the year ending December 31, 2021. In 2020, we received content production incentives of $9.5 million, as compared to $14.7 million in 2019. During the year ending December 31, 2021, we anticipate receiving $15 million to $20 million in content production incentives.
Our accounts receivable relate principally to a limited number of distributors and licensees. At December 31, 2020, there were no customers that individually exceeded 10% of our gross accounts receivable balance. Changes in the financial condition or operations of our distributors, customers or licensees may result in increased delayed payments or non-payments which would adversely impact our cash flows from operating activities and/or our results of operations. We believe credit risk with respect to accounts receivable is limited due to the generally high credit quality of the Company’s major customers.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities was $11.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to cash used of $35.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the current year, we received proceeds from the maturities and sales of our short-term investments of $182.3 million and purchased $153.9 million of short-term investments, as compared to purchases of $124.3 million and proceeds of $157.5 million in the prior year. Additionally, we sold certain marketable equity investments during 2020 and collected net proceeds of $11.7 million. Capital expenditures in 2020 decreased by $41.5 million as compared to 2019. The prior year included additional spending to support the Company’s workplace and technology related strategic initiatives. Due to the uncertainty created from the COVID-19 pandemic, we temporarily delayed construction activity on the Company’s new global headquarters space in Stamford, Connecticut. Capital expenditures for the year ending December 31, 2021 are estimated to range between $65 million and $85 million, with a large portion of this spend associated with the resumed buildout of the Company’s new global headquarters.
Cash Flow from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $39.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to cash used of $162.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company received proceeds of $200.0 million from borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility and repaid $100.0 million of those borrowings during the current year. The Company made dividend payments of $37.2 million and $37.4 million during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Additionally, the Company made employee payroll withholding tax payments of $11.1 million and $30.2 million during 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to net settlement upon vesting of employee equity awards. During 2019, the Company paid $83.4 million for stock repurchases under its approved stock repurchase program.
Contractual Obligations
We have entered into various contracts under which we have commitments to make contractually required payments, including:
Scheduled principal and fixed interest payments under our assumed mortgage in connection with an owned building in Stamford, Connecticut.
Convertible Notes with fixed semi-annual interest payments.
Various operating leases for facilities, sales offices and equipment with terms generally ranging from one to ten years.
Finance lease for the Company’s new headquarters building with an accounting lease term of 30 years in addition to finance leases of certain equipment utilized in our television production operations with contractual terms generally five years or less (see Note 8, Leases, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information).
Service contracts with certain vendors and independent contractors, including our talent, with terms ranging from one to twenty years.
Service agreement obligations related to WWE Network (excluding future performance-based payments which are variable in nature).
Our aggregate minimum payment obligations under these contracts as of December 31, 2020 are as follows (dollars in millions):
(1)Convertible debt obligations assume that no notes are converted prior to the December 15, 2023 maturity date. See Note 11, Convertible Debt, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(2)Operating and finance lease obligations disclosed in the table above are presented on an undiscounted basis. See Note 8, Leases, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the discounted amounts which include the amounts for imputed interest.
(3)Finance lease payments include $398.5 million related to options to extend our global headquarters lease that are reasonably certain of being exercised.
Our Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2020 includes $0.1 million in liabilities associated with uncertain tax positions (including interest and penalties), which are not included in the table above. The Company does not expect to pay any significant settlements related to these uncertain tax positions in 2021.
Seasonality
Our operating results are not materially affected by seasonal factors; however, we may produce several large-scale premier events throughout the year, including WrestleMania, which result in increased revenues and expenses during the periods in which these events occur. WrestleMania typically occurs late in our first quarter or early second quarter, while certain other large-scale premier events may not have set recurring dates. Revenues from our licensing and direct sale of consumer products, including our internet sites, varies from period to period depending on the volume and extent of licensing agreements and marketing and promotion programs entered into during any particular period of time, as well as the commercial success of the media exposure of our characters and brand. The timing of these events, as well as the continued introduction of new product offerings and revenue generating outlets, can and will cause fluctuations in quarterly revenues and earnings.
Inflation
During 2020, 2019 and 2018, inflation did not have a material effect on our business.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any material off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of SEC Regulation S-K.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements requires us to make estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and the related disclosure of contingent assets and contingent liabilities. We base our estimates on our historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making estimates about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. The accuracy of these estimates and the likelihood of future changes depend on a range of possible outcomes and a number of underlying variables, many of which are beyond our control. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following judgments and estimates are critical in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition with Multiple Performance Obligations
Most of our contracts have one performance obligation and all consideration is allocated to that performance obligation. In contracts that have multiple performance obligations which may include the production of live events, content licenses, and advertising and sponsorship rights, we allocate the transaction price to each identified performance obligation based upon their relative standalone selling price. The standalone selling prices are determined using observable standalone selling prices when available as well as estimates of standalone selling prices using adjusted market assessment and expected cost plus margin approaches to estimate the price for individual components. Judgment is required to determine the standalone selling prices and estimate the portion of the transaction price allocated to each performance obligation.
Content Production Assets, Net
The Company is primarily a content producer with content production assets consisting of feature films, non-live event episodic television series, and original programming content for WWE Network. Feature film titles are predominantly monetized on their own through exploitation and exhibition through individual film distribution arrangements or by sale to a third party. The non-live event episodic television series are predominantly monetized on their own through individual television distribution arrangements. The original WWE Network programming content are predominantly monetized as a film group through the collection of monthly subscription fees from WWE Network.
Amounts capitalized for content production assets typically include development costs, production costs, production overhead, and employee salaries and are net of any film production incentives associated with our feature films. Content production assets related to our feature films are amortized in the proportion that revenues bear to management’s estimates of the ultimate revenue expected to be recognized from exploitation, exhibition or sale. Content production assets related to non-live event episodic television series are expensed upon delivery of the completed programming content to the individual television distributors. Our programming content distributed on WWE Network is expensed based upon viewership consumption patterns.
Unamortized content production costs are evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the fair value of a film predominantly monetized on its own or a film group may be less than its unamortized costs. As it relates to our unamortized feature film production assets, if estimates for a feature film’s ultimate revenues and/or costs are revised and indicate a significant decline in a film’s profitability or if events or circumstances change that indicate that we should assess whether the fair value of a film is less than its unamortized film costs, we calculate the film's estimated fair value using a discounted cash flows model. If fair value is less than the unamortized cost, the film is written down to fair value. Our estimate of ultimate revenues for feature films includes revenues from all sources for ten years from the date of a film’s initial release. We estimate the ultimate revenues based on industry and Company specific trends, the historical performance of similar films, the star power of the lead actors, and the genre of the film. Prior to the release of a feature film and throughout its life, we revise our estimates of revenues based on expected future results, actual results and other known factors affecting the various distribution markets. As it relates to our unamortized non-live event episodic television series content assets, if conditions indicate a potential impairment, and the estimated future cash flows using a discounted cash flow model are not sufficient to recover the unamortized asset, the asset is written down to fair value. As it relates to our unamortized original WWE Network programming content assets, which are predominantly monetized as film group, we review in aggregate at a group level when an event or change in circumstances indicates a change in the expected usefulness of the content or that the fair value may be less than unamortized cost. In addition, if we determine that a program will not likely air, we expense the remaining unamortized asset.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $15.4 million and $20.0 million, respectively, in capitalized content production costs. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we recorded aggregate impairment charges of $3.2 million, $1.3 million, and $4.9 million, respectively, related to our content production assets. No assurance can be given that additional unfavorable changes impacting the monetization of our content portfolio will not occur, which, in turn, may result in additional impairment charges that might materially affect our results of operations and financial condition.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Our accounts receivable relate principally to a limited number of distributors and licensees that produce consumer products containing our intellectual property. Adverse changes in general economic conditions and/or contraction in global credit markets could precipitate liquidity problems among our key distributors, increasing our exposure to bad debts which could negatively impact our results of operations and financial condition. We estimate the collectibility of our receivables and establish allowances for the amount of account receivable that we estimate to be uncollectible. We base these allowances on our historical collection experience, the length of time our accounts receivable are outstanding, the financial condition of individual customers and current economic conditions that may affect a customer’s ability to pay. Changes in the financial condition of a single major customer, either adverse or positive, could impact the amount and timing of any additional allowances or reductions that may be required. At December 31, 2020, there were no customers that individually exceeded 10% of our gross accounts receivable balance. At December 31, 2019, our largest receivable balance from customers was 49% of our gross accounts receivable. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our allowance for doubtful accounts was $4.1 million and $0.8 million, respectively.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax liabilities and assets are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been reflected in the Consolidated Financial Statements. Deferred tax liabilities and assets are determined based on the differences between the book and tax basis of particular assets and liabilities, using tax rates in effect for the years in which the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance is provided to offset deferred tax assets if, based upon the available evidence, it is more-likely-than-not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. In evaluating our ability to recover deferred tax assets within the jurisdiction from which they arise, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. If we determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of their net recorded amount, we would make an adjustment to the deferred tax assets valuation allowance, which would reduce the provision for income taxes.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, our deferred tax assets (net of valuation reserve) were $10.1 million and $7.2 million, respectively. The increase in our net deferred tax asset balance in 2020 was primarily driven by license royalty recognition, partially offset by 100% bonus depreciation. We believe that it is more likely than not that we will have sufficient taxable income in the future to realize these deferred tax assets and as such have not recorded a valuation allowance to reduce the net carrying value. If we determine it is more likely than not that we will not have sufficient taxable income to realize these assets, we may need to record a valuation allowance in the future.
We use a two-step approach in recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return by assessing whether they are more likely than not sustainable, based solely on their technical merits, upon examination, and including resolution of any related appeals or litigation process. The second step is to measure the associated tax benefit of each position, as the largest amount that we believe is more likely than not realizable. Differences between the amount of tax benefits taken or expected to be taken in our income tax returns and the amount of tax benefits recognized in our financial statements represent our unrecognized income tax benefits, which we record as a liability. Our policy is to include interest and penalties related to unrecognized income tax benefits as a component of income tax expense. At December 31, 2020, our unrecognized tax benefits including interest and penalties totaled $0.1 million.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The information set forth under Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements under the caption “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Recent Accounting Pronouncements, is incorporated herein by reference.
Cautionary Statement for Purposes of the “Safe Harbor” Provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995
The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 provides a “safe harbor” for certain statements that are forward-looking and are not based on historical facts. When used in this Form 10-K and our other SEC filings, our press releases and comments made in earnings calls, investor presentations or otherwise to the public, the words “may,” “will,” “could,” “anticipate,” “plan,” “continue,” “project,” “intend,” “estimate,” “believe,” “expect” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements, although not all forward-looking statements contain such words. These statements relate to our future plans, objectives, expectations and intentions and are not historical facts and accordingly involve known and unknown risks and uncertainties and other factors that may cause the actual results or the performance by us to be materially different from future results or performance expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. The following factors, among others, could cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in forward-looking statements made in this Form 10-K and our other SEC filings, in press releases, earnings calls and other statements made by our authorized officers: (i) risks relating to the ongoing coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic may continue to negatively affect world economies as well as our industry, business and results of operations; (ii) risks relating to entering, maintaining and renewing major distribution agreements; (iii) risks relating to a rapidly evolving media landscape; (iv) risks relating to WWE Network; (v) our need to continue to develop creative and entertaining programs and events; (vi) our need to retain or continue to recruit key performers; (vii) the risk of a decline in the popularity of our brand of sports entertainment, including as a result of changes in the social and political climate; (viii) the possible unexpected loss of the services of Vincent K. McMahon; (ix) possible adverse changes in the regulatory atmosphere and related private sector initiatives; (x) the highly competitive, rapidly changing and increasingly fragmented nature of the markets in which we operate and/or our inability to compete effectively, especially against competitors with greater financial resources or marketplace presence; (xi) uncertainties associated with international markets including possible disruptions and reputational risks; (xii) our difficulty or inability to promote and conduct our live events and/or other businesses if we do not comply with applicable regulations; (xiii) our dependence on our intellectual property rights, our need to protect those rights, and the risks of our infringement of others’ intellectual property rights; (xiv) risks relating to the complexity of our rights agreements across distribution mechanisms and geographical areas; (xv) the risk of substantial liability in the event of accidents or injuries occurring during our physically demanding events including, without limitation, claims alleging traumatic brain injury; (xvi) exposure to risks relating to large public events as well as travel to and from such events; (xvii) risks inherent in our feature film business; (xviii) a variety of risks as we expand into new or complementary businesses and/or make strategic investments and/or acquisitions; (xix) risks related to our computer systems and online operations; (xx) risks relating to privacy norms and regulations; (xxi) risks relating to a possible decline
in general economic conditions and disruption in financial markets; (xxii) risks relating to our accounts receivable; (xxiii) risks relating to our indebtedness including our convertible notes; (xxiv) potential substantial liabilities if litigation is resolved unfavorably; (xxv) our potential failure to meet market expectations for our financial performance; (xxvi) through his beneficial ownership of a substantial majority of our Class B common stock, our controlling stockholder, Vincent K. McMahon, exercises control over our affairs, and his interests may conflict with the holders of our Class A common stock; (xxvii) a substantial number of shares are eligible for sale by Mr. McMahon and members of his family or trusts established for their benefit, and the sale, or the perception of possible sales, of those shares could lower our stock price; and (xxviii) risks related to the volatility of our Class A common stock. In addition, our dividend is dependent on a number of factors, including, among other things, our liquidity and historical and projected cash flow, strategic plan (including alternative uses of capital), our financial results and condition, contractual and legal restrictions on the payment of dividends (including under our revolving credit facility), general economic and competitive conditions and such other factors as our Board of Directors may consider relevant. Forward-looking statements made by the Company speak only as of the date made, are subject to change without any obligation on the part of the Company to update or revise them, and undue reliance should not be placed on these statements. For more information about risks and uncertainties associated with the Company's business, please refer to the "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" and "Risk Factors" sections of this Form 10-K and our other SEC filings.