ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements as of and for the two years ended December 31, 2020, and the related notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth under the section heading “Item 1A. Risk Factors” above and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” above.
INTRODUCTION
Westwater Resources, Inc. is a 44-year-old public company focused on battery graphite development. Originally incorporated in 1977 as Uranium Resources, Inc. to mine uranium in Texas, our company has been reborn as an energy materials developer. Westwater now is focused on battery-ready graphite materials after its acquisition of Alabama Graphite Corp. (“Alabama Graphite”) and its Coosa Graphite Project (“Coosa Project”) in Alabama in April 2018. Westwater recently discovered significant vanadium concentrations at the Coosa Project and has developed an exploration plan to further investigate the size and extent of those concentrations.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Definitive Feasibility Study on the Coosa Graphite Project
On February 4, 2021, Westwater entered into a Master Services Agreement (the “Master Services Agreement”) with Samuel Engineering, Inc. (“Samuel”) for various engineering support and consulting services in connection with the Company’s Coosa Graphite Project definitive feasibility study (the “Feasibility Study”).
Under the terms of the Master Services Agreement and as a part of the Feasibility Study, Samuel will, among other things, conduct studies that address the Coosa Project’s location, raw materials, product quality, infrastructure and other preliminary assessments, which will provide cost estimates for Phases I and II of the Coosa Project, identify long-lead items and provide detailed specifications for these items to be ordered, as well as prepare designs and drawings for the detailed engineering phase prior to construction.
The DFS is scheduled to be completed by the end of the second quarter of FY2021. Westwater plans to utilize the Definitive Feasibility Study as a basis for engaging financial institutions and to start the construction of the plant, which is anticipated for the end of 2021. Completion of Phase I is planned for the end of 2022, with production anticipated in 2023.
Sale of Uranium Business
On December 31, 2020, Westwater Resources, Inc. (“Westwater”), its wholly owned subsidiary URI Neutron Holdings II, Inc. (“Neutron Holdings”), and enCore Energy Corp. (“enCore”) entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) pursuant to which Westwater and Neutron Holdings agreed to sell their subsidiaries engaged in the uranium business in Texas and New Mexico (the “Uranium Subsidiaries”) to enCore on the terms and subject to the conditions in the Purchase Agreement (the “Transaction”). The Transaction closed December 31, 2020.
At the closing of the Transaction, enCore delivered $0.7 million in cash and issued $1.8 million worth of its common shares to Westwater, valued at the volume weighted average price of enCore’s common shares for the ten trading days ending on and including December 30, 2020, and Westwater and Neutron Holdings transferred all of the equity interests in the Uranium Subsidiaries to enCore along with a copy of a database relating to the Grants Mineral Belt located in New Mexico. In addition, enCore delivered to Westwater a 2% net smelter return royalty on production from the uranium properties held by Uranco, Inc. in New Mexico at the time of the closing, and a 2.5% net profits interest on the profits from operations of Neutron Energy, Inc.’s Juan Tafoya and Cebolleta Projects. Pursuant to the terms of the Purchase Agreement, enCore has also agreed to replace the indemnification obligations of Westwater for certain reclamation surety bonds held in the name of URI, Inc., and Westwater will assign and transfer to enCore all rights to cash collateral held to secure such indemnity obligations.
Also, at the closing Westwater delivered $0.3 million in cash to enCore, which amount will be delivered in escrow to the lender under the loan made to URI, Inc. in May 2020 pursuant to the Small Business Administration Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP Loan”) under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). The escrowed amount will be released to Westwater upon, and subject to, forgiveness of the PPP Loan under the terms of the CARES Act. In the event that all or a portion of the PPP Loan is ineligible for forgiveness, the lender will retain the escrowed amount up to the amount of the unforgiven portion of the PPP Loan, plus interest. No assurance is provided that URI, Inc. will obtain forgiveness of the PPP Loan in whole or in part.
The Purchase Agreement contains customary representations, warranties, covenants and indemnification provisions. The closing of the Transaction was subject to various closing conditions, including, without limitation, the accuracy of the representations and warranties and certain customary and required governmental and stock exchange approvals.
Equity Financings
Significant Capital Raises in January and February 2021
During the month of January 2021, the Company sold 9.3 million shares of common stock for net proceeds of $47.3 million pursuant to the ATM Offering Agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. These shares were sold pursuant to a prospectus supplement filed on December 4, 2020 pursuant to Rule 424(b)(5) as a takedown off the Company’s shelf registration statement which had been declared effective by the Securities and Exchange Commission on December 1, 2020.
Also, during the month of February 2021, the Company sold 0.9 million shares of common stock for net proceeds of $6.6 million pursuant to the December 2020 PA with Lincoln Park. These shares were sold pursuant to a Form S-3 registration statement filed pursuant to Rule 424(b)(3) and declared effective by the Securities and Exchange Commission on December 4, 2020.
The receipt of combined net proceeds in the amount of $53.9 million from these financing facilities has resulted in a cash balance of approximately $101 million at February 11, 2020. The significant treasury balance has mitigated the Company’s capital risk through 2021 and 2022 as the Company’s budgeted pilot program for processing battery-grade graphite and the remaining budgeted product development costs are now fully funded, and the Company will be able to make substantial initial investment in the commercial graphite plant in the latter half of 2021.
December 2020 Purchase Agreement with Lincoln Park Capital, LLC (“Lincoln Park”)
On December 4, 2020, the Company entered into a Purchase Agreement with Lincoln Park (“the “December 2020 PA”) to place up to $100.0 million in the aggregate of the Company's common stock on an ongoing basis when required by the Company over a term of 36 months. The Company controls the timing and amount of any sales to Lincoln Park, and Lincoln Park is obligated to make purchases in accordance with the December 2020 PA. Any common stock that is sold to Lincoln Park will occur at a purchase price that is based on an agreed upon fixed discount to the Company's prevailing market prices at the time of each sale and with no upper limits to the price Lincoln Park may pay to purchase common stock. The agreement may be terminated by the Company at any time, in its sole discretion, without any additional cost or penalty.
The December 2020 PA specifically provides that the Company may not issue or sell any shares of its common stock under the agreement if such issuance or sale would breach any applicable rules of The Nasdaq Capital Market. In particular, Nasdaq Listing Rule 5635(d) provides that the Company may not issue or sell more than 19.99% of the shares of the Company’s common stock outstanding immediately prior to the execution of the December 2020 PA without shareholder approval.
Lincoln Park has no right to require the Company to sell any shares of common stock to Lincoln Park, but Lincoln Park is obligated to make purchases as the Company directs, subject to certain conditions. In all instances, the Company may not sell shares of its common stock to Lincoln Park under the December 2020 PA if it would result in Lincoln Park beneficially owning more than 9.99% of its common stock.
The Company did not sell any of its common stock to Lincoln Park under the December 2020 PA during 2020. From January 1, 2021 to February 11, 2021, the Company sold 0.9 million shares of common stock for gross proceeds of $6.6 million.
Controlled Equity Offering Sales Agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. (“Cantor”)
On April 14, 2017, the Company entered into a Controlled Equity Offering Sales Agreement (the “ATM Offering Agreement”) with Cantor acting as sales agent. Under the ATM Offering Agreement, the Company may from time to time sell shares of its common stock in “at-the-market” offerings. The Company pays Cantor a commission of up to 2.5% of the gross proceeds from the sale of any shares pursuant to the ATM Offering Agreement.
During 2020, the Company sold 11.0 million shares of common stock for net proceeds of $49.9 million and from January 1, 2021 to February 5, 2021, the Company sold 9.3 million shares of common stock for net proceeds of $47.3 million under the ATM Offering Agreement. As of February 5, 2021, the Company has no shares of common stock registered for sale under the ATM Offering Agreement.
Vanadium Target Identification
In late November 2018, Westwater announced the discovery of significant concentration of vanadium mineralization at several locations, hosted in the graphitic schists at the Company’s Coosa, Alabama Project. Westwater subsequently commenced the first of a four-phase exploration program designed to determine the extent, character and quality of the vanadium mineralization at Coosa. As announced by the Company on February 19, 2019, the first phase demonstrated widespread positive values for vanadium that extended beyond the Coosa graphite deposit, as defined in the 2015 Preliminary Economic Assessment for the Coosa Project. The second phase of this project is expected to begin during the first half of 2021. Scope for this effort includes drilling various targets to expand our knowledge of the geology, examining the core and/or cuttings for mineral constituents, and adding to our geologic model. In addition, vanadium mineralization is expected to be evaluated using extractive metallurgy techniques to ascertain any economic potential.
Turkish Government Taking of Temrezli and Sefaatli Licenses and Westwater’s Arbitration Filing
On January 27, 2020, Westwater filed a Claimant’s Memorial (the “Memorial”) in its arbitration proceeding against the Republic of Turkey (“Turkey”). The Memorial relates to Westwater’s request for arbitration submitted to the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) in December 2018 as a result of Turkey’s unlawful actions against Westwater’s investments at the Temrezli and Sefaatli uranium projects owned by Westwater’s Turkish subsidiary Adur Madencilik Limited Sirketi.
The Memorial sets forth the basis for Westwater’s claims under the treaty between the United States and Turkey concerning the reciprocal encouragement and protection of investments and international law generally, as well as the basis for the jurisdiction of the tribunal constituted on May 1, 2019 following ICSID’s registration of Westwater’s request for arbitration. The Memorial also establishes the reparations owed by Turkey for breach of its international obligations towards Westwater, consisting of no less than $36.5 million, plus costs and post-award interest, as compensation for Westwater’s resulting loss of its investment. Accompanying the Memorial is an expert report regarding the reparations owed to Westwater. In determining the amount of Westwater’s loss, the expert report considered (i) the projected future cash flows from the expropriated projects, discounted to present value by a risk-adjusted discount rate, (ii) valuations from transactions for similar projects, and (iii) in the case of the Sefaatli project, the amounts invested in the project.
On March 11, 2020, Turkey filed a request to bifurcate the arbitration proceeding, and on March 30, 2020, Westwater filed a response in opposition to Turkey’s request for bifurcation. On April 28, 2020, the arbitral tribunal denied Turkey’s bifurcation request. On May 13, 2020, Turkey filed with the arbitral tribunal a request, which Westwater elected not to oppose, to extend the date on which their Counter-Memorial must be filed (and to change dates for subsequent pleadings as well as document production and witness identification deadlines), which the tribunal approved on June 3, 2020. As a result of these decisions by the tribunal, Turkey filed its Counter-Memorial on September 14, 2020. The hearing on the substantive issues and damages is scheduled for September 13-17, 2021.
Additional information regarding the ICSID arbitration proceeding is presented in Part II, Item 1 above.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Summary
Our consolidated net loss for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $23.6 million and $10.6 million or $2.68 and $5.39 per share, respectively. The principal components of these year-over-year changes are as follows:
Mineral property expenses
Mineral property expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $2.6 million, as compared with $2.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The following table details our mineral property expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, total mineral property expenses decreased by $0.1 million as compared with 2019. The majority of mineral property expenses for both years was attributable to the Company’s discontinued operations, primarily the uranium business segment that was sold to enCore at the end of 2020.
Product development expenses
For the period ended December 31, 2020, $4.0 million was spent on product development. Of that, approximately $3.2 million was related to the design, construction and operation of our graphite processing pilot program with the remaining attributable to product testing and other lab work, shipping, travel, and other auxiliary costs associated with the Coosa Project.
General and administrative expenses
Significant expenditures for general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were:
General and administrative expenses increased by approximately $1.3 million as compared with 2019. The primary drivers of this increase were the following:
● $0.7 million increase in salaries and payroll burden
o In July 2020, Westwater Resources appointed a new VP of Sales and Marketing. Costs from the initial candidate search and additional employee compensation and benefits since he began contributed to the increase in payroll costs in 2020 over 2019.
o In the first quarter of 2020, the Company temporarily shut down its South Texas operations amid cash flow and financing uncertainties arising from COVID-19 and its effects on the capital market. As a result, reclamation projects fell behind schedule. To compensate, once facilities re-opened, several additional temporary employees were hired throughout the year leading to an increase in wages and hiring fees among other payroll expenses.
● $0.3 million increase in stock compensation expense
o The Board of Directors approved a new long-term incentive awards for the management team in June 2020. No employee stock options or RSUs were granted during 2019.
● $0.2 million increase in Directors and Officers (D&O) insurance
o Rates for D&O insurance nearly doubled in 2020 as compared with 2019.
Arbitration Costs
During 2020, Westwater incurred arbitration related legal and expert consulting costs of $1.5 million. This represents an increase of 6% or $0.1 million in costs associated with the Request for Arbitration against The Republic of Turkey filed with ICSID in December 2018. For further reference, see discussion above at Part I, Item 3 and in the Recent Developments section of this Part II, Item 7.
Impairment of uranium properties
During 2020 and 2019, the Company recorded impairments of $5.2 million and $0.1 million, respectively, to reduce the carrying value of certain uranium properties. The Company performs an impairment evaluation annually unless events or changes in circumstances indicate the related carrying value of long-lived assets may not be recoverable. On September 1, 2020, the Company signed a binding LOI to sell its U.S. uranium assets to enCore Energy Corp. At September 30, 2020 an interim impairment review was performed in anticipation of the sale of Westwater’s uranium business to enCore. As a result, $5.2 million in impairment expense related to the Company’s long-lived uranium assets in south Texas and New Mexico was recognized in the third quarter of 2020. Impairments in 2019 were made solely to plant and equipment at the Kingsville Dome facility in South Texas.
Non-operating income and expenses
The Company recorded a $2.7 million non-operating loss and $0.3 million in non-operating income for 2020 and 2019 respectively. Non-operating expense for 2020 includes a $2.7 million loss on the sale of uranium assets to enCore. Significant activity during 2019 included the $0.7 million gain on the sale of uranium assets to Uranium Royalty Corp. in August 2019, a $0.7 million loss recorded from sale of marketable securities and a decrease in interest income of $0.4 million due to a lower principal balance outstanding on the Laramide Resources Ltd. promissory note in 2019 (“Laramide”).
FINANCIAL POSITION
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $15.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared with $10.0 million for the same period in 2019. The $5.2 million increase in cash used was primarily due to the following:
● $3.9 million increase in product development expenses; and
● $1.3 million increase in general and administrative expenses;
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared with $3.8 million of cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019. The cash used in 2020 was primarily related to the transaction with enCore, including $3.7 million in restricted cash transferred to enCore and $0.3 million transferred to enCore for establishment of an escrow account for settlement of the PPP Loan. In 2019, the Company received note payments on the Laramide note in the amount of $0.8 million in cash. Additionally, the Company received net proceeds of $0.5 million from the sale of the Laramide securities and $2.5 million in net proceeds from the sale of uranium assets to URC in August 2019.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $63.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared with $6.7 million in 2019. Cash inflow for both years was from the sales of common stock through the Company’s Controlled Equity Offering Sales Agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. (“Cantor”), and the Lincoln Park Securities Purchase Agreement.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company last recorded revenues from operations in 2009. Since 2009, the Company has relied on equity financings, debt financings and asset sales to fund its operations. The Company expects to rely on debt and equity financing to fund its operations into the near future. The Company will also continue its cost reduction initiatives to identify ways to reduce its cash expenditures.
In 2016, the Company began to expand its business plan into acquisition and development of energy-related materials. Between 2016 and 2020 the Company obtained mineral leases in Nevada and Utah and evaluated a green-fields exploration program for lithium. In 2018, the Company acquired Alabama Graphite Corp. and its Coosa Graphite Project for the purpose of developing the only commercial sized graphite mineral deposit in the contiguous United States and production of advanced graphite products for use in batteries. In the third quarter of 2020, as further discussed below and as further discussed in Note 3 to the accompanying financial statements, the Company made the strategic decision to focus most of its resources on its graphite business, discontinuing its investment in its lithium mineral properties and selling its uranium business.
As of December 31, 2020, execution of the business plan for development of the Coosa Graphite Project was underway, with the commissioning of pilots for processing flake graphite into battery-grade graphite products. The start-up of operations for those pilots commenced in the 4th quarter of 2020 and the Company expects the pilot program phase to last into mid-2021. The Company will use the data generated from the pilot operations to inform the requirements and specifications for building a commercial sized graphite processing facility. Pursuant to the Company’s Preliminary Economic Assessment of the Coosa Graphite Project as modified, financing required for the estimated capital expenditures to construct the commercial plant is approximately $120 million. Subject to financing, the Company expects the construction phase for the commercial plant to begin in the second half of 2021 and be completed in 2022. The Company expects to begin generating revenues from sales of advanced graphite products from the Coosa Graphite Project in 2023.
In furtherance of the Company’s strategic shift to graphite battery materials, on December 31, 2020 the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement (“Purchase Agreement”) to sell its U.S. uranium business, including its U.S. uranium exploration assets in New Mexico and idled production assets in Texas to enCore Energy Corp. (“enCore”) (see Note 3 to the accompanying financial statements). The transaction closed on December 31, 2020. The sale included the elimination of a $9.3 million bonding liability, the elimination of $5.2 million in asset retirement obligations, and the elimination of more than $4.0 million in annual expenditures related to reclamation and compliance costs at the Company’s Kingsville, Vasquez, and Rosita sites in South Texas and its New Mexico land holding costs. The Company received approximately US$1.8 million of enCore common stock and retained royalty interests on the New Mexico uranium properties as consideration for the sale. The Company retained its uranium interests in Turkey, which are subject to ongoing international arbitration proceeding. The Company’s strategic shift to focus solely on its graphite business also resulted in its decision not to renew its lithium mineral leases in Nevada and Utah when the annual rentals of approximately $0.2 million came due in late August 2020.
At December 31, 2020 the Company’s cash balances were $50.3 million. During the months of January and February 2021, the Company sold 9.3 million shares of common stock for net proceeds of $47.3 million pursuant to its Controlled Equity OfferingSM Sales Agreement with Cantor and 0.9 million shares of common stock for net proceeds of $6.6 million pursuant to the December 2020 PA with Lincoln Park (see Note 15 to the accompanying financial statements). The funding provided by this financing facility has resulted in a cash balance of approximately $101 million at February 11, 2021. Management believes the significant treasury balance has mitigated the Company’s capital risk through 2021 as the Company’s 2021 non-discretionary budget, budgeted graphite pilot program and the remaining budgeted product development initiatives are now fully funded. The Company is pursuing project financing to support primary funding of the capital expenditures for construction of the commercial plant set to occur in the second half of 2021.
Management believes the Company’s current cash balance is sufficient to fund its planned non-discretionary expenditures through 2022. In addition to pursuing other project financing, the Company is evaluating the continued use of the Cantor and Lincoln Park financing facilities for use in funding any required contributions by the Company to support project financing for construction of the commercial graphite facility. While the Company has been successful in the past in raising funds through equity and debt financings as well as through the sale of non-core assets, no assurance can be given that additional financing will be available to it in amounts sufficient to meet its needs, or on terms acceptable to the Company. Stock price volatility and uncertain economic conditions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic could significantly impact the Company’s ability to raise funds through equity financing. In the event funds are not available for project financing to complete construction of the commercial facility in 2022, the Company will be able to fund its non-discretionary expenditures, however, the Company may be required to change its planned business strategies.
Off- Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe our most critical accounting policies involve those requiring the use of significant estimates and assumptions in determining values or projecting future costs.
Property, Plant and Equipment
The Company reviews and evaluates its long-lived assets for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the related carrying amounts may not be recoverable. Impairment is considered to exist if the total estimated future cash flows on an undiscounted basis are less than the carrying amount of the assets. An impairment loss is measured and recorded based on discounted estimated future cash flows or upon an estimate of fair value that may be received in an exchange transaction. Future cash flows are estimated based on quantities of recoverable minerals, expected commodity prices, production levels and operating costs of production and capital, based upon the projected remaining future uranium or graphite production from each project. Existing proven and probable reserves and value beyond proven and probable reserves, including mineralization that is not part of the measured, indicated or inferred resource base, are included when determining the fair value of mine site reporting units at acquisition and, subsequently, in determining whether the assets are impaired. The term “recoverable minerals” refers to the estimated amount of uranium or graphite that will be obtained after taking into account losses during processing and treatment. In estimating future cash flows, assets are grouped at the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows that are largely independent of future
cash flows from other asset groups. The Company’s estimates of future cash flows are based on numerous assumptions and it is likely that actual future cash flows will be significantly different than the estimates, as actual future quantities of recoverable minerals, uranium and graphite prices, production levels and operating costs of production and availability and cost of capital are each subject to significant risks and uncertainties.
During 2020 and 2019, we recorded impairments of $5.2 million and $0.1 million, respectively, to reduce the carrying value of property, plant and mine equipment. Existing proven and probable reserves and value beyond proven and probable reserves, including mineralization that is not part of the measured, indicated or inferred resource base, are included when determining the fair value of uranium properties upon acquisition and, subsequently, in determining whether the assets are impaired. The term “recoverable minerals” refers to the estimated amount of uranium and graphite that will be obtained after taking into account losses during processing and treatment. In estimating future cash flows, assets are grouped at the lowest level for which there is identifiable cash flows that are largely independent of future cash flows from other asset groups.