Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Management’s Plan of Operation
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements give our current expectations or forecasts of future events. You can identify these statements by the fact that they do not relate strictly to historical or current facts. They use of words such as “anticipate”, “estimate”, “expect”, “project”, “intend”, “plan”, “believe”, and other words and terms of similar meaning in connection with any discussion of future operating or financial performance. From time to time, we also may provide forward-looking statements in other materials we release to the public.
Overview
We are a science based direct-to-consumer (DTC) health company offering products and services focused on aging biology wellness and longevity. Our program is based on the book the Kaufmann Protocol® authored by our co-founder Dr. Sandra Kaufmann, M.D., and on identifying and offering individual specific services, recommendations and treatments designed to improve our customers’ lifespan and health-span. Whereas lifespan represents the total number of years we live, and health-span is how many of those years we remain healthy, active, energetic and free from disease. Our goal is to use science and technology, current and emerging treatments, for our customers to lengthen lifespan and maximize health-span.
We operate a DTC sales model, which means we market our products directly to our target consumers. We currently sell our book, the Kaufmann Protocol online, we offer, a mobile application, and plan to commercialize and market a line of products, including our own branded molecular agents, health and wellness testing kits and services, as well as published and multimedia content.
On May 7, 2019, the Eighth Judicial District Court of Nevada appointed Small Cap Compliance, LLC (“Custodian”) as custodian for Worldwide Strategies Inc., and on May 8, 2019, the Custodian appointed an executive officer and board member, who on July 10, 2019, filed a certificate of reinstatement of WWSG with the state of Nevada. On October 16, 2019, the Eighth Judicial District Court of Nevada discharged Small Cap Compliance, LLC as custodian for Worldwide Strategies Inc. On July 10, 2019 the Custodian appointed board member and sole executive officer, appointed a new member to the board of directors and subsequently resigned from the board and as the company’s sole executive officer. The board of directors subsequently appointed the current management team, who are reorganizing the business as a health technology company.
Significant Recent Developments Regarding COVID-19
During March 2020, a global pandemic was declared by the World Health Organization related to the rapidly spreading outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus designated COVID-19. The pandemic has significantly impacted economic conditions in the United States. The long-term impact of COVID-19 on the economy and on our business remains uncertain, the duration and scope of which cannot currently be predicted. Please refer to the matters discussed under the caption “Risk Factors”.
Results of Operations During the Year Ended July 31, 2021 As Compared to The Year Ended July 31, 2020
Net Loss
For the years ended July 31, 2021 and 2020 we incurred net losses of approximately $1.4 million and $48,000 respectively.
Revenue
For the years ended July 31, 2021 and 2020, we generated no revenue.
Expenses
For the years ended July 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred expenses of approximately $1.4 million and $48,000 respectively. The increase of $1.4 million in expenses for the year ended July 31, 2021 was primarily related to stock compensation expense of approximately $1.3 million and an increase in professional fees of approximately $12,000. For the years ended July 31, 2021 and 2020 we incurred interest expense of approximately $48,000 in relation to the promissory notes outstanding.
Liquidity
Currently, we rely on our management to provide us with the capital needed to run our business on a day-to-day basis.
For the years ended July 31, 2021 and 2020 we incurred net losses of approximately $1.4 million and $48,000 respectively. As of July 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no cash on hand and current liabilities of $0.9 million. During the year ended July 31, 2021 our CEO and CFO provided loans to us in the amount of $14,577.
We will seek additional funds through equity or debt financing, collaborative or other arrangements with corporate partners, licensees or others, and from other sources, which may have the effect of diluting the holdings of existing shareholders.
The Company has no current arrangements with respect to, or sources of, such additional financing and we do not anticipate that existing shareholders will provide any portion of our future financing requirements.
No assurance can be given that additional financing will be available when needed or that such financing will be available on terms acceptable to the Company. If adequate funds are not available, we may be required to delay or terminate expenditures for certain of its programs that it would otherwise seek to develop and commercialize. This would have a material adverse effect on the Company.
Going Concern
The report of our independent registered public accounting firm on the financial statements for the years ended July 31, 2021 and 2020, includes an explanatory paragraph relating to the uncertainty of our ability to continue as a going concern. We have incurred recurring losses, incurred liabilities in excess of assets over the past year, and have an accumulated deficit of $15.4 million. Based upon current operating levels, we will be required to obtain additional capital in order to sustain our operations through July 31, 2022.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
On August 1, 2012, the Company adopted ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures. ASC 820 defines fair value, establishes a three-level valuation hierarchy for disclosures of fair value measurement and enhances disclosure requirements for fair value measures. The three levels are defined as follows:
☐ Level 1 inputs to the valuation methodology are quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical assets or liabilities in active markets.
☐ Level 2 inputs to the valuation methodology include quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets, and inputs that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the financial instrument.
☐ Level 3 inputs to valuation methodology are unobservable and significant to the fair measurement.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of July 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K promulgated under the Securities Act of 1934.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
As of July 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not have any contractual obligations.