ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This discussion should be read in conjunction with the other sections of this Form 10-K, including “Risk Factors,” and the Financial Statements and notes thereto. The various sections of this discussion contain a number of forward-looking statements, all of which are based on our current expectations and could be affected by the uncertainties and risk factors described throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements and Risk Factor Summary.” Our actual results may differ materially.
Organizational Overview
We were incorporated on May 30, 1997 under the laws of the state of Delaware. We are a leading provider of Trusted Mobility Management (TM2) that consists of federally certified communications management, identity management, and interactive bill presentment and analytics solutions. We help our clients achieve their organizational missions for mobility management and security objectives in this challenging and complex business environment.
We offer our TM2 solutions through a flexible managed services model which includes both a scalable and comprehensive set of functional capabilities that can be used by any customer to meet the most common functional, technical and security requirements for mobility management. Our TM2 solutions were designed and implemented with flexibility in mind such that it can accommodate a large variety of customer requirements through simple configuration settings rather than through costly software development. The flexibility of our TM2 solutions enables our customers to be able to quickly expand or contract their mobility management requirements. Our TM2 solutions are hosted and accessible on-demand through a secure federal government certified proprietary portal that provides our customers with the ability to manage, analyze and protect their valuable communications assets, and deploy identity management solutions that provide secured virtual and physical access to restricted environments.
Strategic Focus
We executed on our key initiative for 2020 by winning the re-competed U.S. Department of Homeland Security Indefinite Delivery/Indefinite Quantity (DHS CWMS 2.0 IDIQ) and successfully supported the 2020 Census. In addition, we focused on increasing our customer base and our sales pipeline and leveraging our strategic relationships with key system integrators and strategic partners to capture additional market share. In fiscal 2021, we will continue to focus on the following key goals:
●
selling high margin managed services,
●
growing our sales pipeline by investing in our business development and sales team assets,
●
pursuing additional opportunities with our key systems integrator and strategic partners,
●
improving our proprietary platform and products, which includes pursuing FedRAMP certification for ITMS™ and maintaining our ATOs with our federal government agencies, as well as upgrading our secure identity management technology,
●
working to successfully deliver and expand the scope of work under the newly awarded DHS CWMS 2.0 IDIQ, and
●
expanding our solution offerings into the commercial space.
Our longer-term strategic focus and goals are driven by our need to expand our critical mass so that we have more flexibility to fund investments in technology solutions and introduce new sales and marketing initiatives to expand our marketplace share and increase the breadth of our offerings in order to improve company sustainability and growth. Our strategy for achieving our longer-term goals include:
●
pursuing accretive and strategic acquisitions to expand our solutions and our customer base,
●
delivering new incremental offerings to add to our existing TM2 offering,
●
developing and testing innovative new offerings that enhance our TM2 offering, and
●
transitioning our data center and support infrastructure into a more cost-effective and federally approved cloud environment to comply with perceived future contract requirements.
We believe these actions could drive a strategic repositioning our TM2 offering and may include the sale of non-aligned offerings coupled with acquisitions of complementary and supplementary offerings that could result in a more focused core set of TM2 offerings.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Refer to Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for a summary of our significant accounting policies referenced, as applicable, to other notes. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by U.S. GAAP and does not require management’s judgment in its application. Our senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with its Audit Committee. See Note 2 to consolidated financial statements, which contain additional information regarding accounting policies and other disclosures required by U.S. GAAP. The following section below provides information about certain critical accounting policies that are important to the consolidated financial statements and that require significant management assumptions and judgments.
Segments
Segments are defined by authoritative guidance as components of a company in which separate financial information is available and is evaluated by the chief operating decision maker (CODM), or a decision-making group, in deciding how to allocate resources and in assessing performance. Our CODM is our chief executive officer.
Our customers view our market as a singular business and demand an integrated and scalable suite of enterprise-wide solutions. Our TM2 offerings are substantially managed service driven solutions that use our proprietary technology platform to deliver our services. The amount of labor required to perform our contract obligations may vary significantly contract to contract depending on the customer’s specific requirements; however, the way in which we perform these services is consistent across the company and requires a connected group of internal subject matter experts and support personnel.
In order to evaluate a managed service business model our CODM and the executive management team measure financial performance based on our overall mixture of managed and carrier services and related margins. These financial metrics provide a stronger indication of how we are managing our key customer relationships; and it also determines our overall profitability.
We present a single segment for purposes of financial reporting and prepared consolidated financial statements upon that basis.
Revenue Recognition
Our managed services solutions may require a combination of labor, third party products and services. Our managed services are generally not interdependent and our contract performance obligations are delivered consistently on a monthly basis. We do not typically have undelivered performance obligations in these arrangements that would require us to spread our revenue over a longer period of time. In the event there are undelivered performance obligations our practice is to recognize the revenue when the performance obligation has been satisfied.
.
A substantial portion of our revenues are derived from firm fixed price contracts with the U.S. federal government that are fixed fee arrangements tied to the number of devices managed. Our actual reported revenue may fluctuate month to month depending on the hours worked, number of users, number of devices managed, actual or prospective proven expense savings, actual technology spend, or any other metrics as contractually agreed to with our customers.
Our revenue recognition policies for our managed services is summarized and shown below:
■
Managed services are delivered on a monthly basis based on a standard fixed pricing scale and sensitive to significant changes in per user or device counts which form the basis for monthly charges. Revenue is recognized upon the completion of the delivery of monthly managed services based on user or device counts or other metrics. Managed services are not interdependent and there are no undelivered elements in these arrangements.
■
Identity services are delivered as an on-demand managed service through the cloud to an individual or organization or sold in bulk to an organization capable of self-issuing credentials. There are two aspects to issuing an identity credential to an individual that consists of identity proofing which is a significant part of the service and monthly credential validation services which enable the credential holder to access third party systems. Identity proofing services are not bundled and do not generally include other performance obligations to deliver. Revenue is recognized from the sales of identity credentials to an individual or organization upon issuance less a portion deferred for monthly credential validation support services. In the case of bulk sales or credential management system revenue is recognized upon issue or availability to the customer for issuance. There is generally no significant performance obligation to provide post contract services in relation to identity consoles delivered. Identity certificates issued have a fixed life and cannot be modified once issued.
■
Proprietary software revenue for software sold as a term license is recognized ratably over the license term from the date the software is accepted by the customer. Maintenance services, if contracted, are recognized ratably over the term of the maintenance agreement, generally twelve months. Revenue for fixed price software licenses that are sold as a perpetual license with no significant customization are recognized when the software is delivered. Implementation fees are recognized when the work is completed. Revenue from this service does not require significant accounting estimates.
Our revenue recognition policies for our labor services is summarized and shown below:
■
Billable services are professional services provided on a project basis determined by our customers’ specific requirements. These technical professional services are billed based on time incurred and actual costs. We recognize revenues for professional services performed based on actual hours worked and actual costs incurred.
Our revenue recognition policies for our reselling services is summarized and shown below:
■
Reselling services require the Company to acquire third party products and services to satisfy customer contractual obligations. We recognize revenues and related costs on a gross basis for such arrangements whenever we control the products and services before they are transferred to the customer. We are the principal in these transactions as we are seen as the primary creditor, we carry inventory risk for undelivered products and services, we directly issue purchase orders third party suppliers, and we have discretion in sourcing among many different suppliers. For those transactions in which we procure and deliver products and services for our customers’ on their own account we do not recognize revenues and related costs on a gross basis for these arrangements. We only recognize revenues earned for arranging the transaction and any related costs.
Our revenue recognition policies for our billable carrier services is summarized and shown below:
■
Carrier services are delivered on a monthly basis and consist of phone, data and satellite and related mobile services for a connected device or end point. These services require us to procure, process and pay communications carrier invoices. We recognize revenues and related costs on a gross basis for such arrangements whenever we control the services before they are transferred to the customer. We are the principal in these transactions when we are seen as the primary creditor, we directly issue purchase orders directly to communications carriers for wireline and wireless services, and/or we have discretion in choosing optimal providers and rate plans. For arrangements in which we do not have such control we recognize revenues and related costs on a net basis.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of acquisition cost of an acquired company over the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. In accordance with GAAP, goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level annually at December 31 and between annual tests if events or circumstances arise, such as adverse changes in the business climate, that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the reporting unit below its carrying value.
A reporting unit is defined as either an operating segment or a business one level below an operating segment for which discrete financial information is available that management regularly reviews. The Company has a single reporting unit for the purpose of impairment testing.
The goodwill impairment test utilizes a two-step approach. The first step identifies whether there is potential impairment by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, the second step of the impairment test is required to measure the amount of any impairment loss. We have the option to bypass the qualitative assessment for any reporting period and proceed to performing the first step of the two-step goodwill impairment test and then subsequently resume performing a qualitative assessment in any subsequent period. We bypassed using a qualitative assessment for 2020.
Goodwill impairment testing involves management judgment, requiring an assessment of whether the carrying value of the reporting unit can be supported by its fair value using widely accepted valuation techniques, such as the market approach (earnings multiples or transaction multiples for the industry in which the reporting unit operates) or the income approach discounted cash flow methods). The fair values of the reporting units were determined using a combination of valuation techniques consistent with the market approach and the income approach.
When preparing discounted cash flow models under the income approach, we estimate future cash flows using the reporting unit’s internal five-year forecast and a terminal value calculated using a growth rate that management believes is appropriate in light of current and expected future economic conditions. We then apply a discount rate to discount these future cash flows to arrive at a net present value amount, which represents the estimated fair value of the reporting unit. The discount rate applied approximates the expected cost of equity financing, determined using a capital asset pricing model. The model generates an appropriate discount rate using internal and external inputs to value future cash flows based on the time value of money and the price for bearing the uncertainty inherent in an investment.
We had approximately $18.5 million of goodwill as of December 31, 2020. The fair value of our single reporting unit was above carrying value; accordingly, we have concluded that goodwill is not impaired at December 31, 2020. The Company could be exposed to increased risk of goodwill impairment if future operating results or macroeconomic conditions differ significantly from our current assumptions.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We have not historically maintained an allowance for doubtful accounts for our federal government customers as we have not experienced material or recurring losses. Allowances for doubtful accounts relate to commercial accounts receivable and such an allowance represents management’s best estimate of the losses inherent in the Company’s outstanding trade accounts receivable. We determine the allowance for doubtful accounts by considering a number of factors, including the length of time accounts receivable are past due, the customers’ previous payment history and current ability to pay its obligation, and the condition of the general economy and the industry as a whole. Customer account balances outstanding longer than 120 days that have not been settled in accordance with contract terms or for which no firm payment commitments exist are placed with a third party collection agency and a reserve is established. We write off the reserved accounts receivable against the existing allowance after it is determined that such accounts are ultimately uncollectible. Payments subsequently received on such receivables are credited to the allowance for doubtful accounts. If the accounts receivable has been written off and no allowance for doubtful accounts exist subsequent payments received are credited to bad debt expense.
To the extent historical credit experience, updated for emerging market trends in credit is not indicative of future performance, actual losses could differ significantly from management’s judgments and expectations, resulting in either higher or lower future provisions for losses, as applicable. The process of determining the allowance for doubtful accounts requires a high degree of judgment. It is possible that others, given the same information, may at any point in time reach different reasonable conclusions.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded net provisions for bad debt expense totaling approximately $1,000 related to commercial contracts.
Share-Based Compensation
We issue share-based compensation awards to employees, directors, an on occasion to non-employees upon which the fair value of awards is subject to significant estimates made by management. The fair value of each option award is estimated on the date of grant using a Black-Scholes option pricing model (“Black-Scholes model”), which uses the assumptions of no dividend yield, risk free interest rates and expected life (in years) of approximately two (2) to ten (10) years.
Expected volatilities are based on the historical volatility of our common stock. The expected term of options granted is based on analyses of historical employee termination rates and option exercises. The risk-free interest rates are based on the U.S. Treasury yield for a period consistent with the expected term of the option in effect at the time of the grant. To the extent historical volatility estimates, risk free interest rates, option terms and forfeiture rates updated for emerging market trends are not indicative of future performance it could differ significantly from management’s judgments and expectations on the fair value of similar share-based awards, resulting in either higher or lower future compensation expense, as applicable. The process of determining fair value of share-based compensation requires a high degree of judgment. It is possible that others, given the same information, may at any point in time reach different reasonable conclusions.
Accounting for Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using the enacted tax rates expected to be in effect for the years in which the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance is established when management determines that it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the benefit of the deferred tax asset will not be realized.
Since deferred taxes measure the future tax effects of items recognized in the financial statements, certain estimates and assumptions are required to determine whether it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the benefit of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. In making this assessment, management analyzes and estimates the impact of future taxable income, reversing temporary differences and available tax planning strategies. These assessments are performed quarterly, taking into account any new information.
The Company’s significant deferred tax assets consist of net operating loss carryforwards, share-based compensation and intangible asset amortization related to prior business acquisitions. Should a change in facts or circumstances lead to a change in judgment about the ultimate ability to realize a deferred tax asset (including our utilization of historical net operating losses and share-based compensation expense), the Company records or adjusts the related valuation allowance in the period that the change in facts or circumstances occurs, along with a corresponding increase or decrease to the income tax provision.
The Company's valuation allowance predominantly consisted of domestic net operating loss carryforwards and certain state net operating loss carryforwards. As of each reporting date, management considers new evidence, both positive and negative, that could affect its view of the future realization of deferred tax assets. As of December 31, 2020, in part because in the current year the Company achieved three years of cumulative pretax income in the U.S. federal tax jurisdiction, management determined that there is sufficient positive evidence to conclude that it is more likely than not that additional deferred taxes of are realizable. It therefore reduced the valuation allowance accordingly. During 2020, the Company released $8.2 million of the deferred tax asset valuation allowance to offset the regular tax expense generated by current earnings.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year ended December 31, 2019
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were approximately $180.3 million, an increase of approximately $78.6 million (or 77%), as compared to approximately $101.7 million in 2019. Our mix of revenues for the periods presented is set forth below:
(1)
Previously included certain software license revenues that are classified to managed service fees.
■
Our carrier services increased primarily due to activities of the U.S. Department of Commerce contract supporting the 2020 Census, U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, partially offset by reduction in U.S. Customs Border Patrol and Department of Health and Human Services. The carrier service revenue recognized from the 2020 Census project was approximately 61% of our total carrier services revenue in 2020. The largest phase of our work on the 2020 Census project was completed in late 2020. We will continue to support the Bureau of Census through October 2022 in other minor operations.
■
Our managed service fees increased due to expansion of managed services for existing government customers, as well as increases in sales of accessories to our government customers as compared to last year.
■
Billable service fees increased due to the ramp up of services delivered through our partnerships with large systems integrators and professional services supporting the 2020 Census project. As stated above, the largest phase of our work was completed.
■
Reselling and other services increased due to timing of large product resales. Reselling and other services are transactional in nature and as a result the amount and timing of revenue will vary significantly from quarter to quarter.
Revenues by customer type for the periods presented is set forth below:
■
Our sales to federal government customers increased primarily due to the activities of the U.S. Department of Commerce contract supporting the 2020 Census, partially offset by a reduction of services to Department of Health and Human Services and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
■
Our sales to state and local government customers declined as compared to last year due to reduction in carrier services.
■
Our sales to foreign government customers increased slightly as compared to last year due to managed services.
■
Our sales to commercial enterprise customers decreased slightly in 2020 as compared to 2019 due to customer attrition.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were approximately $159.9 million (or 89% of revenues) as compared to approximately $84.3 million (or 83% of revenues) in 2019. The dollar increase was driven by higher labor costs to support billable service fee contracts and inventory costs related to accessory sales as compared to last year. Our cost of revenues may fluctuate due to accessories sales activities which depends heavily on customer mobility equipment accessory requirements.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for the year ended was approximately $20.4 million (or 11% of revenues), as compared to approximately $17.4 million (or 17% of revenues) in 2019. The dollar increase in gross profit reflects higher managed services revenue as compared to last year.
Operating Expenses
Sales and marketing expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $1.9 million (or 1.0% of revenues), as compared to approximately$1.7 million (or 1.6% of revenues) in 2019. Increase reflects investment in business development, partially offset by reduction in travel costs.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were approximately $14.3 million (or 8% of revenues), as compared to approximately $13.8 million (or 14% of revenues) in 2019. The increase in general and administrative expense reflects overhead and administrative costs to support the increased business and costs related to supporting our infrastructure in a cloud environment, as well as an increase in share-based compensation expense compared to last year, partially offset by reduced travel costs .
Product development costs associated with our with our proprietary platform for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were approximately $903,000 and $146,000, respectively, which were capitalized.
Depreciation and amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $1,091,000, as compared to approximately $988,100 in 2019. The increase in depreciation and amortization expense reflects the increase in our depreciable asset base.
Other (Expense) Income
Net other expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $299,000 as compared to approximately $266,400 in 2019. The increase in net other expense is primarily driven by the decrease in other income.
(Benefit) Provision for Income Taxes
Income tax (benefit) provision for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $(7.4) million, as compared to approximately $0.4 million in 2019. The current income tax provision included reversal of valuation allowance of $8.2 million discussed above, partially offset by $0.8 million of current year tax expense that resulted in a tax benefit of $7.4 million.
Net Income
Primarily as a result of the increased revenue from the 2020 Census project that was completed in 2020, net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased to approximately $10.3 million as compared to a net income of approximately $0.2 million in 2019.
Liquidity and Capital
Net Working Capital
Our immediate sources of liquidity include cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, unbilled receivables and access to a working capital credit facility with Atlantic Union Bank for up to $5.0 million. In addition, we recently established an at-the-market (ATM) equity sales program (described below) that permits us to sell, from time to time, up to $24.0 million of our common stock through the sales agents under the program. There is no assurance that, if needed, we will be able to raise capital on favorable terms or at all.
At December 31, 2020, our net working capital was approximately $13.0 million as compared to $5.0 million at December 31, 2019. The increase in net working capital was primarily driven by increases in revenue, and proceeds from issuance of common stock through the ATM sales program, and temporary payable timing differences. We may need to raise additional capital to fund major growth initiatives and/or acquisitions and there can be no assurance that additional capital will be available on acceptable terms or at all.
ATM Sales Program
On August 18, 2020, we entered into an At-The-Market Issuance Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with B. Riley Securities, Inc., The Benchmark Company, LLC and Spartan Capital Securities, LLC which establishes an ATM equity program pursuant to which we may offer and sell up to $24.0 million of shares of our common stock, par value $0.001 per share, from time to time as set forth in the Sales Agreement. We have no obligation to sell any of the Shares, and, at any time, we may suspend offers under the Sales Agreement or terminate the Sales Agreement. We sold 399,000 shares during the three months ended December 31, 2020 under the ATM program and had remaining capacity of $20.0 million as of December 31, 2020.
Subsequent to December 31, 2020, the Company sold 100,687 shares for gross proceeds of $1.1 million.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities provides an indication of our ability to generate sufficient cash flow from our recurring business activities. Our single largest cash operating expense is labor and company sponsored benefits. Our second largest cash operating expense is our facility costs and related technology communication costs to support delivery of our services to our customers. We lease our facilities under non-cancellable long-term contracts. Any changes to our fixed labor and/or infrastructure costs may require a significant amount of time to take effect depending on the nature of the change made and cash payments to terminate any agreements that have not yet expired. We experience temporary collection timing differences from time to time due to customer invoice processing delays that are often beyond our control, including intermittent U.S. federal government shutdowns related to budgetary funding issues.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operations was approximately $6.4 million driven by increased accounts receivable and temporary payable timing differences.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by operations was approximately $5.9 million driven by improved collections of accounts receivable and temporary payable timing differences.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities provides an indication of our long-term infrastructure investments. We maintain our own technology infrastructure and may need to make additional purchases of computer hardware, software and other fixed infrastructure assets to ensure our environment is properly maintained and can support our customer obligations. We typically fund purchases of long-term infrastructure assets with available cash or lease financing agreements.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities was approximately $1.2 million and consisted of computer hardware and software purchases and capitalized internally developed software costs, primarily associated with upgrading our ITMS™ platform, secure identity management technology and network operations center.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in investing activities was approximately $0.5 million and predominantly consisted of computer hardware and software purchases and capitalized internally developed software costs related to our TDI Optimiser™ solutions.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities provides an indication of our debt financing and proceeds from capital raise transactions and stock option exercises.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in financing activities was approximately $3.7 million and consisted of lease principal repayments of approximately $608,000, proceeds from issuance of common stock through the ATM sales program of $4.3 million, net of issuance costs, and repurchases of our common stock of $10,100. The Company was advanced and repaid approximately $1.9 million in cumulative line of credit advances during the year.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in financing activities was approximately $0.8 million and consisted of lease principal repayments of approximately $473,300, payment of debt issuance costs of $5,000, and repurchases of our common stock of $366,000. The Company was advanced and repaid approximately $6.8 million in cumulative line of credit advances during the year.
Net Effect of Exchange Rate on Cash and Equivalents
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the appreciation of the Euro relative to the US dollar increased the translated value of our foreign cash balances by approximately $155,500 as compared to last year. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the gradual depreciation of the Euro relative to the US dollar decreased the translated value of our foreign cash balances by approximately $47,000.
Credit Facilities and Other Commitments
At December 31, 2020, there were no outstanding borrowings against the Company’s $5.0 million working capital credit facility with Atlantic Union Bank. At December 31, 2020, there were no material commitments for additional capital expenditures, but that could change with the addition of material contract awards or task orders awarded in the future. The available amount under the working capital credit facility is subject to a borrowing base, which is equal to the lesser of (i) $5.0 million or (ii) 50% of the net unpaid balance of our eligible accounts receivable. The facility is secured by a first lien security interest on all of our personal property, including its accounts receivable, general intangibles, inventory and equipment. The maturity date of the credit facility is April 30, 2021 and the facility has a variable interest rate equal to the Wall Street Journal prime rate plus 0.25%.
The credit facility requires that the Company meet the following financial covenants on a quarterly basis: (i) maintain a minimum adjusted tangible net worth of at least $2.0 million, (ii) maintain minimum consolidated adjusted EBITDA of at least two times interest expense and (iii) maintain a current ratio of 1.1 to 1.0 (excluding lease liabilities reported under recently adopted lease accounting standards).
We believe our working capital credit facility, provided it is renewed or replaced upon its expiration on April 30, 2021, along with cash on hand and proceeds from sales under our ATM sales program, should be sufficient to meet our minimum requirements for our current business operations or potential acquisitions. We may need to raise additional capital to fund our operations and there can be no assurance that additional capital will be available on acceptable terms, or at all.
Contractual Obligations
The table below identifies transactions that represent our contractually committed future obligations. Purchase obligations include our agreements to purchase goods and services that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify significant terms, including: fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. The following reflects a summary of our contractual obligations for fiscal years ending December 31:
(1)
See Note 8 for further information on leases and the adoption of ASC 842.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has no existing off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under SEC regulations.