Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes that appear elsewhere in this document. Please refer to Item 7 of our 2019 Form 10-K for further discussion and analysis of our 2018 financial condition and results of operations.
Overview
According to World Steel Association’s latest published statistics, U. S. Steel was the twenty-seventh largest steel producer in the world in 2019. Also in 2019 according to World Steel Association’s latest published statistics, U. S. Steel was the third largest steel producer in the United States. U. S. Steel has a broad and diverse mix of products and customers. We use iron ore, coal, coke, steel scrap, zinc, tin, and other metallic additions to produce a wide range of flat-rolled and tubular steel products, concentrating on value-added steel products for customers with demanding technical applications in the transportation, appliance, container, industrial machinery, construction and oil, gas, and petrochemical industries. In addition to our facilities in the United States, U. S. Steel has significant operations in Eastern Europe through U. S. Steel Košice (USSK), located in Slovakia.
We are proud to report the following accomplishments achieved in 2020:
•Set a safety performance record with a 2020 Days Away from Work rate of 0.07, which is eight times better than the industry average reported by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
•Articulating and executing on the transformative Best of BothSM strategy, including exercise of the option to acquire the remaining interest in Big River Steel. The acquisition closed on January 15, 2021.
•Commissioned the new 1.6 million ton electric arc furnace (EAF) at Fairfield, Alabama in October 2020 that is currently used to feed our 0.9 million ton rounds caster.
•Completed construction of the continuous galvanizing line at our PRO-TEC joint venture, which will provide superior finishing capabilities for our differentiated line of advanced high strength steels.
•Trialed 11 U. S. Steel grades of steel at Big River Steel, with its low carbon emissions intensity production process, in furtherance of our commitment to support our sustainability goals and those of our customers.
•Awarded a perfect "100" score by the Human Rights Campaign Corporate Equality Index for the second straight year.
•Positive operating cash flow of $138 million in 2020 and strong year-end liquidity of approximately $3.2 billion, including $2.0 billion of cash, to support the execution of our strategy.
•Achieved record low 24-day cash conversion cycle time, demonstrating intense focus on cash efficiency.
•Successfully raised approximately $1.7 billion in incremental capital including debt offerings and stock issuances.
•Received approximately $163 million and $94 million in net proceeds from the sale of a non-core real estate asset in Fairless, Pennsylvania and the Stelco option to purchase a 25 percent interest in our Minntac mine in Mt. Iron, Minnesota, respectively.
Our disciplined and balanced capital strategy has positioned our balance sheet to support investments in our business. We continue to take steps to improve and secure our long-term position as an industry leader by reducing our vulnerabilities during down cycles, accentuating our advantages in up cycles, and enabling the creation of value - and the related rewards - for all U. S. Steel stakeholders through business cycles.
We aim to achieve our vision by successfully executing on our world-competitive, Best of Both strategy. By bringing together the best of the integrated steelmaking model with the best of the mini mill steelmaking model, we will transform our business to drive long-term cash flow through industry cycles. We aim to offer an unparalleled product platform to serve customers, achieve world-competitive positioning in strategic, high-margin end markets, and deliver high-quality, value-added products and innovative solutions that address our customers' most challenging steel needs. To become a Best of Both company, we are enhancing our focus on operational and commercial excellence and promoting technological innovation, so we can establish a more competitive cost structure and enhance our capabilities … two key drivers for our strategy.
U. S. Steel's results in 2020 were significantly impacted by market challenges in each of the Company's three reportable segments: North American Flat-Rolled (Flat-Rolled), U. S. Steel Europe (USSE) and Tubular Products (Tubular). In Flat-Rolled, results improved in the second half of the year due to the resumption of more typical operations from consumers of steel in North America that had been completely or partially shut down due to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. As regions unevenly re-
opened from pandemic related temporary idlings, demand levels increased, though demand remains at below typical levels. While steel prices did increase toward the end of the year, continued low spot prices impacted operating results for most of the year. Flat-Rolled results were largely impacted by the reset of calendar year fixed contract prices, as well as lost shipments due to customer operating restrictions and lower demand as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result of the sharp decline in North American steel demand, driving raw steel capacity utilization rates sharply lower to almost 50%, there was also significant spot price erosion that followed. USSE continued to experience margin compression due to modestly recovered but still weak performance of the manufacturing sector combined with continued high levels of imports and high raw materials costs. In Tubular, the continued disruption in the oil and gas industry, as well as pandemic-related impacts, reduced demand for oil and gas and severely impacted energy prices, creating significant reductions of drilling activity in the U.S. See Item 1. Business, Human Capital Management and Item 1. Business, Capital Structure and Liquidity for further details regarding our human and financial response to the COVID-19 pandemic, respectively.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of U. S. Steel’s financial condition and results of operations is based upon U. S. Steel’s financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting standards generally accepted in the United States (U.S. GAAP). The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at year-end and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the year. Management regularly evaluates these estimates, including those related to employee benefits liabilities and assets held in trust relating to such liabilities; the carrying value of property, plant and equipment; intangible assets; valuation allowances for receivables, inventories and deferred income tax assets; liabilities for deferred income taxes; potential tax deficiencies; environmental obligations; potential litigation claims and settlements and put and call option assets and liabilities. Management’s estimates are based on historical experience, current business and market conditions, and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from current expectations under different assumptions or conditions.
Management believes that the following are the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the financial statements.
Inventories - Inventories are carried at the lower of cost or market for last-in, first-out (LIFO) inventories and lower of cost and net realizable value for first-in, first-out (FIFO) method inventories. LIFO is the predominant method of inventory costing for inventories in the United States and FIFO is the predominant method used in Europe. The LIFO method of inventory costing was used on 59 percent and 75 percent of consolidated inventories at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Since the LIFO inventory valuation methodology is an annual calculation, interim estimates of the annual LIFO valuation are required. We recognize the effects of the LIFO inventory valuation method on an interim basis by estimating the year end inventory amounts. The projections of annual LIFO inventory amounts are updated quarterly. Changes in U.S. GAAP rules or tax law, such as the elimination of the LIFO method of accounting for inventories, could negatively affect our profitability and cash flow.
Equity method investments - Investments in entities over which U. S. Steel has significant influence are accounted for using the equity method of accounting and are carried at U. S. Steel’s share of net assets plus loans, advances and our share of earnings less distributions. Differences in the basis of the investment and the underlying net asset value of the investee, if any, are amortized into earnings over the remaining useful life of the associated assets.
Income from investees includes U. S. Steel’s share of income from equity method investments, which is generally recorded a month in arrears. Gains or losses from changes in ownership of unconsolidated investees are recognized in the period of change. Intercompany profits and losses on transactions with equity investees have been eliminated in consolidation subject to lower of cost or market inventory adjustments.
U. S. Steel evaluates impairment of its equity method investments whenever circumstances indicate that a decline in value below carrying value is other than temporary. Under these circumstances, we would adjust the investment down to its estimated fair value, which then becomes its new carrying value.
Financial Instruments - U. S. Steel's purchase of a 49.9% equity ownership interest in Big River Steel on October 31, 2019 included certain call and put options. U. S. Steel marked these options to fair value each reporting period using a Monte Carlo simulation which is considered a Level 3 valuation technique. Level 3 valuation techniques include inputs to the valuation methodology that are considered unobservable and significant to the fair value measurement. When the U. S. Steel call option was exercised, the options were legally extinguished and a contingent forward purchase commitment was recorded for the value of the unsettled commitment to purchase the remaining interest in Big River Steel. The contingent forward purchase commitment was removed with the close of the Big River Steel purchase which occurred on January 15, 2021. See Note 5 and Note 20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further details.
Pensions and Other Benefits - The recording of net periodic benefit costs for defined benefit pensions and Other Benefits is based on, among other things, assumptions of the expected annual return on plan assets, discount rate, mortality, escalation or other changes in retiree health care costs and plan participation levels. Changes in the assumptions or differences between
actual and expected changes in the present value of liabilities or assets of U. S. Steel’s plans could cause net periodic benefit costs to increase or decrease materially from year to year as discussed below.
U. S. Steel’s investment strategy for its U.S. pension plan assets provides for a diversified mix of high quality bonds, public equities and selected smaller investments in private equities, private credit, timber and mineral interests. For its U.S. pension plan, U. S. Steel has a target allocation for plan assets of 45 percent in corporate bonds, government bonds and mortgage and asset-backed securities. The balance is primarily invested in equity securities, timber, private equity and real estate partnerships. U. S. Steel believes that returns on equities over the long term will be higher than returns from fixed-income securities as actual historical returns from U. S. Steel’s trusts have shown. Returns on bonds tend to offset some of the short-term volatility of stocks. Both equity and fixed-income investments are made across a broad range of industries and companies (both domestic and foreign) to provide protection against the impact of volatility in any single industry as well as company specific developments. U. S. Steel will use a 6.90 percent assumed rate of return on assets for the development of net periodic cost for the main defined benefit pension plan in 2021. The 2021 assumed rate of return was determined by taking into account the intended asset mix and some moderation of the historical premiums that fixed-income and equity investments have yielded above government bonds. Actual returns since the inception of the plans have exceeded the 6.90 percent rate and while recent annual returns have been volatile, it is U. S. Steel’s expectation that rates will achieve this level in future periods.
The UPI investment strategy for its pension plan is to minimize the volatility of the value of pension assets relative to obligations and to ensure assets are sufficient to pay plan benefits. To achieve this strategy, UPI has a liability driven allocation of 60 percent in fixed income with the balance primarily invested in return seeking U.S. and global equity. UPI will use a 5.35 percent assumed rate of return on assets for the development of net periodic cost for the UPI defined benefit pension plan in 2021.
For its Other Benefits plan assets, U. S. Steel employs a liability driven investment strategy. The plan assets are allocated to match the plan cash flows with maturing investments. To achieve this strategy, U. S. Steel has a target allocation for plan assets of 90 percent in high quality bonds. The balance is primarily invested in equity securities, timber, private equity, private credit and real estate partnerships. U. S. Steel will use a 4.25 percent assumed rate of return on assets for the development of net periodic cost for its Other Benefits plans. The 2021 assumed rate of return includes consideration of the intended asset mix.
The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is applied to the market value of assets as of the beginning of the period less expected benefit payments and considering any planned contributions.
To determine the discount rate used to measure our pension and Other Benefit obligations for U.S. plans we utilize a bond matching approach to select specific bonds that would satisfy our projected benefit payments. At December 31, 2020, the weighted average discount rate used for our pension and Other Benefit obligations was determined to be 2.72 percent and 2.80 percent, respectively, compared to the weighted average discount rate used of 3.35 percent and 3.43 percent, respectively, at December 31, 2019. The discount rate reflects the current rate at which we estimate the pension and Other Benefits liabilities could be effectively settled at the measurement date.
U. S. Steel reviews its actual historical rate experience and expectations of future health care cost trends to determine the escalation of per capita health care costs under U. S. Steel’s benefit plans. Approximately three quarters of our costs for the domestic United Steelworkers (USW) participants’ retiree health benefits in the Company’s main domestic benefit plan are limited to a per capita dollar maximum calculation based on 2006 base year actual costs incurred under the main U. S. Steel benefit plan for USW participants (cost cap). The full effect of the cost cap is expected to be realized around 2028. After 2028, the Company’s costs for a majority of USW retirees and their dependents are expected to remain fixed and as a result, the cost impact of health care escalation for the Company is projected to be limited for this group (See Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements). For measurement of its domestic retiree medical plans where health care cost escalation is applicable, U. S. Steel has assumed an initial escalation rate of 6.50 percent for 2021. This rate is assumed to decrease gradually to an ultimate rate of 4.50 percent in 2029 and remain at that level thereafter.
Net periodic pension benefit cost, including multiemployer plans, is expected to total approximately $87 million in 2021 compared to $145 million in 2020. Excluding settlement and special termination losses totaling $11 million in 2020, the decrease in net periodic pension benefit cost in 2021 is primarily due to 2020 asset performance, partially offset by the decrease in discount rates. Net periodic other benefit income in 2021 is expected to be approximately $(72) million, compared to $(23) million in 2020. The expected improvement in the 2021 net periodic other benefit income is primarily due to the expiration of prior service cost bases and projected decreases in future healthcare costs.
The tables below project the incremental effect of a hypothetical one percentage point change in significant assumptions used in determining the funded status and net periodic benefit cost for pension and other benefits:
The fixed income asset sensitivity shown above excludes other fixed income return components (e.g. changes in credit spreads, bond coupon and active management excess returns), and growth asset returns. Fixed income sensitivity reflects the asset allocation and investment policy effective December 31, 2020. Other factors that impact net funded status (e.g., contributions) are not reflected.
Discount rates and the expected long-term return on assets have a material impact on net periodic pension and other benefit costs. The table below estimates the impact to net periodic pension costs of a hypothetical one percentage point change in rates:
Changes in the assumptions for expected annual return on plan assets and the discount rate used for accounting purposes do not impact the funding calculations used to derive minimum funding requirements for the pension plan. However, the discount rate required for minimum funding purposes is also based on corporate bond related indices and as such, the same general sensitivity concepts as above can be applied to increases or decreases to the funding obligations of the plans assuming the same hypothetical rate changes. (See Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion regarding legislation enacted in November of 2015 that impacts the discount rate used for funding purposes.) For further cash flow discussion see “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Long-lived assets - U. S. Steel evaluates long-lived assets, primarily property, plant and equipment for impairment whenever changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts of those productive assets exceed their recoverable amount as determined by the asset group's projected undiscounted cash flows. We evaluate the impairment of long-lived assets at the asset group level. Our primary asset groups are Flat-Rolled, welded tubular, seamless tubular and U. S. Steel Europe (USSE).
For the period ended March 31, 2020, the steep decline in oil prices that resulted from market oversupply and declining demand was considered a triggering event for the welded tubular and seamless tubular asset groups. A quantitative analysis was completed for both asset groups and a $263 million impairment, consisting of an impairment of $196 million for property, plant and equipment and $67 million for intangible assets was recorded for the welded tubular asset group while no impairment was indicated for the seamless tubular asset group. There were no other triggering events that required an impairment evaluation of our long-lived asset groups during the year-ended December 31, 2020.
During 2019, steel market challenges in the U.S. and Europe, the idling of certain Flat-Rolled facilities and recent losses in the welded tubular asset group were considered triggering events for the Flat-Rolled, USSE and welded tubular asset groups. U. S. Steel completed a quantitative analysis of its long-lived assets for these asset groups and determined that the assets were not impaired. The percentage excess of estimated future cash flows over the net assets was greater than 30 percent for our welded tubular asset group. The key assumptions used to estimate the recoverable amounts for the welded tubular asset group were estimates of future commercial prices, commercial program management and efficiency improvements over the 12-year remaining useful life of the primary welded tubular assets. The percentage excess of estimated future cash flows over the net assets was greater than 75 percent for both the Flat-Rolled and USSE asset groups. There were no triggering events for the seamless tubular asset group that required long-lived assets to be evaluated for impairment.
Taxes - U. S. Steel records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. A valuation allowance is recorded if, based on the weight of all available positive and negative evidence, it is more likely
than not that some portion, or all, of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. Each quarter U. S. Steel analyzes the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be realized.
At December 31, 2020, after weighing all the positive and negative evidence, U. S. Steel determined that it was still more likely than not that the net domestic deferred tax asset (excluding a portion of a deferred tax liability with an indefinite life) may not be realized. As a result, U. S. Steel recorded a $229 million non-cash charge to tax expense. In the future, if we determine that it is more likely than not that we will be able to realize all or a portion of our deferred tax assets, the valuation allowance will be reduced, and we will record a benefit to earnings. See Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further details.
At December 31, 2019, after weighing all the positive and negative evidence, U. S. Steel determined that it was more likely than not that the net domestic deferred tax asset (excluding a portion of a deferred tax liability related to an asset with an indefinite life, as well as a deferred tax asset related to refundable AMT credits) may not be realized. As a result, U. S. Steel recorded a $334 million non-cash charge to tax expense.
At the end of both 2020 and 2019, U. S. Steel did not have any undistributed foreign earnings and profits for which U.S. deferred taxes have not been provided.
U. S. Steel records liabilities for uncertain tax positions. These liabilities are based on management’s judgment of the risk of loss for items that have been or may be challenged by taxing authorities. If U. S. Steel determines that tax-related items would not be considered uncertain tax positions or that items previously not considered to be potential uncertain tax positions could be considered potential uncertain tax positions (as a result of an audit, court case, tax ruling or other authoritative tax position), an adjustment to the liability would be recorded through income in the period such determination was made.
Environmental remediation - U. S. Steel has been identified as a potentially responsible party (PRP) at five sites under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA) as of December 31, 2020. Of these, there are three sites where information requests have been received or there are other indications that U. S. Steel may be a PRP under CERCLA, but where sufficient information is not presently available to confirm the existence of liability or to make a reasonable estimate with respect to any potential liabilities. There are also nine additional sites where U. S. Steel may be liable for remediation costs in excess of $1 million under other environmental statutes, both federal and state, or where private parties are seeking to impose liability on U. S. Steel for remediation costs through discussions or litigation. At many of these sites, U. S. Steel is one of a number of parties involved and the total cost of remediation, as well as U. S. Steel’s share, is frequently dependent upon the outcome of ongoing investigations and remedial studies. U. S. Steel accrues for environmental remediation activities when the responsibility to remediate is probable and the amount of associated costs is reasonably determinable. As environmental remediation matters proceed toward ultimate resolution or as remediation obligations arise, charges in excess of those previously accrued may be required.
U. S. Steel's accrual for environmental liabilities for U.S. and international facilities as of December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $146 million and $186 million, respectively. These amounts exclude liabilities related to asset retirement obligations, disclosed in Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
U. S. Steel is the subject of, or a party to, a number of pending or threatened legal actions, contingencies and commitments involving a variety of matters, including laws and regulations relating to the environment. The ultimate resolution of these contingencies could, individually or in the aggregate, be material to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
For discussion of relevant environmental items, see “Part I. Item 3. Legal Proceedings-Environmental Proceedings.”
Segments
U. S. Steel has three reportable segments: North American Flat-Rolled (Flat-Rolled), U. S. Steel Europe (USSE) and Tubular Products (Tubular). The results of our 49.9% ownership interest in Big River Steel and our railroad and real estate businesses that do not constitute reportable segments are combined and disclosed in the Other Businesses category. Beginning in 2021, we will report the results of Big River Steel in a separate “Mini Mill” segment.
The Flat-Rolled segment includes the operating results of U. S. Steel’s integrated steel plants and equity investees in North America (except for Big River Steel, which is included in Other Businesses) involved in the production of slabs, strip mill plates, sheets and tin mill products, as well as all iron ore and coke production facilities in the United States. These operations primarily serve North American customers in the service center, conversion, transportation (including automotive), construction, container, and appliance and electrical markets.
The USSE segment includes the operating results of U. S. Steel Košice (USSK), U. S. Steel’s integrated steel plant and coke production facilities in Slovakia, and its subsidiaries. USSE conducts its business mainly in Central and Western Europe and primarily serves customers in the European transportation (including automotive), construction, container appliance, electrical, service center, conversion and oil, gas and petrochemical markets. USSE produces and sells slabs, strip mill plate, sheet, tin mill products and spiral welded pipe, as well as refractory ceramic materials.
The Tubular segment includes the operating results of U. S. Steel’s tubular production facilities and an equity investee in the United States. These operations produce and sell seamless and electric resistance welded (ERW) steel casing and tubing
(commonly known as oil country tubular goods or OCTG), standard and line pipe and mechanical tubing and primarily serve customers in the oil, gas and petrochemical markets.
For further information, see Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Net Sales
Net Sales by Segment
Management’s analysis of the percentage change in net sales for U. S. Steel’s reportable business segments is set forth in the following tables:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 versus Year December 31, 2019
(a)Excludes intersegment sales
(b)Foreign currency translation effects
(c)Primarily sales of raw materials and coke making by-products
Net sales for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019 were $9,741 million and $12,937 million, respectively.
•For the Flat-Rolled segment the decrease in sales resulted from decreased shipments (decrease of 1,989 million tons) across most products, a result of the COVID-19 pandemic induced shutdowns that began late in the first quarter of 2020. Lower average realized prices of $35 per net ton for 2020 were also a result of the pandemic onset in March.
•For the USSE segment the decrease in sales resulted from decreased shipments (decrease of 549 thousand tons) across most products and lower average realized prices (decrease of $26 per net ton) across all products.
•For the Tubular segment the decrease in sales resulted from decreased shipments (decrease of 305 thousand tons) across all products, lower average realized prices (decrease of $179 per net ton) across all products and continued high levels of energy tubular imports.
Operating Expenses
Union profit-sharing costs
Profit-based amounts are calculated and paid on a quarterly basis as a percentage of consolidated earnings (loss) before interest and income taxes based on 7.5 percent of profit between $10 and $50 per ton and 15 percent of profit above $50 per ton.
The amounts above represent profit-sharing amounts paid to active USW-represented employees and are included in cost of sales on the Consolidated Statement of Operations.
Net periodic pension and other benefits costs
Pension and other benefit costs (other than service cost) are reflected within net interest and other financial costs and the service cost component is reflected within cost of sales in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Defined benefit and multiemployer pension plan costs included in cost of sales totaled $127 million in 2020 and $121 million in 2019.
Other benefit service cost included in cost of sales totaled $12 million in 2020 and $13 million in 2019.
Costs related to defined contribution plans totaled $22 million in 2020 and $48 million in 2019. The decrease from 2019 primarily resulted from the temporary suspension of the Company's contributions for salaried defined contribution plans that occurred within 2020.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $274 million in 2020 and $289 million in 2019. The decrease from 2019 to 2020 is primarily related from the suspension of the Company's defined contribution plans for a portion of 2020.
Operating configuration adjustments
Over the past three years, the Company has adjusted its operating configuration in response to changing market conditions including global overcapacity, unfair trade practices and increases in domestic demand as a result of tariffs on imports by indefinitely and temporarily idling and then re-starting production at certain of its facilities. U. S. Steel will continue to adjust its operating configuration in order to maximize its strategy of combining the Best of Both leading integrated and mini mill technology.
In October 2020 U. S. Steel started its newly constructed, technologically advanced EAF steelmaking facility at its Fairfield, Alabama, operations.
In 2020, we took actions to adjust our footprint by temporarily idling certain operations for an indefinite period to better align production with customer demand and respond to the impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic. The operations that remained idle as of December 31, 2020 included:
•Blast Furnace A at Granite City Works
•Lone Star Tubular Operations
•Lorain Tubular Operations
•Wheeling Machine Products coupling production facility at Hughes Springs, Texas
As of December 31, 2020 the approximate carrying value of the idled fixed assets for facilities noted above was: Granite City Works Blast Furnace A, $65 million; Lone Star Tubular Operations, $5 million; and Lorain Tubular Operations, $70 million.
In December 2019, U. S. Steel announced that it would indefinitely idle a significant portion of Great Lakes Works. The Company began idling the iron and steelmaking facilities in March 2020 and the hot strip mill rolling facility in June 2020. The carrying value of the Great Lakes Works facilities that were indefinitely idled was approximately $330 million as of December 31, 2020.
In December 2019, the Company completed the indefinite idling of its East Chicago Tin (ECT) operations within its Flat-Rolled segment. ECT was indefinitely idled primarily due to increased tin import levels in the U.S. Additionally, U. S. Steel indefinitely idled its finishing facility in Dearborn, Michigan (which operates an electrolytic galvanizing line), during the fourth quarter of 2019. The carrying value of these facilities was approximately $15 million as of December 31, 2020.
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Depreciation, depletion and amortization expenses were $643 million in 2020 and $616 million in 2019. The increases from 2019 to 2020 are primarily due to increased capital spending in recent years.
Earnings from investees
Loss from investees was $117 million in 2020 versus earnings from investees of $79 million in 2019. The decrease from 2019 to 2020 is primarily due to equity losses from our investment in Big River Steel.
Restructuring and Other Charges
During 2020, the Company recorded restructuring and other charges of $138 million, which consists of charges of $66 million for the indefinite idling of a significant portion of Great Lakes Works, and our Keetac mining operations which was restarted in the fourth quarter, $25 million for the indefinite idling of Lorain Tubular Operations and Lone Star Tubular Operations, and $15 million and $32 million for employee benefit costs related to Company-wide headcount reductions and headcount reductions under a voluntary early retirement program (VERP) offered at USSK, respectively.
Charges for restructuring and ongoing cost reduction initiatives are recorded in the period U. S. Steel commits to a restructuring or cost reduction plan, or executes specific actions contemplated by the plan and all criteria for liability recognition have been met. Charges related to restructuring and cost reductions are reported in restructuring and other charges in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
(Loss) earnings before interest and income taxes by Segment (a)
(a) See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for reconciliations and other disclosures required by Accounting Standards Codification Topic 280.
(b) Included in restructuring and other charges on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. See Note 25 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Gross Margin by Segment
Segment results for Flat-Rolled
The Flat-Rolled segment had a loss of $596 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to earnings of $196 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in Flat-Rolled results for 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to:
•lower average realized prices (approximately $565 million)
•decreased shipments, including substrate to our Tubular segment (approximately $310 million)
•decreased mining sales (approximately $140 million)
•increased other costs (approximately $30 million),
these changes were partially offset by:
•lower energy costs (approximately $100 million)
•lower raw material costs (approximately $95 million)
•decreased operating costs (approximately $60 million)
Gross margin for 2020 as compared to 2019 decreased primarily as a result of lower sales volume and average realized prices.
Segment results for USSE
The USSE segment had earnings of $9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to loss of $57 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in USSE results in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to:
•lower raw material costs (approximately $110 million)
•decreased operating costs (approximately $75 million)
•lower energy costs (approximately $20 million)
•favorable currency impacts (approximately $10 million)
•lower other costs (approximately $10 million)
these changes were partially offset by:
•lower average realized prices (approximately $160 million)
Gross margin increased from 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily as a result of lower operating costs and raw material prices.
Segment results for Tubular
The Tubular segment had a loss of $179 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to a loss of $67 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in Tubular results in 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to:
•lower average realized prices (approximately $80 million)
•decreased shipments, including volume inefficiencies (approximately $70 million)
•increased operating costs (approximately $5 million)
•higher energy costs (approximately $5 million),
these changes were partially offset by:
•lower raw material cost (approximately $25 million)
•decreased other costs (approximately $25 million)
Gross margin for 2020 as compared to 2019 decreased primarily due to lower sales volume and average realized prices.
Results for Other Businesses
Other Businesses had a loss of $39 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to earnings of $23 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in earnings primarily resulted from recording our share of losses from our equity investment in Big River Steel.
Items not allocated to segments:
•We recorded asset impairment charges of $263 million for the impairment of property, plant and equipment and intangible asset within our welded tubular asset group.
•We recorded restructuring and other charges of $138 million for the indefinite idling of a significant portion of Great Lakes Works and our Keetac mining operations, Lorain Tubular Operations, Lone Star Tubular Operations and for employee benefit costs related to Company-wide headcount reductions and a VERP offered at USSK.
•We recorded a tubular inventory impairment charge of $24 million for write-downs to inventory related to the indefinite idlings at Lone Star Tubular Operations and Lorain Tubular Operations.
•Big River Steel debt extinguishment charges of $18 million were recognized in (Loss) earnings from investees for the refinancing of debt at Big River Steel.
•We recorded Big River Steel transaction and other related costs of $3 million related to the Big River Steel acquisition.
•We recorded a Fairless property sale gain of $145 million on the sale of our non-core real estate asset, the Keystone Industrial Port Complex, in Fairless Hills, Pennsylvania.
•We recorded a $25 million gain on previously held investment in UPI as described in Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
•We had recoveries of $6 million for costs associated with the December 24, 2018 Clairton coke making facility fire.
Net Interest and Other Financial Costs
Net interest and other financial costs increased in 2020 as compared to 2019 from increased interest expense due to a higher level of debt partially offset by lower net periodic benefit cost (as discussed below). For additional information on U. S. Steel indebtedness see Note 17 to the Consolidated Financial Statements
The net periodic benefit (income) cost (other than service cost) components of pension and other benefit costs are reflected in the table above, and decreased in 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to better than expected 2019 asset performance, lower amortization of prior service costs, lower future healthcare costs, and reduced participation in our retiree health plans.
For additional information on U. S. Steel’s foreign currency exchange activity see Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements and