ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with “our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this Annual Report contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements regarding our plans, objectives, expectations, intentions and projections. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in Item 1A “Risk Factors.”
Introduction
We are a clinical-stage medical device and biopharmaceutical company developing the “LungFit® system, which is capable of generating NO from ambient air. The LungFit® platform can generate NO up to 400 parts per million (“ppm”) for delivery to a patient’s lungs directly or via a ventilator. LungFit® can deliver NO either continuously or for a fixed amount of time at various flow rates and has the ability to either titrate dose on demand or maintain a constant dose. We believe that LungFit® can be used to treat patients on ventilators that require NO, as well as patients with chronic or acute severe lung infections via delivery through a breathing mask or similar apparatus. Furthermore, we believe that there is a high unmet medical need for patients suffering from certain severe lung infections that the LungFit® platform can potentially address. Our current areas of focus with LungFit® is PPHN, AVP including COVID-19, BRO and NTM lung infection. Our current product candidates will be subject to premarket reviews and approvals by the FDA, as well as similar regulatory agencies in other countries or regions. If approved, our system will be marketed as a medical device in the United States.
On November 10, 2020, we submitted a PMA application to the FDA for the use of LungFit® PH in PPHN. There is a standard 180-day review process that starts upon FDA acknowledgement of submission, though due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, we anticipate an FDA response towards the end of the third calendar quarter of calendar year 2021. We also expect to receive CE mark under the MDR in the European Union around the end of calendar year 2021. We also expect to make certain regulatory filings outside of the U.S. this year. If regulatory approvals are obtained, we anticipate a product launch in the U.S. in 2021 and globally in 2022
COVID-19
The development of our product candidates could be further disrupted and adversely affected by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. The spread of SARS CoV-2 resulted in the Director General of the World Health Organization declaring COVID-19 a pandemic on March 11, 2020. We have assessed the impact COVID-19 may have on our business plans and our ability to conduct the preclinical studies and clinical trials as well as on our reliance on third-party manufacturing and our supply chain. We experienced significant delays in the supply chain for LungFit® PH. Estimated clinical trial completion in NTM is delayed 9-12 months and trials in BRO are delayed from the fourth quarter calendar year 2020 to fourth quarter calendar year 2022. There can be no assurance that we will be able to further avoid part or all of any impact from COVID-19 or its consequences. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic and global efforts to contain its spread may impact our operations will depend on future developments.
Financial Operations Overview
Critical Accounting Estimates and Policies
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses for the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our significant estimates and assumptions including expense recognition and accrual assumptions under consulting and clinical trial agreements, stock-based compensation, impairment assessments, accounting for licensed rights to use technologies and other long-lived assets and the determination of valuation allowance requirements on deferred tax attributes.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses are charged to the statement of operations as incurred. Research and development expenses include salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation and costs incurred by outside laboratories, manufacturers, clinical research organizations, consultants, and accredited facilities in connection with clinical trials and preclinical studies. Research and development expenses are partially offset by the benefit of tax incentive payments for qualified research and development expenditures from the Australian tax authority (“AU Tax Rebates”). We do not record AU Tax Rebates until payment is received due to the uncertainty of receipt. To date, we have not received any AU Tax Rebates.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure the cost of employee and non-employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the grant date fair value of the award. Fair value for restricted stock awards is valued using the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant. The grant date fair value is recognized over the period during which an employee and non-employee is required to provide service in exchange for the award - the requisite service period. The grant date fair value of employee share options is estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The risk-free interest rate assumptions were based upon the observed interest rates appropriate for the expected term of the equity instruments. The expected dividend yield was assumed to be zero as we have not paid any dividends since our inception and do not anticipate paying dividends in the foreseeable future. Due to our limited trading history, we utilize an implied volatility based on an aggregate of guideline companies. In 2020, we began to incorporate and weight our historical volatility with our peer group in order to obtain expected volatility. The peer companies selected have similar characteristics, including industry and market capitalization. We routinely review our calculation of volatility based on our life cycle, our peer group, and other factors. We use the simplified method to estimate the expected term.
Licensed Right to Use Technology
Licensed right to use technology that is considered platform technology with alternative future uses is recorded as an intangible asset and is being amortized on a straight-line method over its estimated useful life, determined to be thirteen years.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Accordingly, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in the tax rate is recognized in income or expense in the period that the change is effective. Tax benefits are recognized when it is probable that the deduction will be sustained. A valuation allowance is established when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset will either expire before we are able to realize the benefit, or that future deductibility is uncertain. As of March 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded a valuation allowance to the full extent of our net deferred tax assets since the likelihood of realization of the benefit does not meet the more likely than not threshold.
We file U.S. Federal, various state, and International income tax returns. Uncertain tax positions are reviewed on an ongoing basis and are adjusted in light of changing facts and circumstances. Such adjustment is reflected in the tax provision when appropriate. We will recognize interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits in income taxes in the statements of operations. Tax years 2017 through 2021 remain open to examination by federal and state tax jurisdictions. We file tax returns in Israel for which tax years 2015 through 2021 remain open. In addition, we file tax returns in Ireland and Australia and the tax year 2020 remains open.
COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
License Agreements
On October 22, 2013, the Company entered into a patent license agreement (the “CareFusion Agreement”) with SensorMedics Corporation, a subsidiary of CareFusion Corp. (“CareFusion”), pursuant to which the Company agreed to pay to CareFusion a non-refundable upfront fee of $150,000 that is credited against future royalty payments, and is obligated to pay 5% royalties of any licensed product net sales, but at least $50,000 per annum during the term of the agreement. As of March 31, 2021, the Company has not paid any royalties to CareFusion since the Company has not received any revenues from the technology associated with the license under the CareFusion Agreement. The term of the CareFusion Agreement extends through the life of applicable patents and may be terminated by either party with 60 days’ prior written notice in the event of a breach of the CareFusion Agreement, and may be terminated unilaterally by CareFusion with 30 days’ prior written notice in the event that the
In August 2015, BA Ltd. entered into the Option Agreement with Pulmonox whereby BA Ltd. acquired the option to purchase certain intellectual property assets and rights (the “Option”) on September 7, 2016 for $25,000. On January 13, 2017, we exercised the Option and paid $500,000 to Pulmonox. We become obligated to make certain one-time development and sales milestone payments to Pulmonox, commencing with the date on which we receive regulatory approval for the commercial sale of the first product candidate qualifying under the Option Agreement. These milestone payments are capped at a total of $87 million across three separate and distinct indications that fall under the agreement, with the majority of them, approximately $83 million, being sales-related based on cumulative sales milestones for each of the three products.
On January 31, 2018, we entered into the NitricGen Agreement to acquire a global, exclusive, transferable license and associated assets including intellectual property, know-how, trade secrets and confidential information from NitricGen related to the LungFit® We acquired the licensing right to use the technology and agreed to pay NitricGen a total of $2 million in future payments based upon achieving certain milestones, as defined in the NitricGen Agreement, and royalties on sales of the LungFit® We paid NitricGen $100,000 upon the execution of the NitricGen Agreement, $100,000 upon achieving the next milestone and issued to NitricGen 100,000 warrants to purchase our common stock valued at $295,000 upon executing the NitricGen Agreement. The remaining future milestone payments are $1,800,000, of which $1,500,000 is due six months after the first approval of the LungFit® by the FDA or the EMA.
Contingencies
On March 16, 2018, Empery filed a complaint in NY Supreme Court, relating to the notice of adjustment of both the exercise price of and the number of warrant shares issuable under warrants issued to Empery in January 2017. The Empery Suit alleges that, as a result of certain circumstances in connection with our February 2018 offering, the 166,672 warrants issued to Empery in January 2017 provide for adjustments to both the exercise price of the warrants and the number of warrant shares issuable upon such exercise. Empery seeks monetary damages and declaratory relief under theories of breach of contract or contract reformation.
While the Company believes that it has complied with the applicable protective features of the 2017 Warrants and properly adjusted the exercise price, if Empery were to prevail on all claims, the new adjusted total number of warrant shares could be as follows: 319,967 warrant shares for Empery Asset Master, Ltd., 159,869 warrant shares for Empery Tax Efficient, LP and 252,672 warrant shares for Empery Tax Efficient II, LP, and the exercise price could be reduced from $3.66 to $1.57 per share. On March 9, 2020, we filed a motion for summary judgment, which was denied by order of the NY Supreme Court entered on August 20, 2020, except for the second claim for relief for declaratory judgment which was dismissed as moot. On October 1, 2020, we filed a Notice of Appeal and appeal of the NY Supreme Court’s denial of summary judgment remains pending. Trial of this matter was conducted from April 19, 2021 to April 21, 2021, and decision was reserved pending post-trial briefing of various issues, to be fully submitted by June 30, 2021.
While we asserted at trial and continues to asset several meritorious defenses against the claims, the ultimate resolution of the matter, if unfavorable, could result in a material loss to us.
In addition to Empery, there are 1,139,220 2017 Warrants outstanding held by investors who did not participate in the February 2018 financing transaction. Any further adjustments to these 2017 Warrants pursuant to their antidilution provisions may result in additional dilution to the interests of our stockholders and may adversely affect the market price of our common stock. The antidilution provisions may also limit our ability to obtain additional financing on terms favorable to us.
On May 25, 2021, the Company and Circassia Limited entered into a Settlement Agreement resolving all claims by and between both parties and mutually terminating the Circassia agreement disclosed in Note 10. Pursuant to the terms of the Settlement Agreement, the Company agreed to pay Circassia $10.5 million in three installments, the first being a payment of $2,500,000 to on the Initial Payment Due Date. Thereafter, the Company shall pay $3.5 million to Circassia on the first anniversary of the Initial Payment Due Date and $4.5 million on the second anniversary of the Initial Payment Due Date. Additionally, beginning in year three post-approval, Circassia will receive a quarterly royalty payment equal to 5% of LungFit® PH net sales in the US. This royalty will terminate once the aggregate payment reaches $6 million. This product candidate continues to be under FDA review.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the year ended March 31, 2021 to the year ended March 31, 2020
License Revenue
On January 23, 2019 we entered into the Circassia Agreement for PPHN and future related indications at concentrations of < 80 ppm in the hospital setting in the United States. License revenue for the year ended March 31, 2021 was $873,190 as compared to $1,390,104 for the year ended March 31, 2020. The decrease of $516,914 was primarily due to delays in the PMA process, thus more revenue was recognized during the year ended March 31, 2020. A greater percentage of cost to complete the performance obligation associated with license revenue was incurred during the year ended March 31, 2020. As of March 31, 2021, there was no performance obligation remaining. As of March 31, 2021 and 2020, deferred revenue was $0 and $873,190, respectively. On December 18, 2019, we terminated the Circassia Agreement pursuant to which we had granted Circassia an exclusive royalty-bearing license to distribute, market and sell our NO generator and delivery system in the United States and China. On May 25, 2021 we reached a settlement agreement with Circassia whereby we retain all rights to LungFit®.
Research and Development
Research and development for the year ended March 31, 2021 were $12,618,349, as compared to $10,648,920 for the year ended March 31, 2020. The increase of $1,969,429 was attributed primarily to an increase in the development of the LungFit® System for PPHN, an increase in pre-clinical studies initiation for NTM open-label clinical trial and acute viral pneumonia clinical trial. In addition, there was an increase in salaries and employee benefits and an increase in stock-based compensation. This was offset by the completion of animal toxicology studies.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expense for the year ended March 31, 2021 and 2020 were $10,468,341 and $8,883,119, respectively. The increase of $1,585,522 was attributed primarily to an increase in salaries and employee benefits and an increase of insurance expense.
Net Loss Attributed to Common Stockholders
Net loss attributed to common stockholders for the year ended March 31, 2021, was $22,874,731 or $1.27 per share, basic and diluted. As a result of the foregoing, our net loss attributed to common stockholders for the year ended March 31, 2020, was $20,464,982 or $1.78 per share, basic and diluted.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have not generated any revenue from the sale of products, and we do not expect to generate revenue from sale of our products until certification or regulatory approval is received for our product candidates. We had an operating cash flow decrease of $19.6 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 and we have experienced an accumulated loss of $80.5 million since inception through March 31, 2021. As of March 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of $35.3 million. We believe that our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash as of March 31, 2021 will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the third fiscal quarter of 2022.
Our future capital needs and the adequacy of its available funds beyond one year from the date of filing these financial statements will depend on many factors, including, but not necessarily limited to, the cost and time necessary for the development, clinical studies and certification or regulatory approval of our other medical devices, indications as well as the commercial success of our first product candidates that receive marketing approval by the FDA. We may be required to raise additional funds through sale of equity or debt securities or through strategic collaborations and/or licensing agreements in order to fund operations until we are able to generate enough product or royalty revenues, if any. Financing may not be available on acceptable terms, or at all, and our failure to raise capital when needed could have a material adverse effect on our strategic objectives, results of operations and financial condition.
There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional equity or debt financing on terms acceptable to us, if at all.
On March 17, 2020, we entered into a facility agreement with certain lenders (“Facility Agreement”) pursuant to which the lenders shall loan to up to $25,000,000 in five tranches of $5,000,000 per tranche at our option, provided however that we may only utilize tranches three through five following FDA approval of LungFit® PH. The loan(s) are unsecured with an interest rate of 10% per annum which is paid quarterly and may be prepaid with certain prepayment penalties. The effective interest rate for this loan is 13.3% per year. Each tranche shall be repaid in installments commencing June 15, 2023 with all remaining amounts outstanding under any tranche due on March 17, 2025. We drew down on the first tranche of $5,000,000.
On April 2, 2020, we entered an At-The-Market Equity Offering Sales Agreement with SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, Inc. and Oppenheimer & Co. (the “ATM”). Under the ATM, we may sell shares of our common stock having aggregate sales proceeds of up to $50 million, from time to time and at various prices. If shares of our common stock are sold, there is a three percent fee paid to the sales agent. As of March 31, 2021, there was a balance of approximately $38 million available under the ATM.
On May 14, 2020, we entered into a $40 million stock purchase agreement (the “New Stock Purchase Agreement”) with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“LPC”), which replaced the former $20 million purchase agreement with LPC, dated August 10, 2018. The New Stock Purchase Agreement provides for the issuance of up to $40 million of our common stock, which we may sell from time to time in our sole discretion, to LPC over the next 36 months, subject to the conditions and limitations in the New Stock Purchase Agreement. As of March 31, 2021, there was a balance of approximately $29.3 million available under the New Stock Purchase Agreement.
Our ability to continue to operate beyond twelve months from the filing of this Form 10-K will be largely dependent upon the approval of our PMA for the PPHN medical device, the expected timing and commercial acceptance of the launch this device, as well as obtaining partners in other parts of the world, and raising additional funds to finance our activities until we are generating cash flow from operations. Further, there are no assurances that we will be successful in obtaining an adequate level of financing for the development and commercialization of our other product candidates.
There are numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development of our NO delivery system and we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenses associated with completing the research and development of our product candidates.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, the medical community and the global economy;
● the progress and costs of our preclinical studies, clinical trials and other research and development activities;
● the costs of commercializing the LungFit® system, if approved;
● the scope, prioritization and number of our clinical trials and other research and development programs;
● the costs and timing of obtaining certification or regulatory approval for our product candidates;
● the costs of filing, prosecuting, enforcing and defending patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
● the costs of, and timing for, strengthening our manufacturing agreements for production of sufficient clinical quantities of our product candidate;
● the potential costs of contracting with third parties to provide marketing and distribution services for us or for building such capacities internally;
● the costs of acquiring or undertaking the development and commercialization efforts for additional, future therapeutic applications of our product candidate;
● the magnitude of our general and administrative expenses; and
● any cost that we may incur under current and future in-and out-licensing arrangements relating to our product candidate.
Cash Flows
Below is a summary of the statements of cash flows for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020.
Comparison between March 31, 2021 and March 31, 2020
For the year ended March 31, 2021, net cash used by operating activities was $19,639,376 which was primarily due to our net loss of $22,874,731, an increase in grant receivable, other current assets prepaid expenses, as well as a net decrease in accounts payable and deferred revenue of $2,784,107, partially offset by an increase in accrued expenses of $707,401 and non-cash expenses of $5,312,061. For the year ended March 31, 2020, net cash used by operating activities was $15,250,049 which was due primarily to our net loss of $19,942,504, a decrease in other current assets, prepaid expenses, accrued expenses and deferred revenue of $2,221,604 and was offset by an increase in unrealized and realized loss from the sale of marketable securities of $2,075,602 an increase in accounts payable of $1,091,557 and non-cash expense of $3,746,900.
Investing Activities
For the year ended March 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities was $890,407 which was from purchase of property and equipment. For the year ended March 31, 2020, cash provided by investing activities was $4,423,433 which was from the net proceeds from the sale of marketable securities of $4,467,064 and the purchase of property and equipment of $43,631.
Financing Activities
For the year ended March 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $30,332,379 which was primarily from the net proceeds from New Stock Purchase Agreement, the net proceeds from the ATM Equity Offering and from the exercise from the issuance of common stock for warrants and options. For the year ended March 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $34,934,590 which was primarily due to net proceeds from an underwritten offering, net proceeds from a private placement, net proceeds from the former $20 million purchase agreement with LPC, dated August 10, 2018, and from the net proceeds from the issuance of common stock from warrant exercises and options.
Contractual Obligations
The following tables sets forth our contractual obligations for the next five years and thereafter for the year ended March 31, 2021: