ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read this discussion together with the financial statements, related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains assumptions, estimates and other forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties, including those discussed under “Risk Factors,” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. To the extent that this Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements regarding the financial condition, operating results, business prospects or any other aspect of our Company, please be advised that our actual financial condition, operating results and business performance may differ materially from that projected or estimated by us in forward-looking statements and thus you should not unduly rely on these statements.
Overview
Since January 11, 2019, when the Company underwent a complete change in management and control, the new management has continued to broaden the Company’s product mix to include artificial intelligence and machine learning products.
Since announcing the formation of mPhase Technologies India, Pvt, Ltd during February 2019, the Company has expanded its focus on software and technology development for new and existing projects through the creation and expansion of its “Center of Excellence” India division. This “Center of Excellence” consists of a team in India of highly qualified software and technology experts in the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning.
In addition to the foregoing, since our acquisition of Travel Buddhi during February 2019, we have continued developing the software platform which enhances travel via ultra-customization tools that tailor a planned trip experience in ways not previously available by making it “smart” and “connected” as part of the internet of things.
Furthermore, since our acquisition of CloseComms during May 2020, pursuant to which we acquired certain assets and assumed certain liabilities, we have continued advancing our patented, software application platform that can be integrated into a retail customer’s existing Wi-Fi infrastructure, giving the retailer important customer data and enabling AI-enhanced, targeted promotions to drive store traffic and sales.
Recent Developments
Financings
Evergreen Agreement
On April 6, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “SPA”) with Evergreen Capital Management LLC (the “Investor”), pursuant to which the Company sold to the Investor a 15% OID convertible promissory note with a principal amount of $1,771,000 (the “Note”) and a warrant (the “Warrant”) to purchase up to 8,855,000 shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.01 per share (the “Common Stock”) for proceeds of $1,540,000.
The Note matures on April 6, 2022, bears interest at the rate of 5% per annum and is convertible at any time upon the option of the Investor into shares of Common Stock at a conversion price equal to $0.20 per share or, upon the occurrence and during the continuance of an Event of Default (as defined in the Note), if lower, at a conversion price equal to 75% of the lowest daily VWAP of the Common Stock during the 20 consecutive trading days immediately preceding the applicable conversion date. The Company has the right to prepay all or any portion of the outstanding balance of the Note in an amount equal to 115% or 120%, depending on whether such repayment is made before November 5, 2021 or after November 5, 2021, respectively, multiplied by the portion of the outstanding balance to be prepaid. The Company is required to prepay all or any portion of the outstanding balance of the Note upon the occurrence of a Qualified Financing (as defined in the Note). If at any time while the Note is outstanding, the Company completes any single Future Transaction (as defined in the Note), the Investor may, in its sole discretion, elect to apply all, or any portion, of the then outstanding principal amount of this Note and any accrued but unpaid interest, as purchase consideration for such Future Transaction.
The Warrant is exercisable at a purchase price of $0.20 per share at any time on or prior to April 6, 2025, and may be exercised on a cashless basis, beginning on the six-month anniversary of the Effective Date, if the shares of Common Stock underlying the Warrant are not then registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). The Investor will not have the right to exercise the Warrant if the Investor, together with its affiliates, would beneficially own in excess of 4.99% of the number of shares of the Common Stock outstanding immediately after giving effect to its conversion and under no circumstances may exercise the Warrant if the Investor, together with its affiliates, would beneficially own in excess of 9.99% of the number of shares of the Common Stock outstanding immediately after giving effect to its exercise.
The SPA contains customary representations, warranties and agreements by the Company, customary conditions to closing, indemnification obligations of the Company, other obligations of the parties thereto, and termination provisions.
Investors’ Agreement
On May 4, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “SPA”) with two accredited investors (the “Investors”), pursuant to which the Company sold to the Investors 15% OID convertible promissory notes with an aggregate principal amount of $2,264,706 (the “Notes”) and warrants (the “Warrants”) to purchase up to 11,323,530 shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.01 per share (the “Common Stock”) for proceeds of $1,925,000 (the “Purchase Price”). The Purchase Price was funded on May 5, 2021.
If the Company files a Registration Statement on Form S-1 for the sale of shares of its Common Stock in conjunction with an application to list the Company’s Common Stock on a national securities exchange, the Investors will be obligated to purchase under the SPA, within three (3) business days, on a pro rata basis, additional promissory notes in the aggregate principal amount of $735,294 and warrants to purchase up to 3,676,471 shares of the Company’s common stock, for proceeds of $625,001.
The Notes mature on May 5, 2022, bear interest at the rate of 5% per annum and are convertible at any time upon the option of the Investors into shares of Common Stock at a conversion price equal to $0.20 per share. The Company has the right to prepay all or any portion of the outstanding balance of the Notes in an amount equal to 115% or 120%, depending on whether such repayment is made before November 5, 2021 or after November 5, 2021, respectively, multiplied by the portion of the outstanding balance to be prepaid.
The Warrants are exercisable at a purchase price of $0.20 per share at any time on or prior to May 5, 2025, and may be exercised on a cashless basis, beginning on the six-month anniversary of the Effective Date, if the shares of Common Stock underlying the Warrants are not then registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”).
The SPA contains customary representations, warranties and agreements by the Company, customary conditions to closing, indemnification obligations of the Company, other obligations of the parties thereto, and termination provisions.
Officer Appointments and Departures
On May 17, 2021, the board of directors the Company appointed Mr. Venkat Kodumudi as the Company’s Chief Operating Officer (the “Appointment”).
Venkat Kodumudi, age 52, combines over 29 years of experience in information technology industry senior management that includes a 14-year career as software developer and architect. Previously, he had been involved in over 5 companies and a Federal Government Agency, in the information technology industry holding positions including chief technology officer, health product practice lead, director, and deputy director for IT operations. From 2017 through May, 2021, Venkat was a Director for CGI, Inc., (NYSE: GIB) IT services company, with diverse duties including practice lead for blockchain and intelligent automation technology. From 2016 to 2017, he was CTO for FocalCXM, Inc., a company involved in building and supporting consumer engagement solutions for the Lifesciences industry. From 2004 to 2015, he held various director level positions for the Transportation Security Agency (TSA), including operating and managing TSA’s Enterprise Learning Management System (LMS). Mr. Kodumudi has a Master’s degree in Computer Science from Arizona State University and an MBA from George Mason University.
In connection with the Appointment, Mr. Kodumudi entered into an Employment Agreement (the “Employment Agreement”) with the Company. The Employment Agreement is for an indefinite term and may be terminated with or without cause. Mr. Kodumudi will receive an annual base salary of $200,000.00 (the “Base Salary”) and shall be eligible to earn a performance bonus in the target amount of up to 50% of the Base Salary, if any, upon the attainment of performance goals established by the Chief Executive Officer of the Company. In connection with his Appointment, Mr. Kodumudi was granted 500,000 restricted stock units of the Company’s common stock (the “RSUs”). The RSUs shall vest in accordance with the following: (i) 125,000 of the RSUs shall vest on the one year anniversary of the Effective Date; (ii) 125,000 RSUs shall vest on the second year anniversary of the Effective Date; (iii) 125,000 RSUs shall vest on the third year anniversary of the Effective Date; and (iv) 125,000 RSUs shall vest on the fourth year anniversary of the Effective Date. As a full-time employee of the Company, Mr. Kodumudi will be eligible to participate in all of the Company’s benefit programs.
Upon termination of Mr. Kodumudi without cause and provided that Mr. Kodumudi has been employed by the Company for a minimum of twelve (12) months but less than twenty-four (24) months, the Company shall pay or provide to Mr. Kodumudi severance pay equal to his then current monthly base salary for six months from the date of termination, during which time Mr. Kodumudi shall continue to receive all employee benefits and employee benefit plans as described in the Employment Agreement. Upon termination of Mr. Kodumudi without cause and provided that Mr. Kodumudi has been employed by the Company for a minimum of twenty-four (24) months, the Company shall pay or provide to Mr. Kodumudi severance pay equal to his then current monthly base salary for twelve months from the date of termination.
On August 27, 2021, the Board of Directors the Company appointed Suhas Subramanyam, Chester White, and Thomas Fore as members of the Board.
The terms of the appointments of Subramanyam, White, and Fore commenced on August 27, 2021 and are in effect for a period of approximately one year, until the time of the Company’s next Annual Meeting of Stockholders.
In connection with the appointments of Subramanyam, White, and Fore, on August 27, 2021, the Company entered into director agreements with Mr. Subramanyam, Mr. White and Mr. Fore. Pursuant to such agreements, the Company will compensate each such director a fee of $20,000 annually, which is to be paid in quarterly installments of $5,000. Such quarterly fee will be increased by $1,250 for each such director who serves as a member of either the Audit, Compensation, or Nominating Committee. In lieu of cash consideration, the annual fee will be paid by issuance of the number of restricted shares of the Company’s common stock equivalent to the applicable cash amount due as determined based upon the closing price on the last trading day of such quarter.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended June 30, 2021 and 2020
Continuing Operations
Revenue
Our revenue increased to $30,672,314 for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to $30,276,422 for the year ended June 30, 2020, an increase of $395,892 or 1%. The increase is the result of deployment and growth of our learning track technology platform and services which generated $24,720,000 of subscription revenue, $3,656,274 of service and support revenue and $2,296,040 of application development and implementation revenue.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue totaled $22,501,496 for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to $22,579,544 for the year ended June 30, 2020. The decrease of $78,048 is the result of certain prior year costs not incurred during the current year.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses decreased to $4,964,910 for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to $20,273,109 for the year ended June 30, 2020, a decrease of $15,308,199, or 76%. The decrease is primarily due to $16,213,606 of stock-based compensation expense recognized during 2020 related to the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, coupled with a decrease of $302,096 in general and administrative expenses, partially offset by an increase of $1,441,143 in software development costs.
Other Income (Expense)
Our other expense, net, increased by $22,561, or 1%, for the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase is primarily the result of increases in original issue discount, deferred financing costs, debt discount, interest expense, initial derivative expense, partially offset by a gain on the change in fair value of derivative liability associated with the convertible promissory notes, and gain on debt settlements and extinguishments.
Net Income (Loss) from Continuing Operations
We generated net income of $1,666,011 for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to a net loss of $14,093,567 for the year ended June 30, 2020, an increase of $15,759,578. The increase in net income is primarily driven by the increase in gross profit, coupled with the decrease in operating expenses, partially offset by the increase in other income (expense).
Discontinued Operations
For the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, there are no revenue, cost of revenue, operating expenses, other income (expense), or net income (loss) from discontinued operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At June 30, 2021, we had $2,473,386 of cash on-hand, an increase of $2,330,973 from $142,413 at June 30, 2020.
Net cash used in operating activities of continuing operations was $1,520,703 for the year ended June 30, 2021, an increase of $176,670 from $1,344,033 used during the year ended June 30, 2020. This increase was primarily due to increases in accounts receivable and net income, partially offset by a net decrease in non-cash charges and an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Net cash used in investing activities of continuing operations was $3,064 for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to net cash provided by investing activities of continuing operations of $69,447 for the year ended June 30, 2020. The increase was due to an increase in capital expenditures, coupled with the decrease in cash acquired from the CloseComms acquisition during the year ended June 30, 2020.
Financing activities of continuing operations increased to $3,979,336 for the year ended June 30, 2021, compared to $1,269,933 for the year ended June 30, 2020. This increase was primarily due to increased proceeds from issuances of convertible promissory notes, and proceeds from notes payable, partially offset by decreases in proceeds from the sale of common stock and notes payable to related parties, and coupled with increases in repayments of notes payable to related parties, repayments under settlement agreement, and repayments of convertible notes payable.
Going Concern
We generated net income of $1,666,011 and incurred a net loss of $14,093,567 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We used cash in operating activities of $1,520,703 and $1,344,033 for the years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively. At June 30, 2021, we had a working capital surplus of $9,755,907, and an accumulated deficit of $226,061,409. While these factors alone may raise doubt as to the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern, management believes the Company’s present and expected cash flows will enable it to meet its obligations for a period of twelve months from the date of this filing. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts nor to the amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
In the event managements’ plans do not materialize, in order to meet the Company’s working capital needs through the next twelve months and to fund the growth of its nanotechnology, artificial intelligence, and machine learning technologies, as well as our 5G and EV charging initiatives, we may consider plans to raise additional funds through the issuance of equity or debt. Although we intend to obtain additional financing to meet our cash needs, we may be unable to secure any additional financing on terms that are favorable or acceptable to us, if at all. Our ability to raise additional capital may also be impacted by the recent COVID-19 pandemic, which such ability is highly uncertain, cannot be predicted, and could have an adverse effect on our business and financial condition.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
A novel strain of coronavirus, COVID-19, surfaced during December 2019 and has spread around the world, including to the United States. During March 2020, COVID-19 was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. During certain periods of the pandemic thus far, a number of U.S. states and various countries throughout the world had been under governmental orders requiring that all workers remain at home unless their work was critical, essential, or life-sustaining. As a result of these governmental orders, we temporarily closed our domestic and international offices and required all of our employees to work remotely. As economic activity has begun and continues recovering, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business has been more reflective of greater economic and marketplace dynamics. Furthermore, in light of variant strains of the virus that have emerged, the COVID-19 pandemic could once again impact our operations and the operations of our customers and vendors as a result of quarantines, illnesses, and travel restrictions.
The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial condition and results of operations will depend on future developments, such as the ultimate duration and scope of the pandemic, its impact on our employees, customers, and vendors, in addition to how quickly normal economic conditions and operations resume and whether the pandemic impacts other risks disclosed in Item 1A “Risk Factors” within this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Even after the pandemic has subsided, we may continue to experience adverse impacts to our business as a result of any economic recession or depression that has occurred as a result of the pandemic. Therefore, we cannot reasonably estimate the impact at this time. We continue to actively monitor the pandemic and may determine to take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state, or local authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, vendors, and shareholders.
Critical Accounting Policies
We have identified the policies below as critical to our understanding of the results of our business operations. We discuss the impact and any associated risks related to these policies on our business operations throughout Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations where such policies affect our reported and expected financial results.
In the ordinary course of business, we have made a number of estimates and assumptions in preparing our financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates and assumptions. The following critical accounting policies are those that are most important to the portrayal of our consolidated financial statements. For a summary of our significant accounting policies, including the critical accounting policies discussed below, refer to Note 3 - “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” included in the notes to consolidated financial statements for the year ended June 30, 2021 included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We consider the following accounting policies to be those most important to the portrayal of our results of operations and financial condition:
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”), Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Revenues are recognized when control is transferred to customers in amounts that reflect the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods. Revenue recognition is evaluated through the following five steps: (i) identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer; (ii) identification of the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determination of the transaction price; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognition of revenue when or as a performance obligation is satisfied.
Revenue is derived from the sale of artificial intelligence and machine learning focused technology products and related services. The Company recognizes revenue when performance obligations under the terms of a contract with the customer are satisfied. Product sales occur once control is transferred upon delivery to the customer. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for transferring products. The amount of consideration the Company receives and revenue the Company recognizes varies with changes in customer incentives the Company offers to its customers and their customers. In the event any discounts, sales incentives, or similar arrangements are agreed to with a customer, such amounts are estimated at time of sale and deducted from revenue. Sales taxes and other similar taxes are excluded from revenue (see Note 7).
Contract liabilities include amounts billed to customers in excess of revenue recognized and are presented as contract liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets (see Note 7).
Income Taxes
We accounts for income taxes using an asset and liability approach to financial accounting and reporting for income taxes. Accordingly, deferred tax assets and liabilities arise from the difference between the tax basis of an asset or liability and its reported amount in the consolidated financial statements. Deferred tax amounts are determined using the tax rates expected to be in effect when the taxes will actually be paid or refunds received, as provided under currently enacted tax law. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. Income tax expense or benefit is the tax payable or refundable, respectively, for the period plus or minus the change in deferred tax assets and liabilities during the period. We have recorded a full valuation allowance for our net deferred tax assets as of June 30, 2021 and 2020 because realization of those assets is not reasonably assured.
We will recognize a financial statement benefit of a tax position only after determining that the relevant tax authority would more likely than not sustain the position following an audit. For tax positions meeting the more-likely-than-not threshold, the amount recognized in the financial statements is the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the relevant tax authority.
We believe our income tax filing positions and deductions will be sustained upon examination and, accordingly, no reserves, or related accruals for interest and penalties has been recorded at June 30, 2021 and 2020.
Share-Based Compensation
We compute share based payments in accordance with the provisions of ASC Topic 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation and related interpretations. As such, compensation cost is measured on the date of grant at the fair value of the share-based payments. Such compensation amounts, if any, are amortized over the respective vesting periods of the grants.
Restricted stock awards are granted at the discretion of the compensation committee of our board of directors (the “Board of Directors”). These awards are restricted as to the transfer of ownership and generally vest over the requisite service periods (vesting on a straight-line basis). The fair value of a stock award is equal to the fair market value of a share of our common stock on the grant date.
We estimate the fair value of stock options and warrants by using the Black-Scholes option valuation model. The Black-Scholes option valuation model requires the development of assumptions that are inputs into the model. These assumptions are the expected stock volatility, the risk-free interest rate, the expected life of the option, the dividend yield on the underlying stock and the expected forfeiture rate. Expected volatility is calculated based on the historical volatility of our common stock over the expected term of the option. Risk-free interest rates are calculated based on continuously compounded risk-free rates for the appropriate term.
Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of equity-based payment awards requires the input of the subjective assumptions described above. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of equity-based payment awards represent management’s best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. We are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and recognize expense only for those shares expected to vest.
We account for share-based payments granted to non-employees in accordance with ASC 505-50, “Equity Based Payments to Non-Employees.” We determine the fair value of the stock-based payment as either the fair value of the consideration received or the fair value of the equity instruments issued, whichever is more readily determinable. If the fair value of the equity instruments issued is used, it is measured using the stock price and other measurement assumptions as of the earlier of either (1) the date at which a commitment for performance by the counterparty to earn the equity instruments is reached, or (2) the date at which the counterparty’s performance is complete.
Derivative Instruments
We enter into financing arrangements that consist of freestanding derivative instruments or are hybrid instruments that contain embedded derivative features. We recognize derivative instruments as either assets or liabilities in the balance sheet and measure such derivative instruments at fair values with gains or losses recognized in earnings. Embedded derivatives that are not clearly and closely related to the host contract are bifurcated and are recognized at fair value with changes in fair value recognized as either a gain or loss in earnings. The fair values of derivative financial instruments are estimated using various techniques (and combinations thereof) that are considered consistent with the objective measuring fair values. In selecting the appropriate technique, the nature of the instrument, the market risks that it embodies and the expected means of settlement are considered. Estimating fair values of derivative financial instruments requires the development of significant and subjective estimates that may, and are likely to, change over the duration of the instrument with related changes in internal and external market factors. In addition, option-based techniques (such as Black-Scholes model) are highly volatile and sensitive to changes in the trading market price of our common stock. Since derivative financial instruments are initially and subsequently carried at fair values, our income (expense) going forward will reflect the volatility in these estimates and assumption changes.
Accounts Receivable
We regularly review outstanding receivables and provide for estimated losses through an allowance for doubtful accounts. In evaluating the level of established loss reserves, we make judgments regarding our customers’ ability to make required payments, economic events, and other factors. As the financial condition of these parties’ change, circumstances develop or additional information becomes available, adjustments to the allowance for doubtful accounts may be required. We maintain reserves for potential credit losses, and such losses traditionally have been within our expectations. Additionally, to date, the Company has entered into three separate tri-party settlement and offset agreements with its largest customer and largest vendor, whereby the Company’s largest customer has agreed to direct funds due the Company for certain outstanding invoices, to the Company’s largest vendor to satisfy payment on behalf of the Company for certain outstanding invoices. To date, the aggregate amount of the five tri-party settlement and offset agreements has totaled $41,250,000. At June 30, 2021 and 2020, we determined there was no requirement for an allowance for doubtful accounts.
New Accounting Standards
Refer to Note 3 to our audited consolidated financial statements including in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recently adopted and to be adopted accounting standards.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.