ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward Looking Statements
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with a review of the other Items included in this Annual Report and our December 31, 2020 Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this report. Certain statements contained in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” may be deemed to be forward-looking statements. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a global provider of transaction processing solutions, enterprise information management, document management and digital business process services. Our technology-enabled solutions allow global organizations to address critical challenges resulting from the massive amounts of data obtained and created through their daily operations. Our solutions address the life cycle of transaction processing and enterprise information management, from enabling payment gateways and data exchanges across multiple systems, to matching inputs against contracts and handling exceptions, to ultimately depositing payments and distributing communications. We believe our process expertise, information technology capabilities and operational insights enable our customers’ organizations to more efficiently and effectively execute transactions, make decisions, drive revenue and profitability, and communicate critical information to their employees, customers, partners, and vendors.
History
We are a former special purpose acquisition company that completed our initial public offering on January 22, 2015. In July 2017, Exela Technologies, Inc. (“Exela”), formerly known as Quinpario Acquisition Corp. 2 (“Quinpario”), completed its acquisition of SourceHOV Holdings, Inc. (“SourceHOV”) and Novitex Holdings, Inc. (“Novitex”) pursuant to the business combination agreement dated February 21, 2017 (“Novitex Business Combination”). In conjunction with the completion of the Novitex Business Combination, Quinpario was renamed Exela Technologies, Inc.
The Novitex Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse merger for which SourceHOV was determined to be the accounting acquirer. Outstanding shares of SourceHOV were converted into our Common Stock, presented as a recapitalization, and the net assets of Quinpario were acquired at historical cost, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded. The acquisition of Novitex was treated as a business combination under ASC 805 and was accounted for using the acquisition method. The strategic combination of SourceHOV and Novitex formed Exela, which is one of the largest global providers of information processing solutions based on revenues.
Our Segments
Our three reportable segments are Information & Transaction Processing Solutions (“ITPS”), Healthcare Solutions (“HS”), and Legal & Loss Prevention Services (“LLPS”). These segments are comprised of significant strategic business units that align our TPS and EIM products and services with how we manage our business, approach our key markets and interact with our customers based on their respective industries.
ITPS: Our largest segment, ITPS, provides a wide range of solutions and services designed to aid businesses in information capture, processing, decisioning and distribution to customers primarily in the financial services, commercial, public sector and legal industries. Our major customers include many leading banks, insurance companies, and utilities, as well as hundreds of federal, state and government entities. Our ITPS offerings enable companies to increase availability of working capital, reduce turnaround times for application processes, increase regulatory compliance and enhance consumer engagement.
HS: HS operates and maintains a consulting and outsourcing business specializing in both the healthcare provider and payer markets. We serve the top healthcare insurance payers and hundreds of healthcare providers.
LLPS: Our LLPS segment provides a broad and active array of support services in connection with class action, bankruptcy labor, claims adjudication and employment and other legal matters. Our customer base consists of corporate counsel, government attorneys, and law firms.
Sale of Non-core Assets
On March 16, 2020, the Company and its indirect wholly owned subsidiaries, Merco Holdings, LLC and SourceHOV Tax, LLC entered into a Membership Interest Purchase Agreement with Gainline Source Intermediate Holdings LLC at which time Gainline Source Intermediate Holdings LLC acquired all of the outstanding membership interests of SourceHov Tax, LLC for $40.0 million subject to adjustment as set forth in the purchase agreement. On July 22, 2020, the Company completed the sale of its physical records storage and logistics business for a purchase price of $12.3 million.
Acquisitions
In April 2018 Exela completed the acquisition of Asterion International Group (“Asterion,” the “Asterion Business Combination”), a well-established provider of technology driven business process outsourcing, document management and business process automation across Europe. The acquisition was strategic to expanding Exela’s European business.
Revenues
ITPS revenues are primarily generated from a transaction-based pricing model for the various types of volumes processed, licensing and maintenance fees for technology sales, and a mix of fixed management fee and transactional revenue for document logistics and location services. HS revenues are primarily generated from a transaction-based pricing model for the various types of volumes processed for healthcare payers and providers. LLPS revenues are primarily based on time and materials pricing as well as through transactional services priced on a per item basis.
People
We draw on the business and technical expertise of our talented and diverse global workforce to provide our customers with high-quality services. Our business leaders bring a strong diversity of experience in our industry and a track record of successful performance and execution.
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately 19,000 employees globally, with 59% located in Americas and EMEA, and the remainder located primarily in India, the Philippines and China.
Costs associated with our employees represent the most significant expense for our business. We incurred personnel costs of $632.4 million, $721.9 million and $687.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The majority of our personnel costs are variable and are incurred only while we are providing our services.
Facilities
We lease and own numerous facilities worldwide with larger concentrations of space in Texas, Michigan, Connecticut, California, India, Mexico, the Philippines, and China. Our owned and leased facilities house general offices, sales offices, service locations, and production facilities.
The size of our active property portfolio as of December 31, 2020 was approximately 3.9 million square feet and comprised of 143 leased properties and 9 owned properties.
We believe that our current facilities are suitable and adequate for our current businesses. Because of the interrelation of our business segments, each of the segments uses substantially all of these properties at least in part.
Key Performance Indicators
We use a variety of operational and financial measures to assess our performance. Among the measures considered by our management are the following:
● Revenue by segment;
● EBITDA; and
● Adjusted EBITDA.
Revenue
We analyze our revenue by comparing actual monthly revenue to internal projections and prior periods across our operating segments in order to assess performance, identify potential areas for improvement, and determine whether segments are meeting management’s expectations.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
We view EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as important indicators of performance of our consolidated operations. We define EBITDA as net income, plus taxes, interest expense, and depreciation and amortization. We define Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA plus optimization and restructuring charges, including severance and retention expenses; transaction and integration costs; other non-cash charges, including non-cash compensation, (gain) or loss from sale or disposal of assets, and impairment charges; and management fees and expenses. See “-Other Financial Information (Non-GAAP Financial Measures)” for more information and a reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020, Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our revenue decreased by $269.8 million, or 17.3%, to $1,292.6 million from $1,562.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. We experienced revenue declines in all of our segments primarily due to lower transaction volumes since mid-March as a result of COVID-19. Our ITPS, HS, and LLPS segments constituted 77.8%, 16.9%, and 5.3% of total revenue, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 79.0%, 16.4%, and 4.6%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The revenue changes by reporting segment were as follows:
ITPS- For the year ended December 31, 2020, revenue attributable to our ITPS segment decreased by $229.2 million, or 18.6% compared to the same period in the prior year. The majority of this revenue decline is attributable to exiting contracts and statements of work in late 2019 from certain customers with revenue that we believe was unpredictable, non-recurring and were not a strategic fit to Company’s long-term success or unlikely to achieve the Company’s long-term target margins (“transition revenue”) in addition to lower transaction volumes since mid-March as a result of COVID-19.
HS- For the year ended December 31, 2020, revenue attributable to our HS segment decreased by $37.7 million, or 14.7% compared to the same period in the prior year primarily due to impact of COVID-19 on our healthcare customers.
LLPS- For the year ended December 31, 2020, revenue attributable to our LLPS segment decreased by $2.9 million, or 4.0% compared to the same period in the prior year primarily due to a decline in legal claims administration services.
Cost of Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our direct costs decreased by $201.2 million, or 16.4%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. In our ITPS and HS segments, the decrease was primarily attributable to the corresponding decline in revenues. Costs on ITPS segment decreased by $186.6 million, or 18.6%, and HS segment decreased by $20.1 million, or 11.2%. Costs on LLPS segment increased by $5.6 million, or 13.0%.
The decrease in cost of revenues was primarily due to a decrease in employee-related costs of $103.1 million, lower travel costs of $4.4 million, lower infrastructure and maintenance costs of $17.6 million and other operating costs of $29.5 million. The lower costs were attributable to cost and capacity management as a result of COVID-19 and transition revenue impact during the year ended December 31, 2020. Cost of revenue includes accelerated amortization of $3.7 million for an operating lease right-of-use asset as the Company decided to permanently close one of its production facilities.
Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was 79.2% compared to 78.4% for the comparable same period in the prior year. The increase in cost of revenues, as a percentage of revenues by 0.8% was primarily due to the impact of costs related to the transition revenue that we expect to be gradually removed to further improve the gross margin profile of the business.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses decreased $12.7 million, or 6.4%, to $186.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $198.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower employee related costs by $13.0 million, lower travel costs of $4.0 million, lower infrastructure and maintenance costs of $1.8 million and lower other costs of $4.3 million offset by higher professional fees of $10.4 million.
SG&A expenses increased as a percentage of revenues to 14.4% in 2020 as compared to 12.7% in 2019. The increase, as a percentage of revenues by 1.7%, was primarily due to the decline in revenues brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic and the transition revenue.
Depreciation & Amortization
Total depreciation and amortization expense was $94.0 million and $100.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in total depreciation and amortization expense by $7.0 million was primarily due to a reduction in depreciation expense as a result of the expiration of the lives of assets acquired in prior periods and decrease in intangibles amortization expense due to end of useful lives for certain intangible assets during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Impairment of Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
The Company recorded no impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets during the year 2020. Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $349.6 million.
Related Party Expenses
Related party expense was $5.4 million and $9.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The lower related party expense in 2020 is attributable to the curtailment in reimbursements made to Ex-Sigma and Ex-Sigma 2. In 2019 the Company paid approximately $4.3 million in respect of legal expenses, premium payments on the Margin Loan and other expenses related to secondary offerings that did not recur in 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $173.9 million and $163.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in interest costs was partially attributable to the interest on securitization facilities and other interest accruals that was not incurred during the corresponding period in 2019.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $9.6 million and $1.4 million respectively. The Company recognized $1.3 million and $8.3 million in debt extinguishment costs during 2020, for the partial debt extinguishment resulting from amendment to the Term Loan in 2020 and the extinguishment of A/R Facility, respectively. The repricing and issuance of the 2019 incremental Term Loans resulted in the partial debt extinguishment, for which Exela recognized $1.4 million in debt extinguishment costs during 2019.
Sundry Expense (Income)
The decrease of $1.1 million over the prior year period was primarily attributable to foreign currency transaction gain / losses associated with exchange rate fluctuations.
Other Expense (Income)
Other expense (income), net was $(34.8) million and $14.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The change was primarily due to the $35.5 million resulting from gain recognized on the sale of SourceHOV Tax, LLC and the $8.7 million gain on the sale of the physical records storage and logistics business. Other expense (income) also includes an interest rate swap entered into in 2017. The interest rate swap was not designated as a hedge. As such, changes in the fair value of this derivative instrument are recorded directly in earnings. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the fair value of the interest swap liability decreased resulting in a gain of $0.4 million.
Income Tax Expense
We had an income tax expense of $13.6 million and $7.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The change in the income tax expense was primarily attributable to our change in judgment related to the realizability of certain deferred tax assets. The change in the effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulted from permanent tax adjustments and valuation allowances, including valuation allowances against disallowed interest expense deferred tax assets that are not more-likely-than-not to be realized.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2019, Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2018
Revenue
Our revenue decreased $23.9 million, or 1.5%, to $1,562.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $1,586.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This decrease is primarily related to a decrease in our ITPS segment revenues of $39.4 million and LLPS segment revenue of $13.2 million. The decrease was partially offset by an increase in revenues in the HS segment by $28.7 million. Our ITPS, HS, and LLPS segments constituted 79.0%, 16.4%, and 4.6% of our total revenue, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to 80.3%, 14.4%, and 5.3%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2018. The revenue changes by reporting segment were as follows:
ITPS-Revenues decreased $39.4 million, or 3.1%, to $1,234.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $1,273.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease was primarily attributable to the low margin contract exit in the third quarter of 2018 and adverse currency impact that was offset partially by the revenue from acquisitions completed in 2018.
HS-Revenues increased $28.7 million, or 12.6%, to $256.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $228.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily attributable to the ramp up of new businesses.
LLPS-Revenues decreased $13.2 million, or 15.6%, to $71.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $84.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower revenue resulting from legal claims administration services of $11.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to the year ended December 31, 2018.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased $11.3 million, or 0.9%, to $1,224.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $1,213.4 million for year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in the HS segment of $28.2 million that was offset by a decrease in the ITPS and LLPS segments of $8.7 million and $8.2 million respectively. The cost of revenue changes by operating segment was as follows:
ITPS-Cost of revenue decreased $8.7 million, or 0.9%, to $1,001.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $1,010.3 million for year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease was attributable to the corresponding revenue decline and flow through of savings that was offset by cost inflation. Cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue increased by 190 basis points from 79.3% for the year ended December 31, 2018 to 81.2% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
HS-Cost of revenue was $180.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, up $28.2 million, or 18.5%, from $151.9 million in for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily attributable an increase in volumes and ramp up of the healthcare asset acquisition from 2018, including additions to our operational headcount for the large new deals. Cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue increased by 350 basis points from 66.6% for the year ended December 31, 2018 to 70.1% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
LLPS-Cost of revenue decreased $8.2 million, or 16.0%, to $43.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $51.2 million for year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease was primarily attributable to the lower costs on the legal claims administration of $5.8 million as a result of corresponding revenue decline. Cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue remained relatively flat from 60.6% for the year ended December 31, 2018 compared to 60.4% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses (“SG&A”)
Selling, general, and administrative expenses increased $14.0 million, or 7.5%, to $198.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $184.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily attributable to higher professional and legal expenses.
Depreciation & Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased $37.2 million, or 26.9%, to $100.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $138.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease was primarily attributable to accelerated amortization of trademarks and trade name write off that ended on December 31, 2018.
Impairment of Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Impairment of goodwill and other intangible assets for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 was $349.6 million and $48.1 million respectively. During the three months ended September 30, 2019, the Company made an evaluation based on factors such as changes in the Company’s growth rate and recent trends in the Company’s market capitalization, and concluded that a triggering event for an interim impairment analysis had occurred in the third quarter of 2019. As a result of the interim impairment assessment, the Company recorded an impairment charge to goodwill and trade names of $96.2 million and $1.0 million, respectively. Due to continued depressed market capitalization during the three months ended December 31, 2019, another triggering event resulted in additional impairment charge of $252.4 million to goodwill at LLPS and ITPS reporting unit.
Related Party Expense
Related party expense decreased $2.9 million, or 23.4%, to $9.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $12.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease was primarily attributable to an overall reduction in the expenses required to be reimbursed to Ex-Sigma 2 pursuant to the terms of the Consent, Waiver and Amendment.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased $7.5 million, or 4.8%, to $163.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $156.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily attributable accrued interest for the Appraisal Action.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 was $1.4 million and $1.1 million. The Repricing and issuance of the 2019 and 2018 Incremental Term Loans resulted in the partial debt extinguishment, for which Exela recognized $1.4 million and $1.1 million in debt extinguishment costs.
Sundry Expense (income)
Sundry expense increased by $4.2 million to $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $(3.3) million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was mainly attributable to foreign currency transaction losses associated with exchange rate fluctuations.
Other Income
Other income for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 was $(14.4) million and $3.0 million respectively. The decrease of $17.5 million over the prior year period is primarily attributable to the Appraisal Action settlement expenses and an interest rate swap entered into in 2017. The interest rate swap was not designated as a hedge. As such, changes in the fair value of this derivative instrument are recorded directly in earnings.
Income Tax (Expense) Benefit
Income tax expense decreased $0.7 million to $7.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $8.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The December 31, 2019 federal tax expense is primarily due to the impact of the TCJA.
Other Financial Information (Non-GAAP Financial Measures)
We view EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as important indicators of performance. We define EBITDA as net income, plus taxes, interest expense, and depreciation and amortization. We define Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA plus optimization and restructuring charges, including severance and retention expenses; transaction and integration costs; other non-cash charges, including non-cash compensation, (gain) or loss from sale or disposal of assets, and impairment charges; and management fees and expenses.
We present EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA because we believe they provide useful information regarding the factors and trends affecting our business in addition to measures calculated under GAAP. Additionally, our credit agreement requires us to comply with certain EBITDA related metrics. Refer to-“Liquidity and Capital Resources-Indebtedness.”
Note Regarding Non-GAAP Financial Measures
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not financial measures presented in accordance with GAAP. We believe that the presentation of these non-GAAP financial measures will provide useful information to investors in assessing our financial performance and results of operations as our board of directors and management use EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to assess our financial performance, because it allows them to compare our operating performance on a consistent basis across periods by removing the effects of our capital structure (such as varying levels of interest expense), asset base (such as depreciation and amortization) and items outside the control of our management team. Net loss is the GAAP measure most directly comparable to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA. Our non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered as alternatives to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure. Each of
these non-GAAP financial measures has important limitations as analytical tools because they exclude some but not all items that affect the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures. These non-GAAP financial measures are not required to be uniformly applied, are not audited and should not be considered in isolation or as substitutes for results prepared in accordance with GAAP. Because EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA may be defined differently by other companies in our industry, our definitions of these non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies, thereby diminishing their utility.
The following tables present a reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to our net loss, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
(1) Adjustment represents net salary and benefits associated with positions, current vendor expenses and existing lease contracts that are part of the on-going savings and productivity improvement initiatives in process transformation, customer transformation and post-merger or acquisition integration.
(2) Represents costs incurred related to transactions for completed or contemplated transactions during the period.
(3) Represents the non-cash charges related to restricted stock units and options that vested during the year at Ex-Sigma in the case of the SourceHOV 2013 Long Term Incentive Plan assumed by it in connection with the Novitex Business Combination and the Company under the 2018 Stock Incentive Plan.
(4) Represents fair value adjustments to deferred revenue and deferred rent accounts established as part of purchase accounting and other non-cash charges. Other charges include severance, retention bonus, facility consolidation and other transition costs.
(5) Represents a loss/(gain) recognized on the disposal of property, plant, and equipment and other assets.
(6) Represents a loss/(gain) recognized on the disposal of noncore-business assets.
(7) Represents the impact of changes in the fair value of an interest rate swap entered into during the fourth quarter of 2017.
(8) Represents costs incurred on new projects, contract start-up costs and project ramp costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary source of liquidity is cash generated from operating activities, supplemented as necessary on a short-term basis by borrowings against our senior secured revolving credit facility and accounts receivable securitization facility. We believe our current level of cash and short-term financing capabilities along with future cash flows from operations are sufficient to meet the needs of the business. Under ASC Subtopic 205-40, Presentation of Financial Statements-Going Concern (“ASC 205-40”), the Company has the responsibility to evaluate whether conditions and/or events raise substantial doubt about its ability to meet its future financial obligations as they become due within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued. The following conditions raised substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern: history of net losses, net operating cash outflows, working capital deficits, Appraisal Action liability, and the accumulated deficit. As previously reported, the Company has undertaken plans to improve our available cash balances, liquidity and cash generated from operations, as further outlined below, and the Company believes these plans alleviate the substantial doubt about the entity’s ability to continue as a going concern for at least twelve months from the date that the accompanying financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K were issued. Going concern matters are more fully discussed in Note 2, Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.
At December 31, 2020, cash and cash equivalents totaled $70.3 million and we had no unutilized availability under our senior secured revolving credit facility.
We currently expect to spend approximately $20.0 to $25.0 million on total capital expenditures over the next twelve months. We will continue to evaluate additional capital expenditure needs that may arise due to changes in the business model due to COVID-19 and remote working. We believe that our operating cash flow and available borrowings under our credit facility will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next twelve months.
On July 13, 2018, Exela successfully repriced the $343.4 million of term loans outstanding under our senior secured credit facilities (the “Repricing Term Loans”). The interest rates applicable to the Repricing Term Loans were 100 basis points lower than the interest rates applicable to the existing senior secured term loans that were incurred on July 12, 2017 pursuant to the Credit Agreement.
On July 13, 2018, the Company borrowed a further $30.0 million pursuant to incremental term loans under the Credit Agreement. On April 16, 2019, the Company borrowed an additional $30.0 million pursuant to incremental term loans under the Credit Agreement. The proceeds of these incremental term loans (collectively, the “Incremental Term Loans”) were used to replace the cash spent for acquisitions, pay related fees, expenses and related borrowings and for general corporate purposes.
The Repricing Term Loans and the Incremental Term Loans bear interest at a rate per annum consisting of, at the Company’s option, either (a) a LIBOR rate determined by reference to the costs of funds for Eurodollar deposits for the interest period relevant to such borrowing, adjusted for certain additional costs, subject to a 1.0% floor, or (b) a base rate determined by reference to the highest of (i) the federal funds rate plus 0.5%, (ii) the prime rate and (iii) the one-month adjusted LIBOR plus 1.0%, in each case plus an applicable margin of 6.5% for LIBOR loans and 5.5% for base rate loans. The Repricing Term Loans and the Incremental Term Loans will mature on July 12, 2023.
The Company is pursuing a debt reduction and liquidity improvement initiative that contemplates the pursuit of the sale of certain non-core businesses that are not central to the Company’s long-term strategic vision. The disposition of those businesses could reduce indebtedness and enhance the Company’s ability to focus on its core businesses. The Company has retained financial advisors to assist with the sale of select assets. As part of the initiative, the Company has taken steps to increase its liquidity and its overall financial flexibility. The Company expects to use the net proceeds from the initiative for the repayment of debt, with a target reduction of $150.0 to $200.0 million. The Company has set a two-year timetable for completion of the initiative. There can be no assurance that the initiative or any particular element of the initiative will be consummated or will achieve its desired result.
On January 10, 2020 certain subsidiaries of the Company entered into a $160.0 million accounts receivable securitization facility with a five year term (the “A/R Facility”). The Company used the proceeds of the initial borrowings to repay outstanding revolving borrowings under the Company’s senior credit facility and to provide additional liquidity and funding for the ongoing business needs of the Company and its subsidiaries.
On March 16, 2020, the Company and its indirect wholly owned subsidiaries, Merco Holdings, LLC and SourceHOV Tax, LLC entered into a Membership Interest Purchase Agreement with Gainline Source Intermediate Holdings LLC at which time Gainline Source Intermediate Holdings LLC acquired all of the outstanding membership interests of SourceHov Tax for $40.0 million, subject to adjustment as set forth in the purchase agreement of approximately $2.0 million.
On March 26, 2020, the Delaware Court of Chancery entered a judgment against one of our subsidiaries in the amount of $57.7 million inclusive of costs and interest arising out of the petition for appraisal pursuant to 8 Del. C. § 262 in the Delaware Court of Chancery, captioned Manichaean Capital, LLC, et al. v. SourceHOV Holdings, Inc., C.A. No. 2017 0673 JRS (pursuant to which former stockholders of SourceHOV sought, among other things, a determination of the fair value of their 10,304 SourceHOV shares at the time of the Novitex Business Combination) (the “Appraisal Action”), which judgment will continue to accrue interest, until paid, at the legal rate, compounded quarterly. SourceHOV appealed the judgment to the Supreme Court of the State of Delaware on June 30, 2020. On January 22, 2021, the Delaware Supreme Court affirmed the judgment of the Delaware Court of Chancery in favor of the appraisal petitioners. As of December 31, 2020, the Company has accrued a liability of $60.7 million for the Appraisal Action based on management’s best estimate of SourceHOV’s total payment obligation including accrued interest as of such date. To date, SourceHOV has not paid the judgment in the Appraisal Action, and the petitioners have not been successful in their attempts to collect on the judgment against SourceHOV.
The petitioners have filed additional actions seeking to enforce their award against SourceHOV, including an action alleging unjust enrichment and seeking restitution and to pierce the corporate veil and seek alter ego liability against Exela Technologies, Inc. and over 50 alleged subsidiaries and/or affiliates. The appraisal petitioners have filed additional actions to recognize the judgment against SourceHOV, an action alleging unjust enrichment and seeking restitution and to pierce the corporate veil and seek alter ego liability against Exela Technologies, Inc. and over 50 alleged subsidiaries and/or affiliates in an attempt to collect the award in the Appraisal Action from entities other than SourceHOV, and an action against SourceHOV and certain of its directors and officers alleging creditor derivative claims relating to the Company’s securitization facilities. In early February 2021, petitioners also filed a motion for a preliminary injunction in the derivative action in which they seek a court order freezing certain property and prohibiting certain transfers and payments by Exela subsidiaries other that SourceHOV, including preventing them from paying their creditors unless the payments are made equally among Exela’s other creditors and toward the Appraisal Action liability. If the petitioners are successful in their efforts to accelerate payment of the entire judgment, such action could have a material adverse effect on our liquidity and/or cause certain of our secured lenders to take action adverse to us.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) was enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions relating to refundable payroll tax credits, deferment of employer side social security payments, net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property. The Company continues to evaluate the impact of the CARES Act, and at present expects that the refundable payroll tax credits and deferment of employer side social security payments provisions of the CARES Act to materially benefit the Company. The Company will also defer certain payroll, social security and value added taxes in various European jurisdictions, as permitted under the recently enacted COVID-19 relief measures.
On May 18, 2020, the Company amended the Prior Credit Agreement to, among other things, extend the time for delivery of its audited financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2019 and its financial statements for the quarter ended March 31, 2020. Pursuant to the amendment, the Company also amended the Prior Credit Agreement to, among other things: restrict the borrower and its subsidiaries’ ability to designate or invest in unrestricted subsidiaries; incur certain debt; create certain liens; make certain investments; pay certain dividends or other distributions on account of its equity interests; make certain asset sales or other dispositions (or utilize the proceeds of certain asset sales to
reinvest in the business); or enter into certain affiliate transactions pursuant to the negative covenants under the Credit Agreement. Further, pursuant to the amendment, the borrower under the Credit Agreement is also required to maintain a minimum Liquidity (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of $35.0 million. On May 21, 2020, the Company also amended the A/R Facility to, among other things, extend the time for delivery of its audited financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2019 and its financial statements for the quarter ended March 31, 2020. Upon delivery of such financial statements, the Company became in compliance with the Credit Agreement, the indenture for its outstanding Notes and the A/R Facility with respect to the financial statement delivery requirements set forth therein.
On July 22, 2020 the Company completed the sale of its physical records storage and logistics business for a purchase price of $12.3 million which can be used to acquire, maintain, develop, construct, improve, upgrade or repair assets useful in our business or to make certain investments and acquisitions as permitted by the Credit Agreement.
On December 17, 2020 certain subsidiaries of the Company entered into a $145.0 million securitization facility with a five year term (the “Securitization Facility”). On December 17, 2020 the Company made the initial borrowing of approximately $92.0 million under the Securitization Facility and used a portion of the proceeds to repay the A/R Facility, which terminated on such date. The Company used the remaining proceeds for general corporate purposes.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Analysis of Cash Flow Changes between the years ended December 31, 2020, December 31, 2019, and December 31, 2018
Operating Activities- Net cash used in operating activities was $29.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to cash used in operating activities of $63.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $34.0 million in cash flows from operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to lower Gross profits in the corresponding period offset by higher cash flow from working capital primarily driven by $46 million improvement in our accounts receivables. “Gross profit” is defined as revenue less cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization). This decrease in cash flow was significantly offset by higher cash flows from accounts receivables.
Net cash used in operating activities was $63.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $23.6 million cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease of $87.5 million in cash flow from operating activities was primarily driven by increase in operating loss by $49.2 million including $35.2 million lower Gross profit and $14.0 million higher selling, general and administrative expenses in 2019 as compared to 2018. “Gross profit” is defined as revenue less cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization). The rest of the decline was driven mainly by working capital items including $13.7 million pay down of accounts payables and $13.6 million pay down of related party payables as compared to 2018.
Investing Activities- Net cash provided by investing activities was $21.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to cash used in investing activities of $25.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $46.6 million in cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to $50.1 million total cash proceeds received from asset sales, lower additions to Property, plant and equipment and
development of internal software offset by partial settlement of the liabilities related to the healthcare acquisition announced early in the first quarter of 2019.
Net cash used in investing activities was $25.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to cash used in investing activities of $58.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease of $33.6 million in cash used in investing activities was primarily due to a decrease in cash spent on acquisitions compared to previous year (in 2018 Company made three acquisitions in Europe and acquired certain healthcare assets) as well as lower capital expenditures to add Property, Plant & Equipment.
Financing Activities- Net cash provided by financing activities was $63.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to cash provided by financing activities of $59.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $4.3 million in cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the proceeds from securitization facilities and revolving credit facility offset by principal payments made on debt.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $59.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to cash used by financing activities of $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase of approximately $61.7 million in cash provided by financing activities was primarily due to $65 million of revolver draw during 2019.
Indebtedness
In connection with the Novitex Business Combination, we acquired debt facilities and issued notes totaling $1.4 billion. Proceeds from the indebtedness were used to pay off credit facilities existing immediately before the Novitex Business Combination.
Senior Credit Facilities
On July 12, 2017, the Company entered into a First Lien Credit Agreement with Royal Bank of Canada, Credit Suisse AG, Cayman Islands Branch, Natixis, New York Branch and KKR Corporate Lending LLC (the “Credit Agreement”) providing Exela Intermediate LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company, upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the Credit Agreement, (i) a $350.0 million senior secured term loan maturing July 12, 2023 with an original issue discount of $7.0 million, and (ii) a $100.0 million senior secured revolving facility maturing July 12, 2022. The Credit Agreement provided for the following interest rates for borrowings under the senior secured term facility and senior secured revolving facility: at the Company’s option, either (1) an adjusted LIBOR, subject to a 1.0% floor in the case of term loans, or (2) a base rate, in each case plus an applicable margin. The initial applicable margin for the senior secured term facility was 7.5% with respect to LIBOR borrowings and 6.5% with respect to base rate borrowings. The initial applicable margin for the senior secured revolving facility was 7.0% with respect to LIBOR borrowings and 6.0% with respect to base rate borrowings. The applicable margin for borrowings under the senior secured revolving facility is subject to step-downs based on leverage ratios. The senior secured term loan is subject to amortization payments, commencing on the last day of the first full fiscal quarter of the Company following the closing date, of 0.6% of the aggregate principal amount for each of the first eight payments and 1.3% of the aggregate principal amount for payments thereafter, with any balance due at maturity.
On July 13, 2018, Exela successfully repriced the $343.4 million of term loans outstanding under its senior secured credit facilities (the “Repricing”). The Repricing was accomplished pursuant to a First Amendment to First Lien Credit Agreement (the “First Amendment”), dated as of July 13, 2018, by and among Exela Intermediate Holdings LLC, the Company, each “Subsidiary Loan Party” listed on the signature pages thereto, Royal Bank of Canada, as administrative agent, and each of the lenders party thereto, whereby the Company borrowed $343.4 million of refinancing term loans (the “Repricing Term Loans”) to refinance the Company’s existing senior secured term loans.
The Repricing Term Loans bear interest at a rate per annum of, at the Company’s option, either (a) a LIBOR rate determined by reference to the costs of funds for Eurodollar deposits for the interest period relevant to such borrowing, adjusted for certain additional costs, subject to a 1.0% floor, or (b) a base rate determined by reference to the highest of
(i) the federal funds rate plus 0.5%, (ii) the prime rate and (iii) the one-month adjusted LIBOR plus 1.0%, in each case plus an applicable margin of 6.5% for LIBOR loans and 5.5% for base rate loans. The interest rates applicable to the Repricing Term Loans are 100 basis points lower than the interest rates applicable to the existing senior secured term loans that were incurred on July 12, 2017 pursuant to the Credit Agreement. The Repricing Term Loans will mature on July 12, 2023, the same maturity date as the existing senior secured term loans. As of December 31, 2020, the interest rate applicable for the first lien senior secured term loan was 8.3%.
On July 13, 2018, the Company successfully borrowed an additional $30.0 million pursuant to incremental term loans (the “2018 Incremental Term Loans”) under the First Amendment to the Credit Agreement. The proceeds of the 2018 Incremental Term Loans were used by the Company for general corporate purposes and to pay fees and expenses in connection with the First Amendment.
On April 16, 2019, the Company successfully borrowed a further $30.0 million pursuant to incremental term loans (the “2019 Incremental Term Loans”, and, together with the 2018 Incremental Terms Loans, the “Incremental Term Loans”) under the Second Amendment to the Credit Agreement. The proceeds of the 2019 Incremental Term Loans were used to replace cash spent for acquisitions, pay related fees, expenses and related borrowings for general corporate purposes.
The Incremental Term Loans bear interest at a rate per annum that is the same as the Repricing Term Loans. The Incremental Term Loans will mature on July 12, 2023, the same maturity date as the Repricing Term Loans. The Company may voluntarily repay the Repricing Term Loans and the Incremental Term Loans (collectively, the “ Term Loans”) at any time, without prepayment premium or penalty, subject to customary “ breakage” costs with respect to LIBOR rate loans. Other than as described above, the terms, conditions and covenants applicable to the Incremental Term Loans are consistent with the terms, conditions and covenants that were applicable to the Repricing Term Loans under the Credit Agreement.
On May 18, 2020, the Company amended the Credit Agreement to, among other things, extend the time for delivery of its audited financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2019 and its financial statements for the quarter ended March 31, 2020. Pursuant to the amendment, the Company also agreed to amend the Credit Agreement to, among other things: restrict the borrower and its subsidiaries’ ability to designate or invest in unrestricted subsidiaries; incur certain debt; create certain liens; make certain investments; pay certain dividends or other distributions on account of its equity interests; make certain asset sales or other dispositions (or utilize the proceeds of certain asset sales to reinvest in the business); or enter into certain affiliate transactions pursuant to the negative covenants under the Credit Agreement. In addition, pursuant to the amendment, the borrower under the Credit Agreement is required to maintain minimum Liquidity (as defined in the amendment) of $35.0 million.
Letters of Credit
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had outstanding irrevocable letters of credit totaling approximately $19.5 million and $20.6 million, respectively, under the senior secured revolving facility.
Senior Secured Notes
Upon the closing of the Novitex Business Combination on July 12, 2017, the Company issued $1.0 billion in aggregate principal amount of 10.0% First Priority Senior Secured Notes due 2023 (the “Notes”). The Notes are guaranteed by certain subsidiaries of the Company. The Notes bear interest at a rate of 10.0% per year. The Company pays interest on the Notes on January 15 and July 15 of each year, commencing on January 15, 2018. The Notes are guaranteed by subsidiary guarantors pursuant to a supplemental indenture. The Notes will mature on July 15, 2023.
Securitization Facilities
On January 10, 2020, certain subsidiaries of the Company entered into the $160.0 million A/R Facility with a five year term. In the A/R Facility, (i) Exela Receivables 1, LLC (the “A/R Borrower”), a wholly-owned indirect subsidiary of the Company, entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (the “A/R Loan Agreement”), dated as of
January 10, 2020, with TPG Specialty Lending, Inc., as administrative agent (the “A/R Administrative Agent”), PNC Bank National Association, as LC Bank (the “A/R LC Bank”), the lenders (each, an “A/R Lender” and collectively the “A/R Lenders”) and the Company, as initial servicer, pursuant to which the A/R Lenders made loans (the “A/R Loan”) to the A/R Borrower used to purchase certain receivables and related assets from its sole member, Exela Receivables Holdco, LLC (the “A/R Parent SPE”), a wholly-owned indirect subsidiary of the Company, (ii) sixteen other indirect, wholly-owned U.S. subsidiaries of the Company (collectively, the “A/R Originators”) sold or contributed to the A/R Parent SPE certain receivables and related assets in consideration for a combination of cash, equity in the A/R Parent SPE and/or letters of credit issued by the A/R LC Bank to the A/R Originators; and (iii) the A/R Parent SPE sold or contributed to the Borrower certain receivables and related assets in consideration for a combination of cash, equity in the A/R Borrower and/or letters of credit issued by the LC Bank to the beneficiaries elected by A/R Parent SPE.
The Company used the proceeds of the initial borrowings under the A/R Facility to repay outstanding revolving borrowings under the Company’s senior credit facility and to provide additional liquidity and funding for the ongoing business needs of the Company and its subsidiaries.
The A/R Borrower and A/R Parent SPE were formed in December 2019, and are consolidated into the Company’s financial statements. The A/R Borrower and A/R Parent SPE are bankruptcy remote entities and as such their assets are not available to creditors of the Company or any of its subsidiaries. Since January 10, 2020, the parties amended and waived the A/R Facility several times to address contractually, the occurrence of certain events, including among other things, the delay in delivery of annual financial statements for the fiscal year ended 2019, financial statements for the quarter ended March 31, 2020, and the Initial Servicer’s Liquidity (as defined in the A/R Facility) falling below $60.0 million. In connection with these amendments a forbearance fee of $4.8 million was due and added to the outstanding principal balance of the loans. The Company concluded that the amendment represented modification of debt under ASC 470-50. Accordingly, the forbearance fee paid was added to unamortized debt issuance cost and amortized ratably over the remaining term of the A/R facility.
Each loan under the A/R Facility originally bore interest on the unpaid principal amount as follows: (1) if a Base Rate Loan, at 3.75% plus a rate equal to the greater of (a) the Prime Rate in effect on such day, (b) the Federal Funds Effective Rate in effect on such day plus 0.50%, (c) the Adjusted LIBOR Rate (calculated based upon an Interest Period of one month and determined on a daily basis) plus 1.00%, and (d) 4.50% per annum and (2) if a LIBOR Rate Loan, 4.75% plus a floating LIBOR Rate with a 1.00% LIBOR floor. In connection with the above described amendments to the A/R Facility, the applicable margin of the Base Rate Loans was increased to 5.75% and the LIBOR Rate Loans was increased to 6.75%. As of December 31, 2020, there were no borrowings outstanding under the A/R Facility.
On December 17, 2020, the Company repaid in full the loans outstanding under the A/R Facility. The aggregate outstanding principal amount of loans under the A/R Facility as of such date was approximately $83.0 million. The early termination of the A/R Facility triggered an early termination fee of $0.8 million and required repayment of approximately $0.5 million in respect of principal, accrued interest and fees. All obligations under the A/R Facility (other than contingent indemnification obligations that expressly survive termination) terminated upon repayment. The A/R Facility was replaced by the Securitization Facility as described below.
On December 17, 2020, certain subsidiaries of Company closed on Securitization Facility with a five year term. Borrowings under the Securitization Facility are subject to an improved borrowing base definition over the A/R Facility that consists of receivables and, subject to contribution, further supported by inventory and intellectual property, in each case, subject to certain eligibility criteria, concentration limits and reserves.
The Securitization Facility provided for an initial funding of approximately $92.0 million supported by the receivables portion of the borrowing base and, subject to contribution, a further funding of approximately $53.0 million supported by inventory and intellectual property. On December 17, 2020 the Company made the initial borrowing of approximately $92.0 million under the Securitization Facility and used a portion of the proceeds to repay the A/R Facility and used the remaining proceeds for general corporate purposes.
The initial documentation for the Securitization Facility includes (i) a Loan and Security Agreement (the “Securitization Loan Agreement”), dated as of December 10, 2020, by and among Exela Receivables 3, LLC (the “Securitization Borrower”), a wholly-owned indirect subsidiary of the Company, the lenders (each, a “Securitization Lender” and collectively the “Securitization Lenders”), Alter Domus (US), LLC, as administrative agent (the “Securitization Administrative Agent”) and the Company, as initial servicer, pursuant to which the Securitization Lenders will make loans to the Securitization Borrower to be used to purchase receivables and related assets from the Securitization Parent SPE (as defined below), (ii) a First Tier Receivables Purchase and Sale Agreement (the, dated as of December 17, 2020, by and among Exela Receivables 3 Holdco, LLC (the “Securitization Parent SPE”), a wholly-owned indirect subsidiary of the Company, and certain other indirect, wholly-owned subsidiaries of the Company listed therein (collectively, the “Securitization Originators”), and the Company, as initial servicer, pursuant to which each Securitization Originator has sold or contributed and will sell or contribute to the Securitization Parent SPE certain receivables and related assets in consideration for a combination of cash and equity in the Securitization Parent SPE, (iii) a Second Tier Receivables Purchase and Sale Agreement, dated as of December 17, 2020, by and among, the Securitization Borrower, the Securitization Parent SPE and the Company, as initial servicer, pursuant to which Securitization Parent SPE has sold or contributed and will sell or contribute to the Securitization Borrower certain receivables and related assets in consideration for a combination of cash and equity in the Securitization Borrower, (iv) the Sub-Servicing Agreement, dated as of December 17, 2020, by and among the Company and each Securitization Originator, (v) the Pledge and Guaranty, dated as of the December 10, 2020, between the Securitization Parent SPE and the Administrative Agent, and (vi) the Performance Guaranty, dated as of December 17, 2020, between the Company, as performance guarantor, and the Securitization Administrative Agent (and together with all other certificates, instruments, UCC financing statements, reports, notices, agreements and documents executed or delivered in connection with the Securitization Loan Agreement, the “Securitization Agreements”).
The Securitization Borrower, the Company, the Securitization Parent SPE and the Securitization Originators provide customary representations and covenants under the Securitization Agreements. The Securitization Loan Agreement provides for certain events of default upon the occurrence of which the Securitization Administrative Agent may declare the facility’s termination date to have occurred and declare the outstanding Securitization Loan and all other obligations of the Securitization Borrower to be immediately due and payable, however the Securitization Facility does not include an ongoing liquidity covenant like the A/R Facility and aligns reporting obligations with the Company’s other material indebtedness agreements.
The Securitization Borrower and Securitization Parent SPE were formed in December 2020, and are consolidated into the Company’s financial statements. The Securitization Borrower and Securitization Parent SPE are bankruptcy remote entities and as such their assets are not available to creditors of the Company or any of its subsidiaries. Each loan under the Securitization Facility bears interest on the unpaid principal amount as follows: (i) if a Base Rate Loan, at a rate per annum equal to (x) the greatest of (a) the Prime Rate in effect on such day, (b) the Federal Funds Effective Rate in effect on such day plus 0.50% and (c) the Adjusted LIBOR Rate (as defined in the Securitization Loan Agreement) plus 1.00%, plus (y) 8.75%; or (ii) if a LIBOR Rate Loan, at the Adjusted LIBOR Rate plus 9.75%. As of December 31, 2020, there were borrowings of $91.9 million outstanding under the Securitization Facility.
Potential Future Transactions
We may, from time to time explore and evaluate possible strategic transactions, which may include joint ventures, as well as business combinations or the acquisition or disposition of assets. In order to pursue certain of these opportunities, additional funds will likely be required. Subject to applicable contractual restrictions, to obtain such financing, we may seek to use cash on hand, borrowings under our revolving credit facilities, or we may seek to raise additional debt or equity financing through private placements or through underwritten offerings. There can be no assurance that we will enter into additional strategic transactions or alliances, nor do we know if we will be able to obtain the necessary financing for transactions that require additional funds on favorable terms, if at all. In addition, pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement that we entered into in connection with the closing of the Novitex Business Combination, certain of our stockholders have the right to demand underwritten offerings of our Common Stock. We may from time to time in the future explore, with certain of those stockholders the possibility of an underwritten public offering of our Common Stock held by those stockholders. There can be no assurance as to whether or when an offering may be commenced or completed, or as to the actual size or terms of the offering.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements requires the use of judgments and estimates. Our critical accounting policies are described below to provide a better understanding of how we develop our assumptions and judgments about future events and related estimations and how they can impact our financial statements. A critical accounting estimate is one that requires subjective or complex estimates and assessments, and is fundamental to our results of operations. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable according to the current facts and circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We believe the current assumptions, judgments and estimates used to determine amounts reflected in our consolidated financial statements are appropriate; however, actual results may differ under different conditions. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this document.
Goodwill and other intangible assets: Goodwill and other intangible assets are initially recorded at their fair values. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price of acquisitions over the fair value of the net assets acquired. Our goodwill at December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $359.8 million. Goodwill and other intangible assets not subject to amortization are tested for impairment annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. Intangible assets with finite useful lives are amortized either on a straight-line basis over the asset’s estimated useful life or on a basis that reflects the pattern in which the economic benefits of the intangible assets are realized.
Impairment of goodwill, long-lived and other intangible assets: Long-lived assets, such as property and equipment and finite-lived intangible assets are evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying value may not be recoverable. Recoverability is measured by a comparison of their carrying amount to the estimated undiscounted cash flows to be generated by those assets. If the undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying amount, we record impairment losses for the excess of the carrying value over the estimated fair value. Fair value is determined, in part, by the estimated cash flows to be generated by those assets. Our cash flow estimates are based upon, among other things, historical results adjusted to reflect our best estimate of future market rates, and operating performance. Development of future cash flows also requires us to make assumptions and to apply judgment, including timing of future expected cash flows, using the appropriate discount rates, and determining salvage values. The estimate of fair value represents our best estimates of these factors, and is subject to variability. Assets are generally grouped at the lowest level of identifiable cash flows, which is the reporting unit level for us. Changes to our key assumptions related to future performance and other economic factors could adversely affect our impairment valuation.
We conduct our annual goodwill impairment tests on October 1st of each year, or more frequently if indicators of impairment exist. When performing the annual impairment test, we have the option of performing a qualitative or quantitative assessment to determine if an impairment has occurred. If a qualitative assessment indicates that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, we would be required to perform a quantitative impairment test for goodwill. A quantitative test requires comparison of fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying value, including goodwill. We use a combination of the Guideline Public Company Method of the Market Approach and the Discounted Cash Flow Method of the Income Approach to determine the reporting unit fair value. For the Guideline Public Company Method, our annual impairment test utilizes valuation multiples of publicly traded peer companies. For the Discounted Cash Flow Method, our annual impairment test utilizes discounted cash flow projections using market participant weighted average cost of capital calculation. If the fair value of goodwill at the reporting unit level is less than its carrying value, an impairment loss is recorded for the amount by which a reporting unit’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
We conducted our annual goodwill impairment test for year 2020 on October1, 2020 and concluded that there was no impairment in our goodwill and other intangible assets during the year. During the third quarter of 2019, the Company concluded that a triggering event for an interim impairment analysis had occurred as discussed above. As part of the interim impairment assessment performed on September 30, 2019, it was determined that the increase in the discount rate applied in the valuation was required to reflect current market dynamics and company-specific risk. This higher discount rate, in conjunction with revised long-term projections, resulted in lower than previously projected discounted long-term future cash flows for the reporting units which reduced the estimated fair value to below carrying
value. As a result of the interim impairment assessment in the third quarter, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $87.9 million and $8.3 million to goodwill at ITPS and LLPS reporting units, respectively. The Company did not perform a separate annual impairment test as of October 1, 2019 as the impairment test performed during the quarter-ended September 30, 2019 was one day from the annual impairment test date. Additionally, later during the fourth quarter of 2019, the Company conducted its annual budgeting process along with an update to its long-range plan. Following the completion of that process, the Company made an evaluation based on factors such as changes in the Company’s growth rate and recent trends in the Company’s market capitalization, concluding that a second triggering event for an impairment analysis had occurred. As a result, we performed another quantitative impairment test as of December 31, 2019, resulting in an additional goodwill impairment charge of $229.7 million and $22.7 million to goodwill at ITPS and LLPS reporting units, respectively. Therefore, as a result of these two impairment assessments in the third and fourth quarters of 2019, a total impairment charge of $348.6 was recorded to goodwill for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Application of the goodwill impairment test requires judgment, including the identification of reporting units, allocation of assets and liabilities to reporting units, and determination of fair value. The determination of reporting unit fair value is sensitive to the amount of Revenue and EBITDA generated by us, as well as the Revenue and EBITDA market multiples used in the calculation. Additionally, the fair value is sensitive to changes in the valuation assumptions such as expected income tax rate, risk-free rate, asset beta, and various risk premiums. Unanticipated changes, including immaterial revisions, to these assumptions could result in a provision for impairment in a future period. Given the nature of these evaluations and their application to specific assets and time frames, it is not possible to reasonably quantify the impact of changes in these assumptions.
In the process of reconciling the fair values of the Company’s reporting units to its overall market capitalization, the Company used a combination of both quantitative and qualitative considerations, arriving at the implied control premium of 41.4%. The implied control premium was computed using the Company’s closing stock price as of October 1, 2020.
Revenue: We account for revenue in accordance with ASC 606. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer, and is the unit of account in ASC 606. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring goods or providing services. The contract transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. All of our material sources of revenue are derived from contracts with customers, primarily relating to the provision of business and transaction processing services within each of our segments. We do not have any significant extended payment terms, as payment is received shortly after goods are delivered or services are provided. Refer to Note 2-Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for additional information regarding our revenue recognition policy.
Income Taxes: We account for income taxes by using the asset and liability method. We account for income taxes regarding uncertain tax positions and recognize interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions in income tax benefit/(expense) in the consolidated statements of operations.
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“TCJA”) was signed by the President of the United States and enacted into law on December 22, 2017. The TCJA significantly changes U.S. tax law by reducing the U.S. corporate income tax rate to 21% from 35%, adopting a territorial tax regime, creating new taxes on certain foreign sourced earnings and imposing a one-time transition tax on the undistributed earnings of certain non-U.S. subsidiaries.
Accounting Standards Codification Topic 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”) requires companies to account for the tax effects of changes in income tax rates and laws in the period in which legislation is enacted (December 22, 2017). ASC 740 does not specifically address accounting and disclosure guidance in connection with the income tax effects of the TCJA. Consequently, on December 22, 2017, the Securities and Exchange Commission staff issued Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 118 (“SAB 118”), to address the application of ASC 740 in the reporting period that includes the date the TCJA was enacted. SAB 118 allows companies a reasonable period of time to complete the accounting for the income tax effects of the TCJA.
Deferred income taxes are recognized on the tax consequences of temporary differences by applying enacted statutory tax rates applicable in future years to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax bases of existing assets and liabilities, as determined under tax laws and rates. A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Due to numerous ownership changes, we are subject to limitations on existing net operating losses under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code (the “Code”). In the event we determine that we would be able to realize deferred tax assets that have valuation allowances established, an adjustment to the net deferred tax assets would be recognized as a component of income tax expense through continuing operations.
We engage in transactions (such as acquisitions) in which the tax consequences may be subject to uncertainty and examination by the varying taxing authorities. Significant judgment is required by us in assessing and estimating the tax consequences of these transactions. While our tax returns are prepared and based on our interpretation of tax laws and regulations, in the normal course of business the tax returns are subject to examination by the various taxing authorities. Such examinations may result in future assessments of additional tax, interest and penalties. For purposes of our income tax provision, a tax benefit is not recognized if the tax position is not more likely than not to be sustained based solely on its technical merits. Considerable judgment is involved in determining which tax positions are more likely than not to be sustained.
Business Combinations: We allocate the total cost of an acquisition to the underlying assets based on their respective estimated fair values. Determination of fair values involves significant estimates and assumptions about highly subjective variables, including future cash flows, discount rates, and asset lives. The estimates of the fair values of assets and liabilities acquired are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable and, when appropriate, include assistance from independent third-party valuation firms.
Because we are primarily a services business, our acquisitions typically result in significant amounts of goodwill and other intangible assets. Fair value estimates and calculations for these acquisitions will affect the amount of amortization expense, or possible impairment related charges recognized in future periods. We base our fair value estimates on assumptions we believe are reasonable, but recognize that the assumptions are inherently uncertain.
Recently Adopted and Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements.
Internal Controls and Procedures
As a publicly traded company, we are required to comply with the SEC’s rules implementing Section 302 and 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, which require management to certify financial and other information in our quarterly and annual reports and provide an annual management report on the effectiveness of controls over financial reporting. For management’s assessment of internal control over financial reporting required by Item 308(a) of Regulation S-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 see Part II-Item 9A - Controls and Procedures for management’s report on the effectiveness of internal controls.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020 we had no material off balance sheet arrangements, except letters of credit described above under Liquidity and Capital Resources. As such, we are not materially exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in such financing arrangements.
The HGM Group and other former SourceHOV equity holders formed Ex-Sigma and its wholly-owned subsidiary, Ex-Sigma 2, to hold the Exela shares to be issued to SourceHOV as merger consideration upon the closing of the Novitex Business Combination and to invest in Exela immediately prior to the closing. Ex-Sigma 2 secured additional PIPE financing in the form of a $55.8 million loan (the “Margin Loan”) that was used to purchase additional common and preferred shares from the Company to help meet the minimum cash requirements needed to close the Novitex Business Combination. As a result of these transactions, the Company issued 28,304,167 shares of Common
Stock to Ex-Sigma 2 at the closing, which represented approximately 54.9% ownership in the Company at that time and were pledged as collateral for the Margin Loan.
The Company determined that Ex-Sigma was a variable interest entity and that the Company had a variable interest in Ex-Sigma through an expense reimbursement arrangement related to the Margin Loan and contained in the Consent, Waiver and Amendment. The Consent, Waiver and Amendment provided among other things for the Company to reimburse Ex-Sigma for costs and fees related to the maintenance of the Margin Loan, other than payments of principal, interest and original issue discount.
The Company was not the primary beneficiary because the Company did not have the power to direct the activities that most significantly impacted the economic performance of Ex-Sigma. Accordingly, the Company did not consolidate the financial statements of Ex-Sigma and did not have any assets or liabilities related to Ex-Sigma and the Company did not have an investment in Ex-Sigma. The Company reaffirmed its assessment as of December 31, 2020.
Ex-Sigma 2 paid off the balance of the Margin Loan as of December 31, 2019, and as such the maximum exposure to loss as a result of the Company’s involvement with Ex-Sigma is $0. Ex-Sigma 2 distributed the shares held by it during the first quarter of 2020 and is no longer a shareholder of Exela. Ex-Sigma and Ex-Sigma 2 ceased to be variable interest entities upon the distribution that occurred on February 21, 2020.