ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and the other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by these forward-looking statements.
For the discussion of the financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018, refer to “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” to our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on March 12, 2020.
Overview
We are a late-stage clinical biopharmaceutical company focused on the research, development and commercialization of novel therapeutics for the treatment of rare diseases. Our pipeline is comprised of potentially first-in-class, oral, small molecule antagonists of chemokine receptor CXCR4, which have the potential to treat a broad range of rare diseases, including primary immunodeficiencies, or PIs, and certain types of cancer. Our lead product candidate, mavorixafor, is a potentially first-in-class, oral, allosteric antagonist of the CXCR4 receptor designed to correct the abnormal signaling caused by the receptor/ligand interaction and enable mobilization and trafficking of immune cells.
We have completed the dose-titration portion of the Phase 2 clinical trial of mavorixafor in patients with Warts, Hypogammaglobulinemia, Infections, and Myelokathexis, or WHIM, syndrome, which is a rare, inherited primary immunodeficiency disease. In June 2019, we initiated 4WHIM, a pivotal, 52-week Phase 3 global clinical trial of mavorixafor for the treatment of patients with WHIM syndrome. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, has granted Breakthrough Therapy Designation for mavorixafor for the treatment of adults with WHIM. In October 2020, the FDA granted Fast Track Designation for mavorixafor for adults with WHIM and in December 2020, the FDA granted Rare Pediatric Designation for mavorixafor for the treatment of WHIM. We expect to report top line data from 4WHIM in 2022.
We are also investigating mavorixafor in combination with axitinib (Inlyta®) in the Phase 2a portion of an open-label Phase 1/2 clinical trial in clear cell renal cell carcinoma, or ccRCC. In September 2019, we announced positive results from the Phase 2a portion of this trial. We hope to pursue future development and potential commercialization of mavorixafor in ccRCC and other possible immuno-oncology indications outside of greater China only as part of a potential strategic collaboration.
In November 2019, we initiated a 14-day, proof-of-concept Phase 1b clinical trial of mavorixafor in patients with severe congenital neutropenia, or SCN. The trial is designed to enroll up to 45 patients in total. SCN patients are immunocompromised and the two-week duration of dosing with mavorixafor provides little potential opportunity for clinical benefit. As a result, the SCN trial has been very difficult to enroll during the COVID pandemic due to the risk of COVID and this difficulty could continue throughout 2021. We plan to share initial data on a small number of patients from the SCN trial in 2021, assuming sufficient progress is made on the trial.
In December 2019, we initiated a Phase 1b clinical trial of mavorixafor in Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia, or Waldenström’s. We expect to report initial data from the Waldenström’s trial in the first half of 2021.
We are also advancing two early stage candidates towards the clinic: X4P-003, a second-generation CXCR4 antagonist designed to have an enhanced pharmacokinetic profile relative to mavorixafor, potentially enabling improved patient compliance and ease of use; and X4P-002, a CXCR4 antagonist designed to cross blood-brain barrier and provide appropriate therapeutic exposures to treat brain cancers.
To date, we have not generated revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate significant revenue from the sale of our products in the foreseeable future. If our development efforts for our product candidates are successful and result in regulatory approval, we may generate revenue in the future from product sales. We cannot predict if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates.
Our Pipeline:
COVID-19 Business Update
In light of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, we have implemented business continuity measures designed to address and mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our employees, our business, including our clinical trials, supply chains and third-party providers. We continue to closely monitor the COVID-19 pandemic as we evolve our business continuity plans and response strategy. In March 2020, the Governor of Massachusetts ordered all individuals living in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to stay at their place of residence for an indefinite period of time (subject to certain exceptions to facilitate authorized necessary activities) to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, our workforce transitioned to working remotely. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we opened our new office in Boston, Massachusetts under a return-to-work plan with a limited phased approach that is principles-based, local in design, with focused on employee safety and optimal work environment. While we are experiencing limited financial impacts at this time, given the global economic slowdown, the overall disruption of global healthcare systems and the other risks and uncertainties associated with the pandemic, our business, financial condition, results of operations and growth prospects could be materially adversely affected.
Clinical Development
With respect to clinical development, we continue to implement risk-based approaches in accordance with FDA and the European Medicines Agency, or EMA, COVID-19 guidance, which includes virtual and remote patient visits and monitoring where possible, while prioritizing patient safety, maintaining trial continuity and preserving data integrity. We have experienced, and expect to continue to experience, a disruption or delay in our ability to initiate trial sites and/or enroll and assess patients in several of our clinical programs as a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, notwithstanding the commencement of vaccination efforts. We have experienced challenges in providing trial drugs to patients enrolled in our clinical trials, and where
necessary and practical, have implemented direct-to-patient shipments from clinical sites. While not currently impacted, there could be an impact on our ability to supply study drug, report trial results, or interact with regulators, ethics committees or other important agencies due to limitations in regulatory authority employee resources or otherwise. In addition, we rely on contract research organizations, or CROs, or other third parties to assist us with clinical trials, and we cannot guarantee that they will continue to perform their contractual duties in a timely and satisfactory manner as a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. If the COVID-19 pandemic continues and persists for an extended period of time, we could experience further disruptions to our clinical development timelines, which would adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations and growth prospects.
Supply Chain
We continue to work closely with our third-party manufacturers, distributors and other partners to manage our supply chain activities and mitigate potential disruptions to our clinical supply as a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. We have business continuity plans in place and expect to have adequate global supply of mavorixafor well into 2021. To best support our patients, we continue to work with our vendors to provide the option for direct-to-patient drug shipments from clinical sites. If the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic impacts essential distribution systems we could experience disruptions to our supply chain and operations, which would adversely impact our ability to carry out our clinical trials.
Regulatory Activities
We expect that we could experience delays in the timing of review and/or our interactions with the FDA or the European Commission, or EC, due to, for example, inability to conduct planned physical inspections related to regulatory approval, or the diversion of efforts of the FDA or EC and attention to approval of other therapeutics or other activities related to COVID-19, which could delay approval decisions with respect to the preparation and submission to the FDA of a new drug application, or NDA, or the preparation and submission to the EC of a Marketing Authorization Application, or MAA, and otherwise delay or limit our ability to make planned regulatory submissions or obtain new product approvals.
Financial Impact
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve and has already resulted in a significant disruption of global financial markets. If the disruption persists and deepens, we could experience an inability to access additional capital, which could in the future negatively affect our operations.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes the results of our operations for the periods indicated:
License Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $3.0 million in revenue related to our license agreement with Abbisko Therapeutics Co., Ltd., or Abbisko, due to the achievement of a financial milestone in March 2020. There was no similar revenue recorded in the year ended December 31, 2019. Pursuant to our license agreement with Abbisko, we are eligible to receive potential development and regulatory milestone payments, which vary based on the number of indications developed, and potential commercial milestone payments based on annual net sales of mavorixafor-based licensed products. The transaction price related to these development and regulatory milestones has been allocated to the delivery to Abbisko of the license to develop and commercialize mavorixafor, was satisfied at the inception of the arrangement in July 2019 and has been fully constrained. We have determined that the future sales of clinical and commercial supplies to Abbisko represent optional goods that will be recognized as revenue at a point in time when such clinical or commercial supplies are delivered to Abbisko in the future. With respect to the remaining development and regulatory milestones, we will re-evaluate the constraint on the transaction price associated with these milestones in each reporting period and as uncertain events are resolved or other changes in circumstances occur.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred in connection with the discovery and development of our product candidates, including employee salaries and related expenses, expenses incurred in connection with the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants and contract research organizations, or CROs; the cost of manufacturing drug products for use in our preclinical studies and clinical trials, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants and contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs; facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct or allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and insurance; costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements; and payments made under third-party licensing agreements. We expense research and development costs as incurred.
Research and development expenses were $41.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $30.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, reflecting an increase of $11.7 million. The increase in research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to higher clinical expenses related to mavorixafor to support our three ongoing clinical trials, an increase in outsourced costs related to our early stage drug candidates and an increase in unallocated expenses, primarily due to an increase in compensation expenses, including stock-based compensation, due to additional personnel within our manufacturing, regulatory and clinical operations functions.
We expect that our research and development expenses, particularly for our mavorixafor programs, will increase over the next several years as we continue to conduct our Phase 3 pivotal trial of mavorixafor in patients with WHIM syndrome, and to conduct our Phase 1b clinical trials of mavorixafor in SCN and Waldenström’s. Research and development expenses related to our X4P-002 and X4P-003 programs were not significant in 2020 relative to our overall research and development expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include direct and allocated facility-related costs as well as professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, investor and public relations, accounting, and audit services.
General and administrative expenses were $21.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $17.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, reflecting an increase of $3.4 million. The increase in general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to an increase in personnel-related costs, including stock compensation, due to an increase in head count to support the growth of our business. We expect the growth of general and administrative expenses will slow relative to prior years, but will continue to grow as we prepare for the possible commercial launch of mavorixafor.
Loss on Transfer of Nonfinancial Assets
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we entered into contractual arrangements with two third parties that transferred the rights to develop and commercialize the programs underlying in-process research and development, or IPR&D, intangible assets that we acquired in the merger with Arsanis. As a result of the transfer of control of the IPR&D projects to third parties, we recorded a charge of $3.9 million to “loss on transfer of nonfinancial assets” during 2019. The loss included the carrying value of the IPR&D intangible assets prior to the transfer of control, partially offset by non-refundable, upfront fees received from the third parties. There was no such loss in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Expense, Net
The increase in other expense, net, of $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to lower interest income due to a general decline in interest rates on our cash equivalent investments and higher interest expense on our borrowings due to higher average outstanding borrowings under our Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement, as amended, with Hercules Capital Inc., or the “Hercules Loan Agreement”. These increases in other expense were partially offset by lower losses on the extinguishment of debt in 2020 as compared to 2019.
Income Taxes
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a $0.1 million income tax provision related to local withholdings associated with a milestone payment received from a customer in a foreign jurisdiction. No income tax benefit or expense was recorded in the prior year due to the requirement for a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets in all jurisdictions.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have funded our operations to date primarily with proceeds from sales of common stock, warrants and prefunded
warrants for the purchase of our preferred stock and our common stock, sales of preferred stock, proceeds from the issuance of
convertible debt and borrowings under loan and security agreements. In August 2020, we entered into a Controlled Equity OfferingSM Sales Agreement, or the ATM Sales Agreement, with B. Riley Securities, Inc., Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., and Stifel, Nicolaus & Company, Incorporated, or collectively, the Sales Agents, pursuant to which we may offer and sell, at our sole discretion through one or more of the Sales Agents, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million. In October 2020, we entered into a common stock purchase agreement with Aspire Capital LLC, or Aspire Capital, pursuant to which Aspire Capital has committed to purchase, at our request from time to time over a 36-month period, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million, subject to certain limitations. As further discussed in Note 16 to our consolidated financial statements, on March 18, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with several institutional and accredited investors, or Investors, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell to the Investors in a private placement shares of common stock and, in lieu of common stock, pre-funded warrants to purchase shares of common stock for estimated gross proceeds of up to approximately $55.0 million, before deducting offering expenses payable by us. We have agreed to register for resale the common stock and the issuance of the shares of common stock underlying the pre-funded warrants held by the Investors by no later than June 30, 2021, subject to liquidated damages should we fail to do so. In addition, on March 18, 2021, we entered into a non-binding letter of intent with a third-party, who is also an Investor, to negotiate a co-development agreement that would provide us with up to $65.0 million in funding when and if the arrangement closes. If we do not execute a definitive co-development agreement by May 15, 2021, this Investor may, at its option, sell the shares it purchased in the private placement back to us to at the original purchase price of $2.0 million. The funds associated with the private placement and co-development arrangement, which have not yet been received, are not considered in our going concern evaluation below.
During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, we received $12.5 million, $10.0 million and $10.0 million, respectively, in gross proceeds through our Hercules Loan Agreement. Under this facility, as amended most recently in December 2020, we have borrowed $32.5 million in term loans and may borrow an additional $7.5 million in term loans upon the achievement of certain operational milestones through June 2022 and an additional $10.0 million in term loans through December 2022, at the sole discretion of Hercules. Principal payments under the Hercules Loan Agreement commence in February 2023 and the agreement matures in July 2024.
Going Concern
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from our operations. We have not yet commercialized any products and we do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any products for several years, if at all. As of December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents were $78.7 million and our restricted cash balance was $2.0 million. We expect that our research and development and general and administrative expenses will continue to increase as we focus on completing the necessary development, obtaining regulatory approval and preparing for potential commercialization of our product candidates. Based on our current operating plan, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the first quarter of 2022. However, we have a covenant under our Hercules Loan Agreement that requires that we maintain a minimum level of cash, as defined, beginning on January 1, 2022, (which date is extended if we meet certain financial milestones related to third party funding). If we are in violation of this covenant, Hercules could require the repayment of all outstanding debt.
These conditions and events raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for the one-year period following the issuance of our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020. To finance our operations, we will need to raise additional capital, which cannot be assured. Unless and until we reach profitability in the future, we will require additional capital to fund our operations, which could be raised through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, other third-party funding, marketing and distribution arrangements and other collaborations and strategic alliances. If we are unable to obtain funding, we could be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate some or all of our research and development programs, product portfolio expansion or commercialization efforts, which would adversely affect our business prospects, or we may be unable to continue operations.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flow activities for each of the periods presented:
Operating Activities: During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $58.8 million, primarily resulting from our net losses of $62.1 million, adjusted for noncash expenses of $7.4 million and changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $4.1 million. Noncash expenses primarily includes stock-based compensation expense. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase cash used in related to funding certain upfront costs associated with our leased office in Boston, Massachusetts. Cash used in operating activities was higher for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year due to higher net losses in the current year.
Investing Activities: During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities of $1.4 million, primarily related to furniture and laboratory equipment purchases related to our Boston lease, and our research and development center in Vienna, Austria. During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by investing activities consisted primarily of $26.4 million of cash and restricted cash acquired in connection with our Merger with Arsanis.
Financing Activities: During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $12.4 million
million, consisting primarily of proceeds from our Hercules Loan Agreement, as amended, in the first and fourth quarters of 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $140.7 million, consisting primarily of $139.4 million of net proceeds for the sale in April 2019 and November 2019 of our common stock, warrants and prefunded warrants and net proceeds of $9.8 million received in our Hercules Loan Agreement, partially offset by $9.4 million for the settlement of X4 Austria’s loan facility with FFG.
Loan and Security Agreement with Hercules Capital, Inc.
In October 2018, we entered into the Hercules Loan Agreement, which was subsequently amended in December 2018, June 2019, March 2020 and December 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we have borrowed an aggregate of $32.5 million under the Hercules Loan Agreement, as amended, which provides for aggregate maximum borrowings of $50.0 million, including $32.5 million of current borrowings, an additional $7.5 million of term loans available through June 20, 2022, the funding of which are subject to the achievement of certain performance milestones and conditions, and $10.0 million subject to Hercules’ investment committee’s sole discretion, through December 31, 2022.
Borrowings under the Hercules Loan Agreement bear interest at a variable rate equal to the greater of (i) 8.75% or (ii) 8.75% plus The Wall Street Journal prime rate minus 6.0%. In an event of default and until such event is no longer continuing, the interest rate applicable to borrowings under the agreement would be increased by 4.0%. As of December 31, 2020, the interest rate applicable to borrowings was 8.75% and the Company was not in default on the Hercules Loan Agreement.
Borrowings are repayable in monthly interest-only payments through January 1, 2023, and in equal monthly payments of principal and accrued interest from February 1, 2023 until the maturity date of the loan, which is July 1, 2024. At our option, we may prepay all, but not less than all, of the outstanding borrowings, subject to a prepayment premium of up to 2.0% of the principal amount outstanding as of the date of repayment. In addition, aggregate end-of-term charges of $2.9 million are payable in the amounts of $0.8 million, $1.3 million and $0.8 million on January 1, 2022, July 1, 2023 and July 1, 2024, respectively, which dates are accelerated upon the prepayment of the Hercules Loan Agreement at our election or upon an event of default.
Borrowings under the Hercules Loan Agreement are collateralized by substantially all of our personal property and other assets except for our intellectual property (but including rights to payment and proceeds from the sale, licensing or disposition of the intellectual property). Our obligations under the agreement are subject to acceleration upon occurrence of specified events of default, including payment default, insolvency and a material adverse change in our business, operations or financial or other conditions.
Under the agreement, we have agreed to affirmative and negative covenants. The covenants also include a requirement that, from and after a defined initial test date of January 1, 2022 (which date is extended if we meet certain financial milestones related to third party funding), we maintain cash in an aggregate amount greater than or equal to the greater of (i) $30.0 million, or (ii) 6 multiplied by a metric based on prior months’ cash expenditures; provided, however, that from and after our achievement of certain performance milestones, the required level shall be reduced to the greater of (x) $20.0 million, or (y) three multiplied by the current metric based on prior months’ cash expenditures; and provided further, that subject to the achievement of certain milestones, this covenant in the Loan Agreement may be extinguished. A breach of any of the covenants under the Hercules Loan Agreement could result in a default under the loan. Upon the occurrence of an event of default under the loan, the lenders could elect to declare all amounts outstanding, if any, to be immediately due and payable and terminate all commitments to extend further credit. If there are any amounts outstanding that we are unable to repay, the lenders could proceed against the collateral granted to them to secure such indebtedness.
Funding Requirements
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents will allow us to fund operations into the first quarter of 2022. However, as noted above, in order to satisfy a minimum cash covenant in our Hercules Loan Agreement, we will be required to raise additional capital, which may be through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, other third-party funding, marketing and distribution arrangements and other collaborations and strategic alliances. During 2021 and beyond, we expect our expenses to continue to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance the current and anticipated clinical trials
of our product candidates in development. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical product candidates, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our funding requirements. Our short term and long term funding requirements will depend on and could increase significantly as a result of many factors, including:
•the scope, number, initiation, progress, timing, costs, design, duration, any potential delays, and results of clinical trials and nonclinical studies for our current or future product candidates, particularly our Phase 3 pivotal clinical trial of mavorixafor for the treatment of patients with WHIM syndrome, our Phase 1b clinical trial of mavorixafor in SCN and our Phase 1b clinical trial of mavorixafor in Waldenström’s;
•the continued global impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and its effect on our ongoing clinical trials, our supply chain and the financial markets in general;
•the outcome, timing and cost of regulatory reviews, approvals or other actions to meet regulatory requirements established by the FDA and comparable foreign regulatory authorities, including the potential for the FDA or comparable foreign regulatory authorities to require that we perform more studies for our product candidates than those that we currently expect;
•our ability to obtain marketing approval for our product candidates;
•the cost of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing our patent claims and other intellectual property rights covering our product candidates, including any such patent claims and intellectual property rights that we have licensed from Genzyme pursuant to the terms of our license agreement with Genzyme;
•our ability to maintain, expand and defend the scope of our intellectual property portfolio, including the cost of defending intellectual property disputes, including patent infringement actions brought by third parties against us or our product candidates;
•the cost and timing of completion of commercial-scale outsourced manufacturing activities with respect to our product candidates;
•our ability to establish and maintain licensing, collaboration or similar arrangements on favorable terms and whether and to what extent we retain development or commercialization responsibilities under any new licensing, collaboration or similar arrangement;
•the cost of establishing sales, marketing and distribution capabilities for any product candidates for which we may receive regulatory approval in regions where we choose to commercialize our products on our own;
•the success of any other business, product or technology that we acquire or in which we invest;
•the costs of acquiring, licensing or investing in businesses, product candidates and technologies;
•our need and ability to hire additional management and scientific and medical personnel;
•the costs to continue to operate as a public company, including the need to implement additional financial and reporting systems and other internal systems and infrastructure for our business;
•market acceptance of our product candidates, to the extent any are approved for commercial sale; and
•the effect of competing technological and market developments.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances, and marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties. We have effective universal shelf registration statements on Form S-3 registering the sale of up to $300.0 million of our common stock, warrants to purchase our common stock and other securities on terms that we may determine. We have entered into the ATM Sales Agreement with the Sales Agents, pursuant to which we may offer and sell, at our sole discretion through one or more of the Sales Agents, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million. We have entered into a common stock purchase agreement with Aspire Capital, pursuant to which Aspire Capital has committed to purchase, at our request from time to time over a 36-month period, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million, subject to certain limitations.
To the extent that we raise additional capital through future equity offerings or debt financings, the ownership interest of our stockholders may be materially diluted, and the terms of such securities could include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our stockholders. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include restrictive covenants that limit our ability to take specified actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or other arrangements when needed, we may be required to delay, reduce or eliminate our product development efforts or future commercialization efforts, or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
As a smaller reporting company, we are not required to provide the disclosure required by Item 303(a)(5) of Regulation S-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, costs and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses. As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advance payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to them at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of these estimates with the service providers and make adjustments, if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
•vendors in connection with preclinical development activities;
•CROs and investigative sites in connection with preclinical studies and clinical trials; and
•CMOs in connection with the production of preclinical and clinical trial materials.
We base the expense recorded related to external research and development on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple CMOs and CROs that supply, conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or the amount of prepaid expenses accordingly.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have not been any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation. We measure all stock-based awards granted to employees, directors and consultants based on the grant-date fair value of the award and recognized compensation expense, net of estimated forfeitures, over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. The stock-based awards that we have issued to date include a service-based vesting condition and the expense for these awards is recognized using the straight-line method. We have also issued stock-based awards with performance-based vesting conditions that vest in part upon our achievement of operational milestones and over time thereafter for the subsequent two years as the employee continues to provide services. We assess the probability of achievement of these operational milestones and recognize stock-based compensation for these awards using the accelerated attribution model based on the fair value of the awards as of the date of grant and our best estimate of the date each operational milestone will be achieved. We update our estimates related to the probability and timing of achievement of the operational milestones each period until the award either vests or is forfeited.
The fair value of stock option grants is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which uses as inputs the fair value of our common stock and assumptions we make for the volatility of our common stock, the expected term of the stock options, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our stock options and an expected dividend yield. Prior to the closing of the Merger and the listing of our common stock on the Nasdaq Capital Market, our board of directors historically determined, as of the date of each option grant and with input from our management, the assistance of a third-party valuation specialist the estimated fair value of our common stock on the date of grant based on a number of objectives and subjective factors. Since the Merger and the listing of our common stock on the Nasdaq Capital Market, we have relied on the market price of our common stock to determine the fair value on the date of grant. As our common stock does not have a sufficient history of trading, we estimate our volatility based on the historical volatility of publicly traded peer companies. We estimate the expected term of our stock awards by utilizing the “simplified” method, which calculates the expected term based on weighted average midpoint of the award’s vesting and expiration dates. We determine the risk-free interest rate by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant of the award for time periods approximately equal to the expected term of the award. We estimate that no dividends will be paid as we do not expect to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
The assumptions underlying these valuations represent the best estimates of our management, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of our judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, the resulting share-based compensation expense could be materially different.
Revenue Recognition. Our revenues are generated primarily through research, development and commercialization agreements. The terms of such agreements may contain multiple promised goods and services, which may include (i) licenses, or options to obtain licenses, to our intellectual property, and (ii) in certain cases, payment in connection with the manufacturing and delivery of clinical supply materials. Payments to us under these arrangements typically include one or more of the following: non-refundable, upfront license fees; option exercise fees; milestone payments; payments for clinical product supply, and royalties on future product sales. To date, our license agreement with Abbisko represents our only revenue-generating agreement.
We analyze our arrangements to assess whether such arrangements involve joint operating activities. For collaboration arrangements that are deemed to be within the scope of ASC Topic 808, Collaborative Arrangements, or ASC 808, we allocate the contract consideration between such joint operating activities and elements that are reflective of a vendor-customer relationship and, therefore, within the scope of ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606. Our policy is to recognize amounts allocated to joint operating activities as a reduction in research and development expense.
Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue when our customers obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps: (1) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligation(s) in the contract and determine whether these are distinct; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligation(s) in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy our performance obligation(s).
We must make significant judgments in our revenue recognition process, including identifying performance obligations in the contract, estimating the amount of variable consideration to include in the transaction price and allocating the transaction price to each performance obligation. In addition, arrangements that include rights to additional goods or services that are exercisable at a customer’s discretion are generally considered discretionary purchase options. We assess if these options provide a material right to the customer and if so, they are considered performance obligations.
Valuation of Embedded Derivative Liability. Our Hercules Loan Agreement contains a redemption feature that, upon an event of loan default, provides Hercules the option to accelerate and demand repayment of the debt, including a prepayment premium, or, at its election, charge additional contingent interest fees on any overdue interest or principal payments. We have concluded that the redemption feature meets the definition of a embedded derivative instrument and, accordingly, the fair value of this redemption feature is classified as a non-current liability on our consolidated balance sheet. Changes in the fair value of this derivative liability are recognized as a component of other income (expense), net in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss. The fair value is estimated by us each reporting date based, in part, on the results of third-party valuations, which are prepared based on a discounted cash flow model that considers the timing and probability of occurrence of a redemption upon an event of default, the potential amount of prepayment fees or contingent interest upon an event of default, discounted to present value at our risk-adjusted discount rate.
Purchase Accounting. Business combinations are accounted for under the acquisition method, whereby the total purchase price of an acquisition is allocated to the underlying identifiable net assets, based on their respective estimated fair values as of the acquisition date. Application of the acquisition method is complex and can require significant judgment. For example, to properly account for a business combination, management must determine the following:
•Whether the entity acquired constitutes a business or a set of assets. Management considers whether the majority (i.e. 90%) of the value of the acquired entity is concentrated in one asset or set of similar assets.
•The identification of the acquirer for accounting purposes, which may differ from the legal acquirer. To make this determination, management considers which entity's stockholders own a substantial majority of the voting rights in the combined organization, (ii) the composition of the initial board of directors of the combined organization and (iii) the senior management team of the combined organization.
•Identification of transactions that must be accounted for separately from the acquired entity. For example, severance and retention bonuses which were arranged for the benefit of the acquirer.
•The fair value of consideration transferred to effect the acquisition, including the value of shares of common stock issued and contingent consideration transferred;
•The accounting for equity compensation arrangement acquired, including the fair value of replacement awards and whether the value of these awards is ascribed to compensation for past services, which is included in the consideration transferred to effect the acquisition, or for future services, which is accounted for prospectively as stock-based compensation expense
•The fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, which requires management’s judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including assumptions with respect to future cash inflows and outflows, probabilities of success, discount rates, and asset lives, among other items.
Lease Accounting. We adopted the new lease standard effective January 1, 2019 as further described in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The new standard requires that all leases, with the exception of leases with a remaining term of less than 12 months, are accounted for as a right-of-use asset with an associated lease liability on the consolidated balance sheet. Management must apply judgment in the application of the new lease standard in the determination of the following:
•Whether a contract contains a lease. We consider whether the contract conveys the right to control an asset for a period of time in excess of one year. We also consider whether the counterparty has the right to substitute the asset without our consent, in which case the contract would generally not contain a lease.
•The term of the lease, which includes a determination of the probability that management will exercise its option to extend the lease.
•The discount rate applied to the lease liability, which in most cases is not a rate that is implicit and readily determinable within the lease. In this case, management calculates its incremental collateralized borrowing rate by reference to recent third-party borrowings, such as observed in its Hercules Loan Agreement, as adjusts this rate to match the term of the lease.
•The commencement date of the lease for accounting purposes, which occurs when the lessor provides management with unfettered access to the leased asset. Management also considers the condition of the leased asset at the inception of the lease agreement and whether unreimbursed costs incurred by management to enhance or construct the leased asset represent prepaid rent and are part of the right-of-use asset or represent leasehold improvements. Management considers the nature and significance of the improvements to the leased asset and whether these improvements were required by the lessor, which indicates that the improvements relate to the lessor's asset, or were at management's election, which indicates that the costs represent leasehold improvements.
Emerging Growth Company Status
The JOBS Act permits an “emerging growth company” such as us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected to “opt out” of this provision and, as a result, we will comply with new or revised accounting standards when they are required to be adopted by public companies that are not emerging growth companies.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.