Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
XOMA Corporation (“XOMA”), a Delaware corporation, is a biotech royalty aggregator. We have a sizable portfolio of economic rights to future potential milestone and royalty payments associated with partnered pre-commercial therapeutic candidates. Our portfolio was built through licensing our proprietary products and platforms from our legacy discovery and development business, combined with acquisitions of rights to future milestones and royalties that we have made since our royalty aggregator business model was implemented in 2017. Our drug royalty aggregator business is focused on early to mid-stage clinical assets primarily in Phase 1 and 2 with blockbuster potential licensed to large-cap partners. We expect that most of our future revenue will be based on payments we may receive for milestones and royalties related to these programs.
Significant Developments
Public Offering of Series A Preferred Shares
In December 2020, we sold 984,000 shares of 8.625% Series A cumulative, perpetual preferred stock (“Series A Preferred Stock”) at the price of $25.00 per share, through a public offering for aggregate gross proceeds of $24.6 million. Total offering costs of $2.0 million were offset against the proceeds from the sale of Series A Preferred Stock, for total net proceeds of $22.6 million. As of December 31, 2020, we held restricted cash of $2.1 million in a segregated account that may only be used to pay dividends on the Series A Preferred Stock. As of December 31, 2020, the current and non-current portion of restricted cash was $1.6 million and $0.5 million, respectively.
Royalty Purchase Agreements
Agenus Royalty Purchase Agreement
In November 2020, we earned $1.0 million pursuant to our Agenus Royalty Purchase Agreement upon the advancement of Merck’s MK-4830 into Phase 2 development.
Bioasis Royalty Purchase Agreement
In November 2020, we entered into the Second Bioasis Royalty Purchase Agreement with Bioasis. Under the Second Bioasis Royalty Purchase Agreement, we purchased potential future milestone and other payments, and royalty rights from Bioasis for product candidates that are being developed pursuant to a research collaboration and license agreement between Bioasis and Chiesi. We paid Bioasis $1.2 million upon closing of the Second Bioasis Royalty Purchase Agreement for the purchased rights.
License and Collaboration Agreements
Novartis
In October 2020, the first patient was dosed in Novartis International’s Phase 2 study of NIS793, an anti-TGFβ monoclonal antibody that we licensed to Novartis International, and we earned a $25.0 million milestone payment. As specified under the terms the Anti-TGFβ Antibody License Agreement, we received $17.7 million in cash and the remaining balance of $7.3 million was recognized as a reduction to our debt obligation to Novartis.
Takeda
In November 2020, the first patient was dosed in Takeda’s Phase 2 study of mezagitamab, and we earned a $2.0 million milestone payment from Takeda pursuant to our Takeda Collaboration Agreement.
Rezolute
In December 2017, we entered into a license and common stock purchase agreement with Rezolute, which was amended on March 30, 2018 and further amended on January 7, 2019. The license agreement was amended to eliminate the requirement that equity securities be issued to us upon the closing of the Qualified Financing (as defined in the license agreement) and to replace it with a requirement that Rezolute: (1) make five cash payments to us totaling $8.5 million following the closing of a Qualified Financing on or before specified staggered future dates through September 2020 (the “Future Cash Payments”); and (2) provide for early payment of the Future Cash Payments (only until $8.5 million was reached) by making cash payments to us equal to 15% of the net proceeds of each future financing following the closing of the Qualified Financing, with such payments to be credited against any remaining unpaid Future Cash Payments in reverse order of their future payment date. The common stock purchase agreement was amended to remove certain provisions related to the issuance of equity to us in accordance with the new provisions regarding the Future Cash Payments in the license agreement.
On March 31, 2020, we and Rezolute further amended the license agreement to extend the payment schedule for the remaining $2.6 million in Future Cash Payments. The amendment to the payment terms was in response to Rezolute’s need to preserve cash as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and was agreed to by us. The revised payment schedule did not impact the total amount due, but instead, spread the $2.6 million into seven quarterly payments to be paid through September 30, 2021. The amended license agreement required that in the event Rezolute completed a Qualified Financing at any time between March 31, 2020 and the date of the final payment, Rezolute would pay all amounts outstanding within fifteen days following the closing of the Qualified Financing.
In the first quarter of 2020, we received the scheduled $0.4 million Future Cash Payment from Rezolute. We evaluated Rezolute’s cash position as of March 31, 2020, including the estimated impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and determined payments scheduled beyond September 30, 2020 were unlikely to be collected unless Rezolute was able to obtain additional funding, which had not occurred as of March 31, 2020. Therefore, for the three months ended March 31, 2020, we recorded $1.4 million in bad debt expense related to the Future Cash Payments. We received the scheduled $0.4 million and $0.4 million Future Cash Payments from Rezolute in the second and third quarters of 2020, respectively.
On October 9, 2020, Rezolute completed a private placement of its equity securities with gross proceeds of $41.0 million, which was considered a Qualified Financing event under the Third Amendment. The Qualified Financing resulted in acceleration of the remaining receivables of $1.4 million due from Rezolute, and we received the entire amount in October 2020.
Zydus
In March 2020, we entered into a license agreement (the “Zydus Agreement”) with Cadila Healthcare Limited (“Zydus”) under which we granted Zydus an exclusive royalty-bearing license to our anti-interleukin-2 (“IL-2”) monoclonal antibodies, including mAb19, for Zydus to develop and commercialize drug candidates in India, Brazil, Mexico and certain other emerging markets. We retain rights in all other territories, subject to a Zydus right of first negotiation. Under the terms of the Zydus Agreement, Zydus is responsible for the development and commercialization of IL-2 based immuno-oncology drug candidates. XOMA is entitled to receive up to $0.5 million in development and regulatory milestone payments, up to $23.5 million in commercial milestone payments, and mid single-digit to low teens royalties from Zydus. We are also eligible to share out-licensing revenue received by Zydus should Zydus (sub)license to third parties, which share is tiered based on clinical trial stage and ranges from a low to mid double-digit percentage rate.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to pose risks to our business as clinical trials industry-wide have slowed. Our business is dependent on the continued development and commercialization efforts of our licensees and our royalty agreement counterparties and their licensees. We have been monitoring and continue to monitor our portfolio programs for potential delays in underlying research programs and elections of our partners to continue or cease development. Delays in clinical trials and underlying research programs may lead to delayed revenue from milestones from our licensees and royalty agreement counterparties or, if certain research programs are discontinued, we may recognize impairment charges for our royalty receivables. COVID-19, the related variants, and the timing of vaccine distribution may impact our underlying programs in a variety of ways which are unknown in length and scope at this time.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The accompanying discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements and the related disclosures, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, assumptions and judgments described below that have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements, including those related to legal contingencies, revenue recognized under units-of-revenue method and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Accounting assumptions and estimates are inherently uncertain and actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements, we believe the following policies to be the most critical to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations because they require us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue from all contracts with customers according to Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers ("ASC 606"), except for contracts that are within the scope of other standards, such as leases, insurance, collaboration arrangements and financial instruments. We recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services.
We have certain license arrangements in the scope of ASC 606. The terms of these agreements may contain multiple performance obligations, which primarily include transfer of our licenses. Prior to recognizing revenue, we make estimates of the transaction price, including variable consideration that is subject to a constraint. Amounts of variable consideration are included in the transaction price to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur and when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. Variable consideration may include payments based upon the achievement of specified milestones, and royalty payments based on product sales derived from the license agreements. The royalty payments will be recognized as revenue when the related sales occur, as far as there are no unsatisfied performance obligations remaining. If there are multiple distinct performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price to each distinct performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. All licenses we grant to customers are unique, as each uses a specific technology of XOMA or is geared towards a specific unique product candidate. Thus, there is no observable evidence of standalone selling price for the licenses. The standalone selling price is generally determined using a valuation approach based on discounted cash flow analysis. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we utilize judgement to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time. Under our license agreements, the nature of the combined performance obligation is the granting of licenses to the customers. As such, we recognize revenue related to the combined performance obligation upon transfer of the license to the customers or completion of the transfer of related materials and services (i.e., point in time).
Sale of Future Revenue Streams
We have sold our rights to receive certain milestones and royalties on product sales. In the circumstance where we have sold our rights to future milestones and royalties under a license agreement and also maintain limited continuing involvement in the arrangement (but not significant continuing involvement in the generation of the cash flows that are due to the purchaser), we defer recognition of the proceeds we received for the sale of milestone or royalty streams and recognize such unearned revenue as revenue under the units-of-revenue method over the life of the underlying license agreement. Under the units-of-revenue method, amortization for a reporting period is calculated by computing a ratio of
the proceeds received from the purchaser to the total payments expected to be made to the purchaser over the term of the agreement, and then applying that ratio to the period’s cash payment.
Estimating the total payments expected to be received by the purchaser over the term of such arrangements requires management to use subjective estimates and assumptions. Changes to our estimate of the payments expected to be made to the purchaser over the term of such arrangements could have a material effect on the amount of revenues recognized in any particular period.
Stock-based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense for stock options and other stock awards is estimated at the grant date based on the award’s fair value-based measurement. The valuation of stock-based compensation awards is determined at the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model (the “Black-Scholes Model”). This model requires highly complex and subjective inputs, such as the expected term of the option and expected volatility. These inputs are subjective and generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop. Our current estimate of volatility is based on the historical volatility of our stock price. To the extent volatility in our stock price increases in the future, our estimates of the fair value of options granted in the future could increase, thereby increasing stock-based compensation cost recognized in future periods. To establish an estimate of expected term, we consider the vesting period and contractual period of the award and our historical experience of stock option exercises, post-vesting cancellations and volatility. The risk-free rate is based on the yield available on United States Treasury zero-coupon issues. Forfeitures are recognized as they occur.
We review our valuation assumptions quarterly and, as a result, we likely will update our valuation assumptions used to value stock-based awards granted in future periods utilizing current data. In the future, as additional empirical evidence regarding these input estimates becomes available, we may change or refine our approach of deriving these input estimates. These changes could impact our fair value-based measurement of stock options granted in the future. Changes in the fair value-based measurement of stock awards could materially impact our operating results.
For our stock options and service-based awards, we recognize compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the award’s vesting period.
Purchase of Rights to Future Milestones and Royalties
We have purchased rights to receive a portion of certain future developmental, regulatory and commercial sales milestones, and royalties on sales of products currently in clinical development. We acquired such rights from various entities and recorded the amount paid for these rights as long-term royalty receivables. We have accounted for the purchased rights as a financial asset in accordance with ASC 310, Receivables.
We account for milestone and royalty rights related to developmental pipeline products on a non-accrual basis using the cost recovery method. These developmental pipeline products are non-commercialized, non-approved products that require FDA or other regulatory approval, and thus have uncertain cash flows. The related receivable balance is classified as noncurrent since no payments are probable to be received in the near term. Under the cost recovery method, any milestone or royalty received is recorded as a direct reduction of the recorded receivable balance. When the recorded receivable balance has been fully collected, any additional amounts collected are recognized as revenue.
We review public information on clinical trials, press releases and updates from our partners regularly to identify any impairment indicators or changes in expected recoverability of the long-term receivable asset. If expected future cash flows discounted to the current period are less than the carrying value of the asset, we will record impairment. The impairment will be recognized by reducing the financial asset to an amount that represents the present value of the most recent estimate of cash flows. No impairment was recorded as of December 31, 2020.
Results of Operations
Revenues
Total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019 were as follows (in thousands):
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
Revenue from contracts with customers includes upfront fees, milestone payments and royalties related to the out-licensing of our product candidates and technologies. The primary components of revenue from contracts with customers in 2020 was $25.0 million in milestone revenue earned under our Anti-TGFβ Antibody License Agreement with Novartis International and $2.0 million earned under our collaboration agreement with Takeda. The primary components of revenue from contracts with customers in 2019 was $14.0 million recognized under our license agreement and common stock purchase agreement with Rezolute and $2.5 million in revenue earned from a one-time payment under our license agreement with Janssen.
The generation of future revenues related to licenses, milestones, and royalties is dependent on the achievement of milestones or product sales by our existing licensees. Due to the anticipated impact of COVID-19 on clinical trial activities of our licensees, potential milestone payments may be delayed.
Revenue recognized under units-of-revenue method
Revenues recognized under the units-of-revenue method include the amortization of unearned revenue from the sale of royalty interests to HealthCare Royalty Partners II, L.P (“HCRP”) in 2016. The increase in 2020 compared with 2019 was due to increased sales of products underlying the agreements with HCRP.
The generation of future revenues related to licenses, milestones, and royalties is dependent on the achievement of milestones or product sales by our existing licensees. Milestone payments earned in 2020 are not indicative of anticipated milestones in future periods.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development (“R&D”) expenses were $0.2 million in 2020, compared with $1.3 million in 2019. The decrease of $1.1 million in 2020, as compared with 2019, was primarily due to a $0.5 million decrease in salary and related expenses as a result of a shift in employee duties that led to a recategorization of an employee from R&D to a general and administrative (“G&A”) department and a $0.5 million decrease in license fee expenses.
We do not expect to incur substantial R&D expenses in 2021 due to the focus on our royalty aggregator business model.
General and Administrative Expenses
G&A expenses include salaries and related personnel costs, facilities costs and professional fees. In 2020, G&A expenses were $16.8 million compared with $21.0 million in 2019.
The decrease of $4.2 million in 2020 as compared with 2019 was primarily due to a $3.9 million decrease in facilities costs due to the termination of our legacy leases and a $1.2 million decrease in salary and related expenses due
to a 2019 separation agreement. These decreases were partially offset by a $1.4 million increase in consulting and legal costs.
To support our royalty aggregator business model, we engage third parties to assist in our evaluation of potential acquisitions of milestone and royalty streams. While we expect our personnel related costs to be comparable in 2021 with 2020, consulting expenses may increase in response to an increase in the volume of acquisition targets evaluated or completed.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest Expense
Amortization of debt issuance costs and discounts are included in interest expense. Interest expense is shown below for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
The decrease in interest expense compared with 2019 is primarily due to lower interest rates and decreased loan balances. In October 2020, in connection with the achievement of a clinical development milestone, $7.3 million of the $25.0 million milestone payment received was recognized as a reduction to the Novartis debt obligation.
We expect our interest expense to decrease in 2021 due to the reduction in our outstanding loan balances. If market interest rates increase in the near term, or if we elect to obtain additional financing, our interest expense may increase.
Other Income, Net
The following table shows the activity in other income (expense), net for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
We own equity securities consisting of shares of Rezolute’s common stock which are remeasured at fair value at each reporting period. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we remeasured the fair value of the equity securities and recognized gains of $1.0 million and $0.3 million, respectively.
The decrease in investment income for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2019 is due to lower rates of return on our cash deposits.
We were party to four sublease agreements in 2019. As a result of the termination of our legacy leases in December 2019, we are no longer party to any subleases, resulting in no sublease income for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same period of 2019.
Total other income, net for 2020 decreased by $2.6 million as compared to 2019 primarily due to the $3.0 million decrease in sublease income.
Provision for Income Taxes
We recorded a $1.5 million income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of the CARES Act, which was enacted on March 27, 2020. The CARES Act permits us to carry back losses from 2018 to offset income in 2017 resulting in an income tax receivable. We had no provision for income tax for the year ended December 31, 2019 since we incurred net operating losses.
We continue to maintain a full valuation allowance against our remaining net deferred tax assets. We had a total of $5.9 million of gross unrecognized tax benefits, none of which would affect the effective tax rate upon realization. We do not expect our unrecognized tax benefits to change significantly over the next twelve months.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table summarizes our unrestricted cash, our working capital and our cash flow activities for each of the periods presented (in thousands):
Cash Provided by (Used in) Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $10.1 million was primarily due to $13.3 million net income and $4.0 million non-cash stock-based compensation, partially offset by the $7.3 million non-cash portion of the Novartis milestone revenue.
Net cash used in operating activities in 2019 of $0.3 million was primarily due to the $2.0 million net loss incurred.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $0.2 million was due to the purchase of milestone and royalty rights of $1.2 million in connection with the Second Bioasis Royalty Purchase Agreement in November 2020, partially offset by $1.0 million milestone payment received in connection with the Agenus Royalty Purchase Agreement.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $19.3 million was due to the purchases of milestone and royalty rights of $19.3 million in connection with the Bioasis Royalty Purchase Agreement
executed in February 2019, the Aronora Royalty Purchase Agreement executed in April 2019, and the Palo Royalty Purchase Agreement executed in September 2019.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $19.8 million was primarily due to the receipt of net cash proceeds of $22.6 million from the public offering of Series A Preferred Stock and $2.4 million net cash provided from the exercise of stock options after related tax payments, partially offset by $5.3 million cash used in the principal payments of debt.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $30.5 million was primarily related to the sale of common stock issued under the 2019 Rights Offering for total net proceeds of $21.9 million and proceeds received under the SVB loan agreement of $9.5 million.
Public Offering of Series A Preferred Shares
In December 2020, we sold 984,000 shares of 8.625% Series A cumulative, perpetual preferred stock at the price of $25.00 per share, through a public offering for aggregate gross proceeds of $24.6 million. Total offering costs of $2.0 million were offset against the proceeds from the sale of Series A Preferred Stock, for net proceeds of $22.6 million. Holders of our Series A preferred stock are entitled to receive, when and as declared by our Board of Directors, out of funds legally available for the payment of dividends, cumulative cash dividends at the rate of 8.625% of the $25.00 liquidation preference per year (equivalent to $2.15625 per year). Dividends on the Series A preferred stock will accumulate and be cumulative from, and including, the date of original issue by us of the Series A preferred stock. Dividends will be payable in arrears on or about the 15th day of January, April, July and October beginning on or about April 15, 2021. As of December 31, 2020, we held restricted cash of $2.1 million in a segregated account that may only be used to pay dividends on the Series A Preferred Stock. As of December 31, 2020, the current and non-current portion of restricted cash was $1.6 million and $0.5 million, respectively.
Rights Offering 2019
In November 2019, we initiated a rights offering to raise $22.0 million through the distribution of subscription rights to holders of our common stock and Series X and Series Y preferred stock. In December 2019, we sold 1,000,000 shares of our common stock at the subscription price of $22.00 per share for aggregate gross proceeds of $22.0 million. Total offering costs of $0.2 million were offset against the proceeds from the sale of common stock, for total net proceeds of $21.8 million.
Silicon Valley Bank Loan Agreement
Under our Loan Agreement with SVB, upon our request, SVB made advances available to us up to $20.0 million. In March 2019, we and SVB amended the Loan Agreement to extend the draw period from March 31, 2019 to March 31, 2020. In connection with the amendment, we issued a second warrant to SVB which is exercisable in whole or in part for up to an aggregate of 4,845 shares of common stock with an exercise price of $14.71 per share. The warrant may be exercised on a cashless basis and is exercisable within 10 years from the date of issuance or upon the consummation of certain acquisitions of XOMA. As of December 31, 2020, we had an outstanding principal balance of $12.2 million under the Loan Agreement, of which $8.1 million was classified as current portion of long-term debt.
2018 ATM Agreement
In December 2018, we entered into an At The Market Issuance Sales Agreement (the “2018 ATM Agreement”) with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC (“HCW”), under which we may offer and sell from time to time at our sole discretion shares of our common stock through HCW as our sales agent, in an aggregate amount not to exceed $30.0 million. HCW may sell the shares by any method permitted by law deemed to be an “at the market” offering as defined in Rule 415 of the Securities Act, and will use its commercially reasonable efforts consistent with its normal trading and sales practices to sell the shares up to the amount specified. We are required to pay HCW a commission of up to 3% of the gross proceeds of any shares of common stock sold under the 2018 ATM Agreement. We have not sold any shares of common stock under the 2018 ATM Agreement.
* * *
We have incurred significant operating losses since our inception and have an accumulated deficit of $1.2 billion at December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had $84.2 million and $2.1 million in unrestricted and restricted cash, respectively, which will enable us to maintain our operations for a period of at least 12 months following the filing date of this report. As of December 31, 2020, the current and non-current portion of restricted cash was $1.6 million and $0.5 million, respectively.
We have taken and continue to take steps to manage our resources by reducing and/or deferring certain discretionary expenditures to mitigate the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Future impacts of COVID-19, related variants, and vaccine distribution may require further actions to improve our cash position, which may include reducing or delaying acquisitions of additional royalty and milestone rights or obtaining additional funds through debt arrangements, the 2018 ATM Agreement, or other equity issuances. Our ability to raise additional capital in the equity and debt markets, should we choose to do so, is dependent on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the market demand for our common stock, which itself is subject to a number of development and business risks and uncertainties, our creditworthiness and the uncertainty that we would be able to raise such additional capital at a price or on terms that are favorable to us. In addition, our ability to raise additional funds may be adversely impacted by deteriorating global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to and volatility in the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Commitments and Contingencies
Although operations are influenced by general economic conditions, we do not believe inflation had a material impact on financial results for the periods presented. We believe that we are not dependent on materials or other resources that would be significantly impacted by inflation or changing economic conditions in the foreseeable future.
Collaborative Agreements, Royalties and Milestone Payments
We have committed to make potential future milestone payments and legal fees to third parties as part of licensing and development programs. Payments under these agreements become due and payable only upon the achievement of certain developmental, regulatory and commercial milestones by our licensees. Because it is uncertain if and when these milestones will be achieved, such contingencies, aggregating up to $7.6 million (assuming one product per contract meets all milestones) have not been recorded on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020. We are unable to
determine precisely when and if our payment obligations under the agreements will become due as these obligations are based on milestone events, the achievement of which is subject to a significant number of risks and uncertainties.
Lease Agreements
In December 2019, we terminated two of our operating leases in Berkeley, California and were fully released from any further payment obligations. We continue to lease one administrative facility in Emeryville, California under an operating lease expiring in February 2023. The lease requires us to pay taxes, insurance, maintenance and minimum lease payments.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments. ASU 2016-13 replaced the incurred loss impairment methodology under current GAAP with a methodology that reflects expected credit losses and requires consideration of a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to inform credit loss estimates. ASU 2016-13 requires use of a forward-looking expected credit loss model for accounts receivables, loans, and other financial instruments. Adoption of the standard requires using a modified retrospective approach through a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the effective date to align existing credit loss methodology with the new standard. Subsequent to issuing ASU 2016-13, the FASB issued ASU 2018-19, Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses, or ASU 2018-19, for the purpose of clarifying certain aspects of ASU 2016-13. In May 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-05, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Targeted Transition Relief, or ASU 2019-05, to provide entities with more flexibility in applying the fair value option on adoption of the credit impairment standard. ASU 2018-19 and ASU 2019-05 have the same effective date and transition requirements as ASU 2016-13. ASU 2016-13 will be effective for all entities except public companies that are not smaller reporting companies for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within those fiscal years, using a modified retrospective approach. Early adoption is permitted. We plan to adopt ASU 2016-13 and related updates as of January 1, 2023. We are evaluating the impact of adopting this new accounting guidance on our consolidated financial statements.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820) (“ASU 2018-13”), which modifies, removes and adds certain disclosure requirements on fair value measurements based on the FASB Concepts Statement, Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting-Chapter 8: Notes to Financial Statements. The ASU is effective for our interim and annual reporting periods during the year ending December 31, 2020, and all annual and interim reporting period thereafter. The amendments on changes in unrealized gains and losses, the range and weighted average of significant unobservable inputs used to develop Level 3 fair value measurements and the narrative description of measurement uncertainty should be applied prospectively for only the most recent interim or annual period presented in the initial fiscal year of adoption. All other amendments should be applied retrospectively to all periods presented upon their effective date. Early adoption is permitted upon issuance of ASU 2018-13. An entity is permitted to early adopt any removed or modified disclosures upon issuance of ASU 2018-13 and delay adoption of the additional disclosures until their effective date. We early adopted the guidance related to removal of disclosures upon issuance of this ASU and adopted the deferred provisions as permitted under the ASU in the first quarter of 2020. The adoption of ASU 2018-13 did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In November 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-18, Collaborative Arrangements (Topic 808) “Clarifying the Interaction between Topic 808 and Topic 606,” which requires transactions in collaborative arrangements to be accounted for under ASC 606 if the counterparty is a customer for a good or service that is a distinct unit of account. The new standard also precludes an entity from presenting consideration from transactions with a collaborator that is not a customer together with revenue recognized from contracts with customers. The ASU is effective for our interim and annual reporting periods during the year ending December 31, 2020, and all annual and interim reporting period thereafter. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than an entity’s adoption date of Topic 606. This ASU requires retrospective adoption to the date we adopted ASC 606, January 1, 2018, by recognizing a cumulative-effect adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings of the earliest annual period presented. We may elect to apply the ASU retrospectively either to all contracts or
only to contracts that are not completed at the date it initially applied ASC 606. We adopted ASU 2018-18 as of January 1, 2020. The adoption of ASU 2018-18 did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. The amendments in ASU 2019-12 are intended to simplify various aspects related to accounting for income taxes. ASU 2019-12 removes certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and also clarifies and amends existing guidance to improve consistent application. ASU 2019-12 is effective for us beginning January 1, 2021. We are evaluating the impact of ASU 2019-12, but do not expect adopting this new accounting guidance will have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848): Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting. These amendments provide temporary optional guidance to ease the potential burden in accounting for reference rate reform. The ASU provides optional expedients and exceptions for applying generally accepted accounting principles to contract modifications and hedging relationships, subject to meeting certain criteria, that reference LIBOR or another reference rate expected to be discontinued. It is intended to help stakeholders during the global market-wide reference rate transition period. The guidance is effective for all entities as of March 12, 2020 through December 31, 2022 and can be adopted as of any date from the beginning of an interim period that includes or is subsequent to March 12, 2020. We are evaluating the impact of adopting this new accounting guidance on our consolidated financial statements.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivative and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40). This ASU reduces the number of accounting models for convertible debt instruments and convertible preferred stock and amends the guidance for the derivatives scope exception for contracts in an entity’s own equity to reduce form-over-substance-based accounting conclusion. In addition, this ASU improves and amends the related EPS guidance. These amendments are effective for us for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim period within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Adoption is either a modified retrospective method or a fully retrospective method of transition. We are currently evaluating the impacts of the provisions of ASU 2020-06 and we do not expect this ASU to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, including the use of structured finance, special purpose entities or variable interest entities.