Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us” “we” or “NextGen” refer to NextGen Acquisition Corporation. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those that will be set forth in our preliminary prospectus/proxy statement to be included in a Registration Statement on Form S-4 that we will file with the SEC relating to our proposed business combination with Xos.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on July 29, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a Business Combination. Our sponsor is NextGen Sponsor LLC, a Cayman Island exempted company.
The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on October 6, 2020. On October 9, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 35,000,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $350.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $19.8 million, inclusive of approximately $12.3 million in deferred underwriting commissions. On November 13, 2020, the underwriters partially exercised the over-allotment option and on November 17, 2020, purchased an additional 2,500,000 Over-Allotment Units, generating gross proceeds of $25.0 million, and incurred additional offering costs of approximately $1.4 million in underwriting fees (inclusive of approximately $875,000 in deferred underwriting fees).
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 6,000,000 Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant with our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $9.0 million. Simultaneously with the closing of the Over-allotment on November 17, 2020, the Company consummated the second closing of the Private Placement, resulting in the purchase of an aggregate of an additional 333,334 Private Placement Warrants by the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $500,000.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Over-Allotment and the Private Placement, $375.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement were placed in a Trust Account with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee and invested in United States government treasury bills with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds investing solely in U.S. Treasuries and meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or October 9, 2022, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (2) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than 10 business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses and which interest shall be net of taxes payable), divided by the number of then issued and outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any); and (3) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Proposed Xos Business Combination
On February 21, 2021, we entered into the Merger Agreement, which provides that, among other things and upon the terms and subject to the conditions thereof, the following transactions will occur:
(i) at the Closing, upon the terms and subject to the conditions of the Merger Agreement and in accordance with the DGCL, Merger Sub will merge with and into Xos, the separate corporate existence of Merger Sub will cease and Xos will be the surviving corporation and a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company;
(ii) as a result of the Merger, among other things and after giving effect to the Company Recapitalization (as defined in the Merger Agreement), all outstanding shares of Xos common stock or resulting from the conversion of preferred stock of Xos into common stock of Xos, together with shares of Xos common stock reserved in respect of the Xos Awards that will be converted into awards based on new Xos common stock, will be cancelled in exchange for the right to receive an aggregate of 127,626,116 shares of new Xos common stock (at a deemed value of $10.00 per share), which, in the case of Xos Awards, will be shares underlying awards based on new Xos common stock representing a pre-transaction equity value of Xos of $1,276,261,160. The portion of the Aggregate Merger Consideration reflecting the conversion of the Xos Awards is calculated assuming that all new Xos Options are net-settled (although new Xos Options may by their terms be cash exercised, resulting in additional dilution); and
(iii) upon the effective time of the Domestication, we will immediately be renamed “Xos, Inc.” or such other name as agreed to by NextGen and Xos prior to Closing.
On February 21, 2021, concurrently with the execution of the Merger Agreement, we entered into the Subscription Agreements, pursuant to, and on the terms and subject to the conditions of which, the PIPE Investors have collectively subscribed for 22,000,000 shares of the Company’s Common Stock for an aggregate purchase price equal to $220,000,000, a portion of which is expected to be funded by one or more affiliates of our Sponsor and certain additional investors (which may include mutual funds and existing shareholders of NextGen). 2,000,000 of the shares of the NextGen Common Stock to be sold in the PIPE Investment are shares owned by certain Xos officers. The PIPE Investment will be consummated substantially concurrently with the Closing.
Refer to the our Current Report on Form 8-K, filed with the SEC on February 21, 2021 for additional information.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception through December 31, 2020 related to our formation, the preparation for the Initial Public Offering, and since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from July 29, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of approximately $352,000, which consisted of approximately $360,000 in general and administrative costs, including $30,000 of general and administrative costs to related party, partially offset by net gains from cash equivalents held in Trust Account of approximately $8,000.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $821,000 in our operating bank account and working capital of approximately $1.2 million. The deferred underwriting commissions of approximately $13.1 million are not payable from working capital, but rather will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, To date, our liquidity needs were satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from our Sponsor to cover certain expenses on our behalf in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares, the loan under a promissory note from our Sponsor of $300,000 and the net proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. We fully repaid the balance of the promissory note on October 8, 2020. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our officers, directors and Initial Shareholders may, but are not obligated to, provide us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”).
On March 29, 2021, we issued a promissory note, pursuant to which we may borrow up to an aggregate principal amount of $1,000,000. The promissory note is non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of (i) October 9, 2022 and (ii) the completion of our initial business combination. To date, there was $0 outstanding under the promissory note.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or our officers and directors to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
We continue to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an administrative services agreement to pay our Sponsor $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to us.
Critical Accounting Policies
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, on December 31, 2020, 35,802,473 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net loss per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of shares of ordinary shares outstanding during the period excluding ordinary shares subject to forfeiture. An aggregate of 35,802,473 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption on December 31, 2020 has been excluded from the calculation of basic loss per ordinary share, since such shares, if redeemed, only participate in their pro rata share of the trust earnings. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering (including the consummation of the Over-Allotment Units) and Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 18,833,334 ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted loss per share, since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events. As a result, diluted net loss per ordinary share is the same as basic net loss per ordinary share for the period presented.
We apply the two-class method in calculating income (loss) per ordinary share. Net income (loss) per ordinary share, basic and diluted for Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is calculated by dividing the proportionate share of income or loss on Investment held by the Trust Account, net of applicable franchise and income taxes, by the weighted average number of shares of Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption outstanding since original issuance.
Net income (loss) per ordinary share, basic and diluted for non-redeemable ordinary share is calculated by dividing net income (loss) less income attributable to Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption by the weighted average number of shares of non-redeemable ordinary shares outstanding for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Our management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Item 7.A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosure About Market Risk.
We are a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act and are not required to provide the information otherwise required under this item.