Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” included in this Form 10-K.
This section contains forward-looking statements that are based on management’s current expectations, estimates and projections about our business and operations, and involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those currently anticipated and expressed in such forward-looking statements because of various factors, including those described in the sections titled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019. Discussions of 2018 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2019 and 2018 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Overview of Business
We are a global provider of highly engineered tubular services, tubular fabrication and specialty well construction and well intervention solutions to the oil and gas industry and have been in business for over 80 years. We provide our services and products to leading exploration and production companies in both offshore and onshore environments, with a focus on complex and technically demanding wells.
We conduct our business through three operating segments:
•Tubular Running Services. The TRS segment provides tubular running services globally. Internationally, the TRS segment operates in the majority of the offshore oil and gas markets and also in several onshore regions with operations in approximately 40 countries on six continents. In the U.S., the TRS segment provides services in the active onshore oil and gas drilling regions, including the Permian Basin, Eagle Ford Shale, Haynesville Shale, Marcellus Shale and Utica Shale, as well as in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico. Our customers in these markets are primarily large exploration and production companies, including international oil and gas companies, national oil and gas companies, major independents and other oilfield service companies.
•Tubulars. The Tubulars segment designs, manufactures and distributes connectors and casing attachments for large OD heavy wall pipe. Additionally, the Tubulars segment sells large OD pipe originally manufactured by various pipe mills, as plain end or fully fabricated with proprietary welded or thread-direct connector solutions and provides specialized fabrication and welding services in support of offshore deepwater projects, including drilling and production risers, flowlines and pipeline end terminations, as well as long-length tubular assemblies up to 400 feet in length. The Tubulars segment also specializes in the development, manufacture and supply of proprietary drilling tool solutions that focus on improving drilling productivity through eliminating or mitigating traditional drilling operational risks.
•Cementing Equipment. The CE segment provides specialty equipment to enhance the safety and efficiency of rig operations. It provides specialized equipment, services and products utilized in the construction, completion and abandonment of the wellbore in both onshore and offshore environments. The product portfolio includes casing accessories that serve to improve the installation of casing, centralization and wellbore zonal isolation, as well as enhance cementing operations through advance wiper plug and float equipment technology. Abandonment solutions are primarily used to isolate portions of the wellbore through the setting of barriers downhole to allow for rig evacuation in case of inclement weather, maintenance work on other rig equipment, squeeze cementing, pressure testing within the wellbore, hydraulic fracturing and temporary and permanent abandonments. These offerings improve operational efficiencies and limit non-productive time if unscheduled events are encountered at the wellsite.
How We Generate Our Revenue
The majority of our services revenue is derived primarily from providing tubular services, which involves the handling and installation of multiple joints of pipe to establish a cased wellbore and the installation of smaller diameter pipe inside a cased wellbore. We also generate services revenue from our drilling tool offerings, as well as from well construction and well intervention services.
In contrast, our products revenue is derived from sales of certain products, including large OD pipe connectors and large OD pipe manufactured by third parties directly to external customers, as well as from our well construction and well intervention product offerings.
In addition, our customers typically reimburse us for transportation costs that we incur in connection with transporting our products and equipment from our staging areas to the customers’ job sites.
Outlook
The full impact of the COVID-19 outbreak and the resulting reduction in oil sector activity continues to evolve daily. However, with ongoing mass vaccination programs beginning to be deployed, we expect the market to respond positively throughout 2021. As COVID-19 responses have normalized and the OPEC and Russia production cut agreements have remained in place, demand is expected to continue to draw down stockpiles of supply. While it is uncertain how long depressed energy demand will last, we anticipate international and U.S. offshore demand for our products and services to moderately increase from current levels as more customer projects come back online in 2021. Exploration and development spending continues to shift toward offshore and internationally focused projects, while U.S. land activity is anticipated to have a moderate recovery over the coming year. Activity in the deepwater offshore market is expected to improve as delayed projects resume and new projects commence throughout 2021.
As COVID-19 has increased challenges relating to personnel logistics, our customer base has accelerated to our efficiency-based integrated technology that remove personnel from the rig site. With this, we continue to focus on deploying this differentiated technology across all markets with a focus on improving market share, asset utilization, and profitability.
For our Tubular Running Services segment, we expect the international offshore markets to see moderate growth in line with market trends, U.S. offshore to remain stable, and U.S. onshore operations to rebound slightly from 2020 as demand for oil improves. This business is typically associated with higher margin projects and will continue to be a vehicle to pull through additional product lines and revenue sources. Competitive pricing is likely to persist that could serve to limit our growth; however, we expect to maintain market share gains from previous years. Our client base continues to expand as drilling contractors and integrated service providers look for differentiated technology and efficiency-based solutions.
The Tubulars segment is primarily driven by the specialized needs of our customers and the timing of projects, specifically in North America. We also expect to benefit from increased sales in select international markets. We expect our drilling tools service line to grow as we invest further in new technology and continue to gain share in key markets. Similarly, our tubulars product line is anticipated to benefit from greater demand during 2021 than that which was seen during 2020 as offshore activity increases.
The Cementing Equipment segment is expected to see incremental improvement year-over-year in offshore markets. U.S. onshore products and services are anticipated to remain relatively flat relative to market trends. As in 2020, the growth of Cementing Equipment into international markets is expected to again see year-over-year growth as equipment is deployed. The U.S. offshore market is expected to see an increase from market share gains.
Overall, management anticipates that the industry and economic impact of COVID-19 and OPEC’s actions to continue to impact our operations in 2021, the degree to which remains uncertain. We will continue our efforts to expand our newer service and product lines that have been historically weighted to the U.S. offshore market, focusing on international markets which have been historically underrepresented by the Cementing Equipment and
Tubulars segments. We will also place a strong focus on operational efficiency gains and prioritizing projects that improve market share and profitability. As we move through this challenging market, we are continuing to see the results of our profitability improvement project which has increased efficiencies and reduced costs. We will continue to monitor the market to ensure we are right sized to execute customer projects and maximize profitability. We remain in a strong position financially with a significant cash balance relative to our debt.
How We Evaluate Our Operations
We use a number of financial and operational measures to routinely analyze and evaluate the performance of our business, including revenue, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA margin and safety performance.
Revenue
We analyze our revenue growth by comparing actual monthly revenue to our internal projections for each month to assess our performance. We also assess incremental changes in our monthly revenue across our operating segments to identify potential areas for improvement.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest income, net, depreciation and amortization, income tax benefit or expense, asset impairments, gain or loss on disposal of assets, foreign currency gain or loss, equity-based compensation, unrealized and realized gain or loss, the effects of the TRA, other non-cash adjustments and other charges or credits. Adjusted EBITDA margin reflects our Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of our revenue. We review Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin on both a consolidated basis and on a segment basis. We use Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin to assess our financial performance because it allows us to compare our operating performance on a consistent basis across periods by removing the effects of our capital structure (such as varying levels of interest expense), asset base (such as depreciation and amortization), items outside the control of our management team (such as income tax and foreign currency exchange rates) and other charges outside the normal course of business. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered as an alternative to net income (loss), operating income (loss), cash flow from operating activities or any other measure of financial performance presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S. (“GAAP”).
The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin to net loss for each of the periods presented (in thousands):
(1) Comprised of Equity-based compensation expense (2020: $11,010; 2019: $11,280; 2018: $10,621), Mergers and acquisition expense (2020: none; 2019: none; 2018: $58), Unrealized and realized gains (2020: $1,378; 2019: $228; 2018: $1,682), Investigation-related matters (2020: $1,868; 2019: $3,838; 2018: $5,454) and Other adjustments (2020: $616; 2019: $957; 2018: none).
Safety Performance
Safety is one of our primary core values. See Item 1 - Business under the heading “Safety” included in this Form 10-K for additional discussion.
Results of Operations
The following table presents our consolidated results for the periods presented (in thousands):
(1) Please see Note 11-Related Party Transactions in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue. Revenue from external customers, excluding intersegment sales, for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased by $189.6 million, or 32.7%, to $390.4 million from $579.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Revenue decreased across all of our segments as a result of the impact of COVID-19. Revenue for our segments is discussed separately below under the heading “Operating Segment Results.”
Cost of revenue, exclusive of depreciation and amortization. Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased by $104.9 million, or 25.2%, to $312.1 million from $417.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to lower activity levels across all segments, as well as due to productivity and cost efficiency actions.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased by $38.1 million, or 31.6%, to $82.3 million from $120.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, due to cost savings associated with personnel reductions.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by $22.6 million, or 24.4%, to $70.2 million from $92.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, as a result of a lower depreciable asset base.
Goodwill impairment. We recognized a goodwill impairment of $57.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a goodwill impairment of $111.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. See Note 1-Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Severance and other charges (credits), net. Severance and other charges (credits), net for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased by $17.4 million to $33.0 million from $50.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Severance and other charges (credits), net for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of fixed asset impairment charges of $15.7 million, intangible asset impairments of $4.7 million, inventory impairments of $0.4 million and severance and other costs of $12.3 million, primarily driven by COVID-19-related activity disruptions and customer spending cuts in response to falling oil prices. Severance and other charges (credits), net for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted of fixed asset impairment charges of $32.9 million, intangible asset impairments of $3.3 million, inventory impairments of $4.5 million and severance and other costs of $9.7 million, primarily made in conjunction with our business review conducted during the fourth quarter of 2019. See Note 17-Severance and Other Charges (Credits), net in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Foreign currency gain (loss). Foreign currency loss for the year ended December 31, 2020, decreased by $2.0 million to $0.2 million from $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The change in foreign currency results year-over-year was primarily driven by strengthening of the U.S. dollar in the current period as compared to the prior year period, particularly in comparison to the Norwegian krone.
Income tax expense (benefit). Income tax expense (benefit) for the year ended December 31, 2020, changed by $27.9 million to a benefit of $4.1 million from an expense of $23.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The effective income tax rate was 2.5% and (11.2)% for the years ended December 31, 2020, and December 31, 2019, respectively. The change was due primarily to a significant tax expense recorded in 2019 to record a valuation allowance against certain indefinite-lived intangibles.
Operating Segment Results
The following table presents revenue and Adjusted EBITDA by segment (in thousands):
(1)Adjusted EBITDA is a supplemental non-GAAP financial measure that is used by management and external users of our financial statements, such as industry analysts, investors, lenders and rating agencies. (For a reconciliation of our Adjusted EBITDA, see “-Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin.”)
(2)Our Corporate component includes certain expenses not attributable to a particular segment, such as costs related to support functions and corporate executives.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Tubular Running Services
Revenue for the TRS segment was $269.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $130.6 million, or 32.6%, compared to $400.3 million for the same period in 2019. The decrease was driven by lower activity levels in most regions, partially offset by improved activity levels in the Caribbean.
Adjusted EBITDA for the TRS segment was $22.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $63.4 million, or 74.1%, compared to $85.6 million for the same period in 2019. Segment results were negatively impacted by activity declines, partially offset by cost cutting measures.
Tubulars
Revenue for the Tubulars segment was $53.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $21.0 million, or 28.1%, compared to $74.7 million for the same period in 2019, primarily as a result of lower drilling tools activity and tubular sales in the Gulf of Mexico, partially offset by increased demand for our drilling tools in international markets.
Adjusted EBITDA for the Tubulars segment was $7.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $3.8 million, or 32.8%, or compared to $11.6 million for the same period in 2019, primarily driven by lower drilling tools activity and tubular sales in the Gulf of Mexico.
Cementing Equipment
Revenue for the CE Segment was $67.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $37.9 million, or 36.1%, compared to $104.9 million for the same period in 2019, driven by reductions in the U.S. land and offshore markets, partially offset by continued expansion to international markets.
Adjusted EBITDA for the CE segment was $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $3.3 million, or 23.4%, compared to $14.1 million for the same period in 2019, primarily due to reductions in the U.S. land and offshore markets, partially offset by continued expansion to international markets.
Corporate
Adjusted EBITDA for Corporate was a loss of $31.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a favorable decrease of $22.0 million, or 41.0%, compared to a loss of $53.7 million for the same period in 2019, primarily due to cost cutting actions taken as part of our profitability improvement program.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
At December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments of $211.8 million and no debt. Our primary sources of liquidity to date have been cash flows from operations. Our primary uses of capital have been for organic growth capital expenditures and acquisitions. We continually monitor potential capital sources, including equity and debt financing, in order to meet our investment and target liquidity requirements. The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly reduced economic activity levels across the globe, which has resulted in lower demand for oil and natural gas, as well as for our services and products. The reduced demand for our services and products has had, and may continue to have, a material adverse impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition. In consideration of these risks, we are undertaking additional measures to protect liquidity. These measures include increased focus on collection of receivables, enhanced customer credit review, special measures to reduce risks of high-cost inventory items, and enhanced cash reporting requirements.
Our total capital expenditures are estimated to be approximately $25 million for 2021, of which we expect approximately 90% will be used for the purchase and manufacture of equipment and approximately 10% for other property, plant and equipment, inclusive of capitalized enterprise resource planning software implementation costs. The actual amount of capital expenditures for the manufacture of equipment may fluctuate based on market conditions. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, purchases of property, plant and equipment and intangibles were $28.5 million, $36.9 million and $56.5 million, respectively, all of which were funded from internally generated sources. We believe our cash on hand and cash flows from operations will be sufficient to fund our capital expenditure and liquidity requirements for the next twelve months.
Our Board of Directors has authorized a program to repurchase our common stock from time to time. Approximately $38,502,322 remained authorized for repurchases as of December 31, 2020; subject to the limitation set in our shareholder authorization for repurchases of our common stock, which is currently 10% of the common stock outstanding as of April 30, 2020. From the inception of this program in February 2020 through December 31, 2020, we repurchased 570,044 shares of our common stock for a total cost of approximately $1.5 million. This program was suspended during the second quarter of 2020 due to the impacts of COVID-19 and commodity price declines and will be revisited when market conditions stabilize sufficiently to provide greater clarity to anticipated business results.
The timing, declaration, amount of, and payment of any dividends is within the discretion of our board of managing directors subject to the approval of our Board of Supervisory Directors and will depend upon many factors, including our financial condition, earnings, capital requirements, covenants associated with certain of our debt service obligations, legal requirements, regulatory constraints, industry practice, ability to access capital markets, and other factors deemed relevant by our board of managing directors and our Board of Supervisory
Directors. We do not have a legal obligation to pay any dividend and there can be no assurance that we will be able to do so.
Credit Facility
Asset Based Revolving Credit Facility
On November 5, 2018, FICV, Frank’s International, LLC and Blackhawk, as borrowers, and FINV, certain of FINV’s subsidiaries, including FICV, Frank’s International, LLC, Blackhawk, Frank’s International GP, LLC, Frank’s International, LP, Frank’s International LP B.V., Frank’s International Partners B.V., Frank’s International Management B.V., Blackhawk Intermediate Holdings, LLC, Blackhawk Specialty Tools, LLC, and Trinity Tool Rentals, L.L.C., as guarantors, entered into a five-year senior secured revolving credit facility (the “ABL Credit Facility”) with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent (the “ABL Agent”), and other financial institutions as lenders with total commitments of $100.0 million including up to $15.0 million available for letters of credit. Subject to the terms of the ABL Credit Facility, we have the ability to increase the commitments to $200.0 million. The maximum amount that the Company may borrow under the ABL Credit Facility is subject to a borrowing base, which is based on a percentage of certain eligible accounts receivable and eligible inventory, subject to customary reserves and other adjustments.
All obligations under the ABL Credit Facility are fully and unconditionally guaranteed jointly and severally by FINV’s subsidiaries, including FICV, Frank’s International, LLC, Blackhawk, Frank’s International GP, LLC, Frank’s International, LP, Frank’s International LP B.V., Frank’s International Partners B.V., Frank’s International Management B.V., Blackhawk Intermediate Holdings, LLC, Blackhawk Specialty Tools, LLC, and Trinity Tool Rentals, L.L.C., subject to customary exceptions and exclusions. In addition, the obligations under the ABL Credit Facility are secured by first priority liens on substantially all of the assets and property of the borrowers and guarantors, including pledges of equity interests in certain of FINV’s subsidiaries, subject to certain exceptions. Borrowings under the ABL Credit Facility bear interest at FINV’s option at either (a) the Alternate Base Rate (“ABR”) (as defined therein), calculated as the greatest of (i) the rate of interest publicly quoted by the Wall Street Journal, as the “prime rate,” subject to each increase or decrease in such prime rate effective as of the date such change occurs, (ii) the federal funds effective rate that is subject to a 0.00% interest rate floor plus 0.50%, and (iii) the one-month Adjusted LIBO Rate (as defined therein) plus 1.00%, or (b) the Adjusted LIBO Rate (as defined therein), plus, in each case, an applicable margin. The applicable interest rate margin ranges from 1.00% to 1.50% per annum for ABR loans and 2.00% to 2.50% per annum for Eurodollar loans and, in each case, is based on FINV’s leverage ratio. The unused portion of the ABL Credit Facility is subject to a commitment fee that varies from 0.250% to 0.375% per annum, according to average daily unused commitments under the ABL Credit Facility. Interest on Eurodollar loans is payable at the end of the selected interest period, but no less frequently than quarterly. Interest on ABR loans is payable monthly in arrears.
The ABL Credit Facility contains various covenants and restrictive provisions which limit, subject to certain customary exceptions and thresholds, FINV’s ability to, among other things, (1) enter into asset sales; (2) incur additional indebtedness; (3) make investments, acquisitions, or loans and create or incur liens; (4) pay certain dividends or make other distributions and (5) engage in transactions with affiliates. The ABL Credit Facility also requires FINV to maintain a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.0 to 1.0 based on the ratio of (a) consolidated EBITDA (as defined therein) minus unfinanced capital expenditures to (b) Fixed Charges (as defined therein), when either (i) an event of default occurs under the ABL Facility or (ii) availability under the ABL Credit Facility falls for at least two consecutive calendar days below the greater of (A) $12.5 million and (B) 15% of the lesser of the borrowing base and aggregate commitments (a “FCCR Trigger Event”). Accounts receivable received by FINV’s U.S. subsidiaries that are parties to the ABL Credit Facility will be deposited into deposit accounts subject to deposit control agreements in favor of the ABL Agent. After a FCCR Trigger Event, these deposit accounts would be subject to “springing” cash dominion. After a FCCR Trigger Event, the Company will be subject to compliance with the fixed charge coverage ratio and “springing” cash dominion until no default exists under the ABL Credit Facility and availability under the facility for the preceding thirty consecutive days has been equal to at least the greater of
(x) $12.5 million and (y) 15% of the lesser of the borrowing base and the aggregate commitments. If FINV fails to perform its obligations under the agreement that results in an event of default, the commitments under the ABL Credit Facility could be terminated and any outstanding borrowings under the ABL Credit Facility may be declared immediately due and payable. The ABL Credit Facility also contains cross default provisions that apply to FINV’s other indebtedness.
As of December 31, 2020, FINV had no borrowings outstanding under the ABL Credit Facility, letters of credit outstanding of $10.3 million and availability of $24.2 million.
Cash Flows from Operating, Investing and Financing Activities
Cash flows provided by (used in) our operations, investing and financing activities are summarized below (in thousands):
Statements of cash flows for entities with international operations that use the local currency as the functional currency exclude the effects of the changes in foreign currency exchange rates that occur during any given year, as these are noncash changes. As a result, changes reflected in certain accounts on the consolidated statements of cash flows may not reflect the changes in corresponding accounts on the consolidated balance sheets.
Operating Activities
Cash flow provided by operating activities was $39.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $27.0 million in 2019. The increase in cash flow provided by operating activities in 2020 of $12.7 million compared to 2019 was primarily a result of favorable change in accounts receivable of $32.6 million, partially offset by unfavorable changes in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $12.9 million.
Investing Activities
Cash flow used in investing activities was $20.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $10.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cash used in investing activities of $10.0 million was primarily a result of decreased net proceeds from the sale of investments of $26.0 million, partially offset by decreased purchases of property, plant and equipment of $8.5 million and increased proceeds from sale of assets of $7.5 million.
Financing Activities
Cash flow used in financing activities was $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $5.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in cash flow used in financing activities of $3.8 million was due to decreased repayment of borrowings $5.4 million, partially offset by repurchases under our publicly announced share repurchase program of $1.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Contractual Obligations
We are a party to various contractual obligations. A portion of these obligations are reflected in our financial statements, such as operating leases, while other obligations, such as purchase obligations, are not reflected on our balance sheet. The following is a summary of our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(1) Includes purchase commitments related to connectors and pipe inventory. We enter into purchase commitments as needed.
In addition to the above, the Company has issued purchase orders in the ordinary course of business for the purchase of goods and services. These purchase orders are enforceable and legally binding. However, none of the Company’s purchase orders call for deliveries of goods or services for time periods in excess of one year. Not included in the table above are uncertain tax positions of $27.2 million.
Tax Receivable Agreement
We entered into the TRA with FICV and Mosing Holdings in connection with our IPO. The TRA generally provides for the payment by us to Mosing Holdings of 85% of the amount of the net cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax and franchise tax that we actually realize (or are deemed to realize in certain circumstances) in periods after our IPO as a result of (i) tax basis increases resulting from the Conversion and (ii) imputed interest deemed to be paid by us as a result of, and additional tax basis arising from, payments under the TRA. We will retain the benefit of the remaining 15% of these cash savings, if any. Payments we make under the TRA will be increased by any accrued interest from the due date (without extensions) of the corresponding tax return to the date of payment specified by the TRA. The payments under the TRA will not be conditioned upon a holder of rights under the TRA having a continued ownership interest in FINV. As of February 17, 2021, based on the best information available to us, the Mosing family collectively owns approximately 47% of our common shares.
The payment obligations under the TRA are our obligations and not obligations of FICV. The term of the TRA commenced upon the completion of the IPO and will continue until all tax benefits that are subject to the TRA have been utilized or expired, unless we exercise our right to terminate the TRA (or the TRA is terminated due to other circumstances, including our breach of a material obligation thereunder or certain mergers or other changes of control), and we make the termination payment specified by the TRA.
If we elect to terminate the TRA early, which we may do in our sole discretion (or if it terminates early as a result of our breach), we would be required to make a substantial, immediate lump-sum payment equal to the present value of the hypothetical future payments that could be required to be paid under the TRA (based upon certain assumptions and deemed events set forth in the TRA, including the assumption that we have sufficient taxable income to fully utilize the tax attributes subject to the TRA), determined by applying a discount rate equal to the long-term Treasury rate in effect on the applicable date plus 300 basis points. Any early termination payment may be made significantly in advance of the actual realization, if any, of the future tax benefits to which the termination payment relates. In addition, payments due under the TRA will be similarly accelerated following certain mergers or other changes of control.
In certain circumstances, we may be required to make payments under the TRA that we have entered into with Mosing Holdings. In most circumstances, these payments will be associated with the actual cash savings that we recognize from tax benefits resulting from the Conversion, which would reduce the actual tax benefit to us of the Conversion. If we were to elect to exercise our sole right to terminate the TRA early or enter into certain change of
control transactions, we may incur payment obligations prior to the time we actually incur any tax benefit. In those circumstances, we would need to pay the amounts out of cash on hand, finance the payments or refrain from incurring the obligation (including by not entering into a change of control transaction). Based on our current liquidity and our expected ability to access debt and equity financing, we believe we would be able to make such an early termination payment if necessary. Any such payment could reduce our cash on hand and our borrowing availability, however, which would also reduce the amount of cash available to operate our business, to fund capital expenditures and to be paid as dividends to our stockholders, among other things. Please see Note 11-Related Party Transactions in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements with the exception of purchase obligations.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to select appropriate accounting principles from those available, to apply those principles consistently and to make reasonable estimates and assumptions that affect revenue and associated costs as well as reported amounts of assets and liabilities, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Certain accounting policies involve judgments and uncertainties. We evaluate estimates and assumptions on a regular basis. We base our respective estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from the estimates and assumptions used in preparation of our consolidated financial statements. We consider the following policies to be the most critical to understanding the judgments that are involved and the uncertainties that could impact our results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. Payment terms on services and products generally range from 30 days to 120 days. Given the short-term nature of our service and product offerings, our contracts do not have a significant financing component and the consideration we receive is generally fixed. We do not disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations for contracts with an original expected duration of one year or less. Because our contracts with customers are short-term in nature and fall within this exemption, we do not have significant unsatisfied performance obligations.
Service revenue is recognized over time as services are performed or rendered. Rates for services are typically priced on a per day, per man-hour or similar basis. We generally perform services either under direct service purchase orders or master service agreements which are supplemented by individual call-out provisions. For customers contracted under such arrangements, an accrual is recorded in unbilled revenue for revenue earned but not yet invoiced.
Revenue on product sales is generally recognized at a point in time when the product has shipped and significant risks of ownership have passed to the customer. The sales arrangements typically do not include a right of return or other similar provisions, nor do they contain any other post-delivery obligations.
Some of our Tubulars segment and Cementing Equipment segment customers have requested that we store pipe, connectors and cementing products purchased from us in our facilities. We recognize revenue for these “bill and hold” sales once the following criteria have been met: (1) there is a substantive reason for the arrangement, (2) the product is identified as the customer’s asset, (3) the product is ready for delivery to the customer, and (4) we cannot use the product or direct it to another customer.
Income Taxes
The liability method is used for determining our income tax provisions, under which current and deferred tax liabilities and assets are recorded in accordance with enacted tax laws and rates. Under this method, the amounts of deferred tax liabilities and assets at the end of each period are determined using the tax rate expected to be in effect when taxes are actually paid or recovered. Valuation allowances are established to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that some portion or all the deferred tax assets will not be realized. In determining the need for valuation allowances, we have made judgments and estimates regarding future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. These estimates and judgments include some degree of uncertainty, and changes in these estimates and assumptions could require us to adjust the valuation allowances for our deferred tax assets. Historically, changes to valuation allowances have been caused by major changes in the business cycle in certain countries and changes in local country law. The ultimate realization of the deferred tax assets depends on the generation of sufficient taxable income in the applicable taxing jurisdictions.
Through FICV, we operate in approximately 40 countries under many legal forms. As a result, we are subject to the jurisdiction of numerous U.S. and foreign tax authorities, as well as to tax agreements and treaties among these governments. Our operations in these different jurisdictions are taxed on various bases: actual income before taxes, deemed profits (which are generally determined using a percentage of revenue rather than profits) and withholding taxes based on revenue. Determination of taxable income in any jurisdiction requires the interpretation of the related tax laws and regulations and the use of estimates and assumptions regarding significant future events such as the amount, timing and character of deductions, permissible revenue recognition methods under the tax law and the sources and character of income and tax credits. Changes in tax laws, regulations, agreements and treaties, foreign currency exchange restrictions or our level of operations or profitability in each taxing jurisdiction could have an impact on the amount of income taxes that we provide during any given year.
Our tax filings for open tax periods are subject to audit by the tax authorities. These audits may result in assessments of additional taxes that are resolved either with the tax authorities or through the courts. These assessments may occasionally be based on erroneous and even arbitrary interpretations of local tax law. Resolution of these situations inevitably includes some degree of uncertainty; accordingly, we provide taxes only for the amounts we believe will ultimately result from these proceedings. The resulting change to our tax liability, if any, is dependent on numerous factors including, among others, the amount and nature of additional taxes potentially asserted by local tax authorities; the willingness of local tax authorities to negotiate a fair settlement through an administrative process; the impartiality of the local courts; the number of countries in which we do business; and the potential for changes in the tax paid to one country to either produce, or fail to produce, an offsetting tax change in other countries. Our experience has been that the estimates and assumptions used to provide for future tax assessments have proven to be appropriate. However, past experience is only a guide, and the potential exists that the tax resulting from the resolution of current and potential future tax controversies may differ materially from the amount accrued.
In addition to the aforementioned assessments received from various tax authorities, we also provide for taxes for uncertain tax positions where formal assessments have not been received. The determination of these liabilities requires the use of estimates and assumptions regarding future events. Once established, we adjust these amounts only when more information is available or when an event occurs necessitating a change to the reserves such as changes in the facts or law, judicial decisions regarding the application of existing law or a favorable audit outcome. We believe that the resolution of tax matters will not have a material effect on our consolidated financial condition, although a resolution could have a material impact on our consolidated statements of operations for a particular period and on our effective tax rate for any period in which such resolution occurs.
Goodwill
Goodwill is not subject to amortization and is tested for impairment annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. A qualitative assessment is allowed to determine if goodwill is potentially impaired. We have the option to bypass the qualitative assessment for any reporting unit in any period and proceed directly to performing the quantitative goodwill impairment test. The qualitative assessment determines whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. If it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying amount, then a quantitative impairment test is performed. The quantitative goodwill impairment test is used to identify both the existence of impairment and the amount of impairment loss. The test compares the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, an impairment loss is recorded based on that difference. We complete our assessment of goodwill impairment as of October 31 each year.
As of October 31, 2019, we performed a quantitative goodwill impairment test for our Cementing Equipment reporting unit. During the fourth quarter of 2019, market factors indicated a downturn in the demand for our Cementing Equipment products and services in the U.S. land market and a slower uptake of our service offering in international markets, and we reduced our management forecast for this reporting unit accordingly. Based on this refined outlook, the quantitative goodwill impairment test indicated that the fair value of the Cementing Equipment reporting unit was less than its carrying value. As a result, during the fourth quarter of 2019 we recorded a $111.1 million impairment charge to goodwill.
During the first quarter of 2020, as a result of the decline in oil prices due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and Russia price war in early 2020, we identified a triggering event that indicated the fair value of goodwill within our Cementing Equipment reporting unit was less than its carrying value. Based on the results of our goodwill impairment test as of March 31, 2020, we recorded a $57.1 million impairment charge to goodwill, which is included in goodwill impairment on the consolidated statements of operations. Our goodwill impairment assessment as of October 31, 2020, did not identify a triggering event that indicates the fair values of our reporting units were less than their carrying values.
We used the income approach to estimate the fair value of the Cementing Equipment reporting unit, but also considered the market approach to validate the results. The income approach estimates the fair value by discounting the reporting unit’s estimated future cash flows using an estimated discount rate, or expected return, that a marketplace participant would have required as of the valuation date. The market approach includes the use of comparative multiples to corroborate the discounted cash flow results and involves significant judgment in the selection of the appropriate peer group companies and valuation multiples. The inputs used in the determination of fair value are generally level 3 inputs.
Some of the more significant assumptions inherent in the income approach include the estimated future net annual cash flows for the reporting unit, the terminal growth rate and the discount rate. We selected the assumptions used in the discounted cash flow projections using historical data supplemented by current and anticipated market conditions and estimated growth rates. Our estimates are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable. However, given the inherent uncertainty in determining the assumptions underlying a discounted cash flow analysis, actual results may differ from those used in our valuation which could result in additional impairment charges in the future. Assuming all other assumptions and inputs used in the discounted cash flow analysis were held constant, a 50 basis point increase in the discount rate assumption would have increased the 2020 goodwill impairment charge by approximately $4.3 million.
No goodwill impairment was recorded for year ended December 31, 2018. At December 31, 2020, goodwill is allocated to our reportable segments as follows: Cementing Equipment - approximately $24.1 million; TRS - approximately $18.7 million.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1-Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements set forth in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” under the heading “Recent Accounting Pronouncements” included in this Form 10-K.