Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
OVERVIEW
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand the Company’s operations and business environment. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. The following discussion includes forward-looking statements that involve certain risks and uncertainties. See Part I, Item 1, “Business- Forward-Looking Statements and Associated Risks” in the beginning of this Form 10-K. The MD&A includes the following sections:
•Business - a general description of Dentsply Sirona’s business and how performance is measured;
•Results of Operations - an analysis of the Company’s consolidated results of operations for the three years presented in the Consolidated Financial Statements;
•Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates- a discussion of accounting policies that require critical judgments and estimates; and
•Liquidity and Capital Resources - an analysis of cash flows; debt and other obligations; off-balance sheet arrangements; and aggregate contractual obligations.
2020 Operational Highlights
•For the year ended December 31, 2020, net sales decreased 17.1% compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Net sales were positively impacted by approximately 0.3% due to the weakening of the U.S. dollar over the prior year period. Net sales, on an organic sales basis (a Non-GAAP measure as defined under the heading "Principal Measurements" below), decreased 16.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019.
•For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company reported net loss attributable to Dentsply Sirona of $83 million as compared to the net income attributable to Dentsply Sirona of $263 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The Company reported diluted net loss per share of $0.38 per share compared to a net income per share of $1.17 in the prior year.
•For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash from operations was $635 million, as compared to $633 million in the prior year ended December 31, 2019.
•During the year, the Company continued to execute on the restructuring plan that was announced in November 2018. The Company also announced an addition to the plan in August 2020. Under this plan, the Company is undergoing a restructuring to drive revenue growth, margin expansion and to simplify its organization.
Company Profile
DENTSPLY SIRONA Inc. (“Dentsply Sirona” or the “Company”), is the world’s largest manufacturer of professional dental products and technologies, with a 134-year history of innovation and service to the dental industry and patients worldwide. Dentsply Sirona develops, manufactures, and markets a comprehensive solutions offering including dental equipment and dental consumable products under a strong portfolio of world class brands. The Company also manufactures and markets healthcare consumable products. As The Dental Solutions Company, Dentsply Sirona’s products provide innovative, high-quality and effective solutions to advance patient care and deliver better, safer and faster dentistry. Dentsply Sirona’s worldwide headquarters is located in Charlotte, North Carolina. The Company’s shares of common stock are listed in the United States on Nasdaq under the symbol XRAY.
BUSINESS
The Company operates in two operating segments, Technologies & Equipment and Consumables.
The Technologies & Equipment segment is responsible for the design, manufacture, sales and distribution of the Company’s Dental Technology and Equipment Products and Healthcare Consumable Products. These products include dental implants, CAD/CAM systems, orthodontic clear aligner products, imaging systems, treatment centers, instruments, as well as consumable medical device products.
The Consumables segment is responsible for the design, manufacture, sales and distribution of the Company’s Dental Consumable Products which include preventive, restorative, endodontic, and dental laboratory products.
The impacts of COVID-19 and the Company’s response
The impacts to the Company’s net sales and net income during the year ended December 31, 2020 were as follows:
•As previously announced, in the early part of the first quarter, the Company started to experience declines in customer demand in Asia as a result of the effects of COVID-19. As COVID-19 spread to other geographies during the first quarter, the Company experienced effects on customer demand in those regions as well. In early March, the Company experienced declines in demand in the European region, followed by North and South America in the second half of March. These decreases in demand were primarily driven by the government actions taken to limit the spread of COVID-19. Additionally, end-user demand was affected by guidance from professional dental associations recommending practitioners only perform emergency procedures.
•Following March, the Company continued to see lower levels of customer demand on a global basis as a result of government authorities extending actions taken in response to COVID-19. The Company experienced the lowest sales levels in April, however, it began to see an increase in sales during May and June as most stay-at-home orders were lifted and dental practices started to re-open particularly in the United States, Europe, and certain Asian countries within the Rest of World region. In the second half of 2020, the Company continued to see demand improve in both the United States and Europe, while the Rest of the World sales started to show improvement in the fourth quarter.
•While government authorities have lifted many of their restrictions, the end dates for all restrictions being lifted are still unknown. It is also uncertain when customer demand will fully return to pre-COVID-19 levels upon lifting these restrictions.
•The demand for the Company's products has been, and continues to be, affected by social distancing guidelines, newly implemented dental practice safety protocols which reduce patient traffic, and patient reluctance to seek dental care. At this time, it is uncertain how long these impacts will continue.
The Company’s response to the pandemic through December 31, 2020 was as follows:
•A COVID-19 infection crisis management process was implemented by the Company to have a unified approach to responding to employees infected by COVID-19. All potential and actual cases across the Company were reviewed to ensure that the Company managed exposed employees appropriately, consistently and safely. No major outbreaks have occurred at any of the Company's locations.
•The Company put in place travel restrictions, implemented a work from home policy where possible, and prohibited all meetings of more than 10 people. These measures were taken to limit employee exposure to COVID-19 as well as comply with stay-at-home and social distancing guidelines.
•A customer service support continuity plan was implemented to meet customer needs. Technical support was maintained to assist the Company’s customers during this period while still ensuring employees' safety.
•The Company remained focused on maintaining a high level of customer support through robust virtual training and development courses.
•The Company suspended or significantly reduced operations at most of its principal manufacturing and distribution locations, which included furloughing employees related to these locations. While the operations were suspended or significantly reduced, the Company continued to fulfill customer demand. The Company also continued sales and manufacturing operations at normal levels within the Healthcare business. The Company’s principal manufacturing facilities and other operations have returned to a more normalized level during the second half of the year. The Company continues to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic and may need to reduce operations in the event of a resurgence of COVID-19 or in the event of actions from governmental authorities to combat a resurgence.
•The Company temporarily reduced spending on sales, marketing, and other related expenses due to the decrease in customer demand. Additionally, the Company instituted a temporary global hiring freeze, a reduction in temporary employees and consultants, as well as curtailed or stopped all projects that are not critical to the continuity of the business. Despite these temporary reductions, the Company maintained investment in critical capital and research and development projects as well as global efficiency and cost savings initiatives. The majority of these temporary reductions were eased during the fourth quarter as sales level continued to improve.
•During April, the Company announced additional furloughs or the reduction of working hours for employees throughout its organization. The total number of employees impacted by these measures represented approximately 52% of the workforce. The furloughs remained in place throughout the second quarter and the majority of these furloughs and reductions were then lifted in the third quarter with all remaining furloughs and reductions being lifted during the fourth quarter.
•For the safety of all employees and customers, the Company established additional protocols in addition to following all mandated regulatory requirements imposed by the country, the state, and the local jurisdictions in which the Company operates.
•The Company implemented a 25% wage reduction plan for all salaried employees of the Company who were not furloughed and were above a certain specified salary level, including members of management, where allowed by law, during the second quarter. These reductions were in place for 90 days. The CEO relinquished all but the portion of his base salary necessary to fund, on an after-tax basis, his contributions to continue to participate in the Company’s health benefits plan and meet certain other legal requirements. In addition, each member of the Board of Directors agreed to waive one quarter of his or her annual cash retainer for 2020.
•The Company has also continued to take measures to contain costs in light of lower sales levels and has taken actions to accelerate the cost improvement initiatives included in the previously announced restructuring plan.
•Many governments across the world instituted programs to reimburse business entities for a portion of employee compensation expense for employees that are furloughed or that are working reduced hours. The Company applied for and has received relief under these programs as well as certain other programs instituted by governments to mitigate the negative impacts of COVID-19. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had received a total of $38 million in relief.
•In an effort to preserve liquidity, the Company took action related to deferring the payment of income and payroll tax related liabilities where governments have allowed such deferrals. Additionally, the Company implemented cost containment measures to ensure the preservation of cash.
•During the second quarter, the Company took various actions to ensure its ongoing liquidity. The Company elected to drawdown the full amount of its $700 million 2018 Credit Facility to provide additional liquidity and financial flexibility in light of the economic conditions and uncertainties which arose in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic. On May 26, 2020, the Company issued $750 million of 3.25% senior unsecured notes due 2030 and used the proceeds to repay the $700 million 2018 Credit Facility. Additionally, out of an abundance of caution, in order to provide for further liquidity, the Company entered into a $310 million revolving credit facility on April 9, 2020, a 40 million euro revolving credit on May 5, 2020, a 30 million euro revolving credit facility on May 12, 2020 and 3.3 billion Japanese yen revolving credit facility on June 11, 2020. These three additional facilities are all short-term. At December 31, 2020, there were no outstanding borrowings under these facilities and the Company’s $700 million 2018 Credit Facility.
The impact to the Company's net sales and net income subsequent to December 31, 2020 includes:
•Governments have continued the imposition of certain restrictions in Europe which began in the fourth quarter due to the rising number of COVID-19 infections. At this time it is uncertain the impact these actions and further restrictions could potentially have on the Company's net sales and net income.
•The Company has continued to prioritize employee safety and preventing the possible spread of COVID-19 by encouraging ongoing work-from-home where possible and maintaining travel restrictions.
Up through the date of the filing of this Form 10-K, the Company’s principal manufacturing facilities and other operations have now returned to a more normalized level. The Company continues to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic. As governmental authorities adjust restrictions globally, the Company plans to appropriately staff sales, manufacturing, and other functions to meet customer demand and deliver on continuing critical projects while also complying with all government requirements.
Principal Measurements
The principal measurements used by the Company in evaluating its business are: (1) constant currency sales growth by segment and geographic region; (2) organic sales growth by segment and geographic region; and (3) adjusted operating income and margins of each reportable segment, which excludes the impacts of purchase accounting, corporate expenses, and certain other items to enhance the comparability of results period to period. These principal measurements are not calculated in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ("US GAAP"); therefore, these items represent Non-GAAP measures. These Non-GAAP measures may differ from other companies and should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with US GAAP.
The Company defines “constant currency” sales growth as the increase or decrease in net sales from period to period excluding the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. This impact is calculated by comparing current-period revenues to prior-period revenues, with both periods converted to the U.S. dollar using local currency foreign exchange rates for each month of the prior period, for the currencies in which the Company does business.
The Company defines "organic sales" as the increase or decrease in net sales excluding: (1) net sales from acquired and divested businesses recorded prior to the first anniversary of the acquisition or divestiture, (2) net sales attributable to discontinued product lines in both the current and prior year periods, and (3) the impact of foreign currency translation, which is calculated by comparing current-period sales to prior-period sales, with both periods converted to the U.S. dollar rate at local currency foreign exchange rates for each month of the prior period.
The "organic sales" measure is not calculated in accordance with US GAAP; therefore, this item represents a Non-GAAP measure. This Non-GAAP measure may differ from those used by other companies and should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with US GAAP. Organic sales is an important internal measure for the Company. The Company's senior management receives a monthly analysis of operating results that includes organic sales. The performance of the Company is measured on this metric along with other performance metrics.
The Company discloses organic sales to allow investors to evaluate the performance of the Company’s operations exclusive of certain items that impact the comparability of results from period to period and may not be indicative of past or future performance of the normal operations of the Company. The Company believes that this information is helpful in understanding underlying net sales trends.
Business Drivers
The primary drivers of internal sales growth include macroeconomic factors, global dental market demand, innovation and new product launches by the Company, as well as continued investments in sales and marketing resources, including clinical education. Management believes that the Company’s ability to execute its strategies should allow it to grow faster than the underlying dental market over time. On a short-term basis, sudden changes in the macroeconomic environment such as those caused by the impacts of COVID-19, changes in strategy, or distributor inventory levels can and have impacted the Company's sales.
The Company has a focus on maximizing operational efficiencies on a global basis. The Company has expanded the use of technology as well as process improvement initiatives to enhance global efficiency. In addition, management continues to evaluate the worldwide consolidation of operations and functions to further reduce costs. While the Company continues consolidation initiatives which can have an adverse impact on reported results in the short term, the Company expects that the continued benefits from these global efficiency efforts will improve its cost structure.
Product innovation is a key component of the Company’s overall growth strategy. New advances in technology are anticipated to have a significant influence on future products in the dentistry and consumable medical device markets in which the Company operates. As a result, the Company continues to pursue research and development initiatives to support technological development, including collaborations with various research institutions and dental schools. In addition, the Company licenses and purchases technologies developed by third parties. Although the Company believes these activities will lead to new innovative dental and healthcare products, they involve new technologies and there can be no assurance that marketable products will be developed.
Subject to the pace of the post-pandemic recovery, the Company intends to continue pursuing opportunities to expand the Company’s product offerings, technologies, and sales and service infrastructure through partnerships and acquisitions. Although the professional dental and the consumable medical device markets in which the Company operates have experienced consolidation, they remain fragmented. Management believes that there will continue to be adequate opportunities to participate as a consolidator in the industry for the foreseeable future.
The Company’s business is subject to quarterly fluctuations of consolidated net sales and net income. Price increases, promotional activities, as well as changes in inventory levels at distributors contribute to this fluctuation. The Company typically implements most of its price increases in January or October of a given year across most of its businesses. Distributor inventory levels tend to increase in the period leading up to a price increase and decline in the period following the implementation of a price increase. Required minimum purchase commitments under agreements with key distributors may increase inventory levels in excess of retail demand. These net inventory changes have impacted the Company’s consolidated net sales and net income in the past, and may continue to do so in the future, over a given period or multiple periods. In addition, the Company may from time to time, engage in new distributor relationships that could cause fluctuations of consolidated net sales and net income. Distributor inventory levels may fluctuate, and may differ from the Company’s predictions, resulting in the Company’s projections of future results being different than expected. There can be no assurance that the Company’s dealers and customers will maintain levels of inventory in accordance with the Company’s predictions or past history, or that the timing of customers’ inventory build or liquidation will be in accordance with the Company’s predictions or past history. The Company anticipates that inventory levels may fluctuate as dealers and customers manage the effects of COVID-19 on their businesses. Any of these fluctuations could be material to the Company’s consolidated financial statements. For more information about the drivers of our business and related risks, see Part I, Item 1, "Business" and Part I, Item 1A, "Risk Factors."
Restructuring Announcement
In November 2018, the Board of Directors of the Company approved a plan to restructure and simplify the Company’s business. The goal of the restructuring is to drive annualized net sales growth of 3% to 4% and adjusted operating income margins of 22% by the end of 2022 as well as achieve net annual cost savings of $200 million to $225 million by 2021. In July 2020, the Board of Directors of the Company approved an expansion of this plan that is intended to further optimize the Company’s product portfolio and reduces operating expenses. The product portfolio optimization has resulted in the divestiture or closure of certain underperforming businesses. The operating expense reductions will come as a result of additional leverage from continued integration and simplification of the business. The Company had initially anticipated one-time expenditures and charges of approximately $275 million yielding annual cost savings of $200 million to $225 million by 2021. The program expansion is expected to result in total charges of approximately $375 million and annual cost savings of approximately $250 million. The Company expects that these expanded actions will result in incremental global headcount reductions of 6% to 7% in addition to the original projections of 6% to 8%. Since November 2018, the Company has incurred expenditures of approximately $310 million under this program, of which, approximately $120 million were non-cash charges. These amounts include the charges for the portfolio shaping initiatives announced on August 6, 2020 which are further discussed below.
As part of this expanded plan, the Company announced on August 6, 2020 that it will exit its traditional orthodontics business as well as both exit and restructure certain portions of its laboratory business. The traditional orthodontics business is part of the Technologies & Equipment segment and the laboratory business is part of the Consumables segment. The Company is exiting several of its facilities and reducing its workforce by approximately 4% to 5%. The Company expects to record restructuring charges in a range of $70 million to $80 million for inventory write-downs, severance costs, fixed asset write-offs, and other facility closure costs. The Company estimates that $45 million to $55 million of the restructuring charges will be non-cash charges related to inventory write-downs and fixed asset write-offs. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded expenses of approximately $59 million related to these actions, of which, approximately $48 million were non-cash charges. The Company expects most of the remaining restructuring charges will be recorded during the first quarter of 2021. The Company does not expect a significant impact to net sales in the first quarter of 2021. Both businesses have been experiencing declining sales and are dilutive to the Company’s operating income rate.
The Company’s traditional orthodontics business, which includes brackets, bands, tubes and wires, had net sales of $132 million in 2019. The portion of the laboratory business the Company is exiting manufactures removable dentures and related products and had net sales of $44 million in 2019. The net income of these businesses is not material to the Company’s consolidated results.
As part of this restructuring plan, the Company has introduced five key operating principles in order to achieve this goal:
•Approach customers as one: Put the customer at the center of how Dentsply Sirona is organized. The Company is creating one integrated approach to customer service, direct and indirect selling, and clinical education to strengthen the relationship with the customer and better serve the customers' needs.
•Assume greater responsibility for Dentsply Sirona’s demand creation: To better support dealer partners and end-user customers, the Company launched a sales force effectiveness program, with a view to improving returns on sales and marketing investments.
•Ensure that innovation is substantial and supported: Create a comprehensive R&D program that prioritizes spending across the entire Company portfolio resulting in more impactful innovations each year.
•Lead in clinical education: Dentsply Sirona is investing to further its leadership position through local training events and enhancing online training presence to strengthen the relationship with the dental professionals.
•Take advantage of scale: The Company is focused on integrating its dental product portfolios to unlock operational efficiencies, including performance improvements in procurement, logistics, manufacturing, sales force and marketing programs. In addition, Dentsply Sirona is taking significant measures to simplify the business. In combination, these initiatives will improve organizational efficiency and better leverage the Company’s selling, general and administrative infrastructure.
Impact of Foreign Currencies
Due to the Company’s significant international presence, movements in foreign currency exchange may impact the Consolidated Statements of Operations. With approximately two-thirds of the Company’s net sales located in regions outside the United States, the Company’s consolidated net sales are impacted negatively by the strengthening or positively impacted by the weakening of the U.S. dollar. Additionally, movements in certain foreign exchange rates may unfavorably or favorably impact the Company’s results of operations, financial condition and liquidity as a number of the Company’s manufacturing and distribution operations are located outside of the U.S.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
2020 Compared to 2019
Net Sales
The Company presents net sales comparing the current year periods to the prior year periods. In addition, the Company also compares net sales on an organic sales basis, which is a Non-GAAP measure.
The Company defines "organic sales" as the increase or decrease in net sales excluding: (1) net sales from acquired and divested businesses recorded prior to the first anniversary of the acquisition or divestiture, (2) net sales attributable to discontinued product lines in both the current and prior year periods, and (3) the impact of foreign currency translation, which is calculated by comparing current-period sales to prior-period sales, with both periods converted to the U.S. dollar rate at local currency foreign exchange rates for each month of the prior period.
The "organic sales" measure is not calculated in accordance with US GAAP; therefore, this item represents a Non-GAAP measure. This Non-GAAP measure may differ from those used by other companies and should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with US GAAP. Organic sales is an important internal measure for the Company. The Company's senior management receives a monthly analysis of operating results that includes organic sales. The performance of the Company is measured on this metric along with other performance metrics.
The Company discloses organic sales to allow investors to evaluate the performance of the Company’s operations exclusive of certain items that impact the comparability of results from period to period and may not be indicative of past or future performance of the normal operations of the Company. The Company believes that this information is helpful in understanding underlying net sales trends.
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $3,342 million, a decrease of $687 million or 17.1% from the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net sales was attributable to both the Consumables and the Technologies & Equipment segments which were impacted by reduced demand for dental related procedures primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Net sales were positively impacted by approximately 0.3% due to the weakening of the U.S. dollar as compared to the same prior year period. This decrease included a reduction of 0.6% from divestitures of non-strategic businesses and a 0.1% decrease due to discontinued products.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, organic sales decreased 16.7% as compared to the same prior year period. The decrease in organic sales was attributable to both the Consumables and the Technologies & Equipment segments and was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company saw normal sales levels for the months of January and February and started to experience a decline in sales volume during March which continued to its lowest levels in April as certain countries in Asia and Europe began to issue stay-at-home and social distancing guidelines which were quickly adopted in the United States as well. The Company then began to see an increase in sales during May and June as most stay-at-home orders were lifted and dental practices started to re-open, particularly in the United States and Europe. During the last six months of 2020, the Company continued to see demand improve.
Net Sales by Region
Net sales by geographic region were as follows:
United States
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $1,109 million, a decrease of $264 million or 19.2% from the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net sales was attributable to both the Technologies & Equipment and the Consumables segments and was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The decrease included a reduction of 0.5% from divestitures of non-strategic businesses and a decline of 0.6% due to discontinued products.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, organic sales decreased 18.4% as compared to the same prior year period. The decrease in organic sales was attributable to both the Consumables and the Technologies & Equipment segments and was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Europe
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $1,387 million, a decrease of $227 million or 14.1% from the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net sales was attributable to both the Technologies & Equipment and the Consumables segments and was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The year ended December 31, 2020 was positively impacted by approximately 1.3% due to the weakening of the U.S. dollar as compared to the same prior year period. The decrease included a reduction of 0.9% from divestitures of non-strategic businesses and a decline of 0.1% due to discontinued products.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, organic sales decreased 14.4% as compared to the same prior year period. The decrease in organic sales was attributable to both the Technologies & Equipment and the Consumables segments and was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Rest of World
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $846 million, a decrease of $196 million or 18.8% from the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net sales was attributable to both the Consumables and the Technologies & Equipment segments and was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The year ended December 31, 2020 was negatively impacted by approximately 1.1% due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar as compared to the same prior year period. The decrease included a reduction of 0.2% from divestitures of non-strategic businesses offset by an increase of 0.5% from discontinued products.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, organic sales decreased 18.0% as compared to the same prior year period. The decrease in organic sales was attributable to both the Consumables and the Technologies & Equipment segments and was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross Profit
Gross profit as a percentage of net sales decreased by 410 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the decrease in the gross profit rate as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily driven by the decline in net sales and the resulting unfavorable manufacturing variances due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as accelerated depreciation and inventory write-downs related to the discontinuation of product lines.
Operating Expenses
NM - Not meaningful
SG&A Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2020, SG&A, including research and development expenses, as a percentage of net sales increased 10 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The higher rate was driven by the impact of lower sales which more than offsets the cost reduction measures implemented by the Company in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
These cost reduction measures include, but are not limited to, the reduction of the following expense categories: marketing and promotion expenses, travel and meeting expenses, salary expenses, and professional services.
Goodwill Impairment
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $157 million. The impairment charge is related to the Equipment & Instruments reporting unit within the Technologies & Equipment segment recorded in the three months ended March 31, 2020. For further details see Item 8, Note 10, Goodwill and Intangible Assets, in the Notes to the Audited Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K.
Restructuring and Other Costs
The Company recorded restructuring and other costs of $77 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $81 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded $26 million of restructuring costs primarily related to the expansion of the restructuring plan announced in August 2020. The Company also recorded $51 million of other costs, which consist primarily of impairment charges of $39 million related to indefinite-lived intangible assets and other impairments of $8 million. For further details see Item 8, Note 10, Goodwill and Intangible Assets, in the Notes to the Audited Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-K.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded $34 million of restructuring costs. The Company also recorded $47 million of other costs, which consisted primarily of fixed asset impairments of $33 million, a $5 million impairment of indefinite-lived tradenames and trademarks within the Technologies & Equipment segment, and a $4 million impairment of intangible assets related to discontinued product lines in the Consumables segment.
The Company announced on August 6, 2020 that it will exit its traditional orthodontics business as well as both exit and restructure certain portions of its laboratory business. The traditional orthodontics business is part of the Technologies & Equipment segment and the laboratory business is part of the Consumables segment. The Company expects to record restructuring charges in a range of $70 million to $80 million for inventory write-downs, severance costs, fixed asset write-offs, and other facility closure costs. The Company estimates that $45 million to $55 million of the restructuring charges will be non-cash charges related to inventory write-downs and fixed asset write-offs. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded expenses of approximately $59 million related to these actions, of which, approximately $48 million were non-cash charges.
Other Income and Expenses
NM - Not meaningful
Net Interest Expense
Net interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $19 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Higher average debt levels in 2020 when compared to the prior year period were the primary driver resulting in higher net interest expense.
Other Expense (Income), Net
Other expense (income), net for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $13 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Other expense (income), net for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes foreign exchange gains of $13 million, primarily on net investment hedges, offset by the non-operating losses of $14 million related to the divestitures of non-strategic businesses. The net investment hedges were sold in April 2020 resulting in lower income for the year. Other expense (income), net for the year ended December 31, 2019 includes foreign exchange gains of $27 million, primarily on net investment hedges, offset by the non-operating losses of $15 million related to the divestitures of non-strategic businesses.
Income Taxes and Net (Loss) Income
(a) For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company's net loss per share was calculated on a non-diluted basis.
Provision for Income Taxes
For the year ended December 31, 2020, income taxes were a net expense of $23 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded $9 million of tax expense for other discrete tax matters. The Company also recorded an $11 million tax benefit as a discrete item related to the indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment charge and $2 million related to the asset impairment charge. Excluding these discrete tax items and adjusting pretax income to exclude the pretax charge related to the impairment of the intangible assets and non-intangible assets, and non-deductible goodwill impairment charge, the Company's effective tax rate was 18.4%.
The Company continues to reassess the realizability of its deferred tax assets and, after weighing all positive and negative evidence, continues to maintain a valuation allowance on certain deferred tax assets.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, income taxes were a net expense of $82 million. During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded the following discrete tax items: $4 million of excess tax benefit related to employee share-based compensation, tax expense of $9 million for other discrete tax matters, and tax benefit of $4 million related to valuation allowance on foreign tax credits and other deferred tax assets. The Company also recorded a $10 million tax benefit as a discrete item related to the fixed asset impairment charge, $2 million tax benefit related to the indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment charge and $1 million tax benefit related to the definite-lived intangible asset impairment charge. Excluding these discrete tax items and adjusting pretax income to exclude the pretax charge related to impairment of fixed assets, impairment of the indefinite-lived intangible assets, and the losses related to the divestitures of non-strategic businesses, the Company’s effective tax rate was 24.3%.
Further information regarding the details of income taxes is presented in Note 15, Income Taxes, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Operating Segment Results
(a) See Note 5, Segment and Geographic Information, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a reconciliation from segment adjusted operating income to consolidated US GAAP income.
(b) Certain charges related to discontinuance of product lines which were previously reported in adjusted operating income for the reportable segments, $38 million in 2019, has been reclassified as pertaining to corporate results to conform to current year presentation and our internal reporting to our Chief Operating Decision Maker package ("CODM"). This amount is not material to the measure of segment results for the years presented.
Technologies & Equipment
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $1,961 million, a decrease of $322 million or 14.1% from the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net sales was across all dental businesses primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by increased sales in the Healthcare business. Net sales were positively impacted by approximately 0.6% due to the weakening of the U.S. dollar over the prior year. The decrease included a reduction of 1.0% from divestitures of non-strategic businesses and a 0.2% decrease due to discontinued products.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, organic sales decreased 13.5% as compared to the prior year. Organic sales decline was across all regions and was primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Key drivers of the decrease in organic sales for the year ended December 31, 2020, were Implants, Equipment & Instruments, and Digital Dentistry businesses, partially offset by an increase in the Healthcare business.
Adjusted operating income decreased $80 million or 17.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year. The decrease in operating income was primarily driven by lower sales volume and the resulting unfavorable manufacturing variances due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by cost reduction measures in both gross profit and SG&A.
Consumables
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $1,381 million, a decrease of $365 million or 20.9% from the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in net sales was across all businesses primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The decrease included a reduction of 0.1% from divestitures of non-strategic businesses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, organic sales decreased 20.8% as compared to the prior year. The decline in organic sales was the result of lower demand in all regions primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Key drivers of the decrease in organic sales for the year ended December 31, 2020, were the Endodontic, Restorative, and Laboratory businesses.
Adjusted operating income decreased $126 million or 28.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the prior year. The decrease in operating income was primarily driven by lower sales volume and the resulting unfavorable manufacturing variances due to the impact of COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by cost reduction measures in both gross profit and SG&A.
Discussion of the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2018 was included in Part II, Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019, as filed with the SEC on March 2, 2020.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires the Company to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Future events and their effects cannot be determined with absolute certainty. Therefore, the determination of estimates requires the exercise of judgment. Actual results could differ from those estimates, and such differences may be material to the consolidated financial statements. The process of determining significant estimates is fact specific and takes into account factors such as historical experience, current and expected economic conditions, product mix and in some cases, actuarial techniques. The Company evaluates these significant factors as facts and circumstances dictate. Some events as described below could cause results to differ significantly from those determined using estimates. The Company has identified the following accounting estimates as those which are critical to its business and results of operations.
Business Acquisitions
The Company acquires businesses as well as partial interests in businesses. Acquired businesses are accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting which requires the Company to record assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their respective fair values with the excess of the purchase price over estimated fair values recorded as goodwill. The assumptions made in determining the fair value of acquired assets and assumed liabilities as well as asset lives can materially impact the results of operations.
The Company obtains information during due diligence and through other sources to get respective fair values. Examples of factors and information that the Company uses to determine the fair values include: tangible and intangible asset evaluations and appraisals, and evaluations of existing contingencies, liabilities, and product line integration information. If the initial valuation for an acquisition is incomplete by the end of the reporting period in which the acquisition occurred, the Company will record a provisional estimate in the financial statements. The provisional estimate will be finalized as soon as information becomes available but will only occur up to one year from the acquisition date. More information on the assumptions used to estimate the fair values of acquired intangible assets is included in Note 1, Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
The Company follows the accounting standards for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles, which require an annual test for impairment to goodwill using a fair value approach. In addition to minimum annual impairment tests, the Company also performs impairment assessments more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the goodwill or indefinite-lived assets might be impaired. If the carrying value of a reporting unit with goodwill exceeds the implied fair value of that reporting unit, an impairment charge is recognized for the excess amount. Similarly, if the carrying amount of an indefinite-lived intangible asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment loss is recognized on the intangible.
Impairment Assessment
Assessment of the potential impairment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets is an integral part of the Company’s normal ongoing review of operations. Testing for potential impairment of these assets is dependent on significant assumptions and reflects management’s best estimates at a particular point in time. The dynamic economic environments in which the Company’s businesses operate and key economic and business assumptions with respect to projected selling prices, increased competition and introductions of new technologies can significantly affect the outcome of impairment tests. Estimates based on these assumptions may differ significantly from actual results. Changes in factors and assumptions used in assessing potential impairments can have a significant impact on the existence and magnitude of impairments, as well as the time at which such impairments are recognized. If there are unfavorable changes in these assumptions, particularly changes in the Company’s discount rates, revenue growth rates, and operating margins, the Company may be required to recognize impairment charges. Information with respect to the Company’s significant accounting policies on goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are included in Note 1, Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Annual Goodwill Impairment Testing
Goodwill is not amortized; instead, it is tested for impairment annually or more frequently if indicators of impairment exist or if a decision is made to sell a business. The valuation date for annual impairment testing is April 30. Judgment is involved in determining if an indicator of impairment has occurred during the course of the year. Such indicators may include a decline in expected cash flows, unanticipated competition or slower growth rates, among others. It is important to note that fair values which could be realized in an actual transaction may differ from those used to evaluate the impairment of goodwill.
Goodwill is allocated among reporting units and evaluated for impairment at that level. The Company’s reporting units are either an operating segment or one level below its operating segments, as determined in accordance with ASC 350.
The evaluation of impairment involves comparing the current fair value of each reporting unit to its net book value, including goodwill. The Company uses a discounted cash flow model (“DCF model”) as its valuation technique to measure the fair value for its reporting units when testing for impairment, as management believes forecasted operating cash flows are the best indicator of such fair value. The discounted cash flow model uses five- to ten- year forecasted cash flows plus a terminal value based on a multiple of earnings or by capitalizing the last period’s cash flows using a perpetual growth rate. The significant assumptions and estimates are involved in the application of the DCF model to forecast operating cash flows include, but are not limited to the discount rates, revenue growth rates, perpetual revenue growth rates, and future operating margin percentages of the reporting unit’s business. These assumptions may vary significantly among the reporting units. Operating cash flow forecasts are based on approved business-unit operating plans for the early years and historical relationships and projections in later years. In the development of the forecasted cash flows, the Company applies revenue, gross profit, and operating expense assumptions taking into consideration historical trends as well as future expectations. The revenue growth rate assumptions were developed in consideration of future expectations which included, but were not limited to, the current and ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, distribution channel changes, impact from competition, and new product development changes for these reporting units. The Company also considers the current and projected market conditions for dental and medical device industries, both in the U.S. and globally, when determining its assumptions. Operating cash flow assumptions may also be impacted by assumptions regarding benefits from restructuring initiatives, tax rates, capital spending and working capital changes. Discount rates are estimated for geographic regions and applied to the reporting units located within the regions. These rates are developed based on market participant data, which included assumptions regarding the Company’s weighted-average cost of capital adjusted for the relevant risk associated with business-specific characteristics and the uncertainty related to the reporting unit's ability to execute on the projected cash flows. The Company has not materially changed its methodology for goodwill impairment testing for the years presented.
The use of estimates and the development of assumptions results in uncertainties around forecasted cash flows. Due to the many variables inherent in the estimation of a reporting unit’s fair value and the relative size of the Company’s recorded goodwill, differences in assumptions may have a material effect on the results of the Company’s impairment analysis. Should the Company’s analysis in the future indicate an increase in discount rates or a decline in the overall markets served by these reporting units, it could result in impairment of the carrying value of goodwill to its implied fair value. There can be no assurance that the Company’s future goodwill impairment testing will not result in a material charge to earnings.
Annual Indefinite-Lived Intangible Asset Impairment Testing
Indefinite-lived intangible assets consist of tradenames and trademarks and are not subject to amortization; instead, they are tested for impairment annually as of April 30 or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of indefinite-lived intangible assets may be impaired or if a decision is made to sell a business. A significant amount of judgment is involved in determining if an indicator of impairment has occurred during the course of the year. Such indicators may include a decline in expected cash flow, unanticipated competition or slower growth rates, among others. It is important to note that fair values that could be realized in an actual transaction may differ from those used to evaluate the impairment of indefinite-lived assets.
The fair value of acquired tradenames and trademarks is estimated by the use of a relief from royalty method, which values an indefinite-lived intangible asset by estimating the royalties saved through the ownership of an asset. Under this method, an owner of an indefinite-lived intangible asset determines the arm’s length royalty that likely would have been charged if the owner had to license the asset from a third party. The royalty rate, which is based on the estimated rate applied against forecasted sales, is tax-effected and discounted at present value using a discount rate commensurate with the relative risk of achieving the cash flow attributable to the asset. Management judgment is necessary to determine key assumptions, including revenue growth rates, perpetual revenue growth rates, royalty rates, and discount rates. Other assumptions are consistent with those applied to goodwill impairment testing.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Asset Impairment Results
During the three months ended March 31, 2020, prior to performance of the annual impairment test, the Company concluded that due to the negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on revenue and profitability, a triggering event existed for four of the Company's five reporting units containing a goodwill balance as of March 31, 2020. The first quarter goodwill impairment test resulted in an impairment charge of $157 million in the Equipment & Instruments reporting unit. No goodwill impairment was identified at April 30, 2020 in conjunction with the annual test and no subsequent triggering events were identified. For further information, see Note 10, Goodwill and Intangible Assets, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Indefinite-lived Intangible Assets
During the three months ended March 31, 2020, prior to performance of the annual test, the Company identified a triggering event, and consequently performed an interim impairment test which resulted in an impairment charge of $39 million which was recorded in Restructuring and other costs in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. The impaired indefinite-lived intangibles assets are tradenames and trademarks related to the Equipment & Instruments reporting unit, for which the tradenames and trademarks for one business unit in the Equipment & Instruments reporting unit makes up a significant portion of the Company's total $39 million intangible asset impairment charge. The impairment charge was primarily driven by a decline in forecasted sales due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, the Company impaired $5 million of product tradenames and trademarks within the Technologies & Equipment segment. The impaired indefinite-lived intangible assets are tradenames and trademarks held within the Equipment and Instrument reporting unit. The impairment was the result of a change in forecasted sales related to divestitures of non-strategic product lines. The Company previously recorded an impairment charge of $179 million in the twelve months ended December 31, 2018 for the impairment of tradenames and trademarks related to the CAD/CAM, Imaging, and Instrument businesses. The impairment charge was primarily driven by a decline in forecasted sales resulting from increased competition and the impact of low-cost competitive products. Consistent with the current year charges, these amounts were recorded in Restructuring and other costs in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
The Company also assessed the annual impairment of indefinite-lived intangible assets as of April 30, 2020, which largely consist of acquired tradenames and trademarks, in conjunction with the annual impairment tests of goodwill. The assumptions used in determining the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible assets contain uncertainties, and any changes to these assumptions could have a negative impact and result in a future impairment. At April 30, 2020, the Company did not identify any impairment triggers for the indefinite-lived intangible assets. For further information see Note 10, Goodwill and Intangible Assets, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Litigation
The Company and its subsidiaries are from time to time parties to lawsuits arising out of their respective operations. The Company records liabilities when a loss is probable and can be reasonably estimated. These estimates are typically in the form of ranges, and the Company records the liabilities at the low point of the ranges, when no other point within the ranges is a better estimate of the probable loss. The ranges established by management are based on analysis made by internal and external legal counsel based on information known at the time. If the Company determines a liability to be only reasonably possible, it considers the same information to estimate the possible exposure and discloses any material potential liability. These loss contingencies are monitored regularly for a change in fact or circumstance that would require an accrual adjustment. The Company believes it has appropriately estimated liabilities for probable losses in the past; however, the unpredictability of litigation and court decisions could cause a liability to be incurred in excess of estimates. Legal costs related to these lawsuits are expensed as incurred.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are determined using the liability method of accounting for income taxes. The Company’s tax expense includes U.S. and international income taxes plus the provision for U.S. taxes on undistributed earnings of international subsidiaries not deemed to be permanently invested.
The Company applies a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. The Company recognizes in the consolidated financial statements the impact of a tax position if that position is more likely than not of being sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position.
Certain items of income and expense are not reported in tax returns and financial statements in the same year. The tax effect of such temporary differences is reported as deferred income taxes. Deferred tax assets are recognized if it is more likely than not that the assets will be realized in future years. The Company establishes a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets for which realization is not likely. At December 31, 2020, the Company has a valuation allowance of $287 million against the benefit of certain deferred tax assets of foreign and domestic subsidiaries.
The Company’s tax positions are subject to ongoing examinations by the tax authorities. The Company operates within multiple taxing jurisdictions throughout the world and in the normal course of business is examined by taxing authorities in those jurisdictions. Adjustments to the uncertain tax positions are recorded when taxing authority examinations are completed, statutes of limitation are closed, changes in tax laws occur or as new information comes to light with regard to the technical merits of the tax position.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $635 million, an increase of $2 million as compared to $633 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. Working capital contributed $213 million of operating cash flow in 2020 compared to $9 million consumed in 2019. The Company's cash and cash equivalents increased by $33 million to $438 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, on a constant currency basis, the number of days for sales outstanding in accounts receivable decreased by 8 days to 54 days as compared to 62 days at December 31, 2019. On a constant currency basis, the number of days of sales in inventory decreased by 14 days to 102 days at December 31, 2020 as compared to 116 days at December 31, 2019. The Company calculates “constant currency basis” by removing the impact of foreign currency translation, which is calculated by comparing current-period sales, accounts receivables, and inventory to prior-period sales, accounts receivable, and inventory, with both periods converted to the U.S. dollar rate at local currency foreign exchange rates for each month of the prior period.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 included acquisitions of $1,078 million, capital expenditures of $87 million and cash proceeds from net investment hedges of $58 million. The Company expects capital expenditures to be in the range of approximately $135 million to $160 million for the full year 2021.
Cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to a payment on a Treasury Rate Lock of $31 million, dividend payments of $88 million and net share repurchases of $140 million.
On March 9, 2020, the Company entered into an Accelerated Share Repurchase Transaction (“ASR Agreement") for $140 million. The final amount repurchased was 3.7 million shares at a volume-weighted average price of $38.25 inclusive of a $0.63 per share discount. At December 31, 2020, the Company held 45.8 million shares of treasury stock. The Company received proceeds of $11 million as a result of the exercise of 0.3 million shares of stock options during the year ended December 31, 2020. Including prior year repurchases, the total amount repurchased under this authorization is $650 million leaving $350 million available to be repurchased. Additional share repurchases, if any, will be made through open market purchases, Rule 10b5-1 plans, accelerated share repurchases, privately negotiated transactions, or other transactions in such amounts and at such times as the Company deems appropriate based upon prevailing market and business conditions and other factors.
The Company's total borrowings increased by $842 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Dentsply Sirona's long-term debt, including the current portion at December 31, 2020 and 2019, was $2,274 million and $1,433 million, respectively. The Company's long-term debt, including the current portion, increased by a net of $841 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. This net change included a net increase in borrowings of $743 million, and an increase of $98 million due to exchange rate fluctuations on debt denominated in foreign currencies.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company took actions to strengthen its liquidity and financial flexibility. See Note 13, Financing Arrangements, to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for more information.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company's ratio of net debt to total capitalization increased to 27.0% compared to 16.8% at December 31, 2019. Dentsply Sirona defines net debt as total debt, including current and long-term portions, less cash and cash equivalents and total capitalization as the sum of net debt plus total equity.
The Company has access to a $700 million 2018 Credit Facility through July 28, 2024 and a separate $310 million revolving credit facility through April 8, 2021. These facilities are unsecured and contain certain affirmative and negative covenants relating to the operations and financial condition of the Company. The most restrictive of these covenants pertain to asset dispositions and prescribed ratios of indebtedness to total capital and operating income plus depreciation and amortization to interest expense. The Company also has available an aggregate $500 million under a U.S. dollar commercial paper facility. The $700 million revolver serves as a back-up to the commercial paper facility, thus the total available credit under the commercial paper facility and the multi-currency revolving credit facilities in the aggregate is $700 million. At December 31, 2020, there were no outstanding borrowings under both the $700 million and the $310 million multi-currency revolving credit facilities. The Company had no outstanding borrowings under the commercial paper facility at December 31, 2020.
The Company’s revolving credit facility, term loans and senior notes contain certain affirmative and negative covenants relating to the Company's operations and financial condition. These credit agreements contain a number of covenants and two financial ratios, which the Company is required to satisfy. The most restrictive of these covenants pertain to asset dispositions and prescribed ratios of total debt outstanding to total capital not to exceed the ratio of 0.6 to 1.0, and operating income excluding depreciation and amortization to interest expense of not less than 3.0 times, in each case, as such terms are defined in the relevant agreement. Any breach of any such covenants or ratios would result in a default under the existing debt agreements that would permit the lenders to declare all borrowings under such debt agreements to be immediately due and payable and, through cross default provisions, would entitle the Company's other lenders to accelerate their loans. At December 31, 2020, the Company was in compliance with these covenants.
The Company also has access to $48 million in uncommitted short-term financing under lines of credit from various financial institutions. The lines of credit have no major restrictions and are provided under demand notes between the Company and the lending institutions. At December 31, 2020, $3 million was outstanding under these short-term lines of credit. At December 31, 2020, the Company had total unused lines of credit related to the revolving credit agreements and the uncommitted short-term lines of credit of $1,173 million.
The Company expects on an ongoing basis to be able to finance cash requirements, including capital expenditures, cash payments related to restructuring programs, debt service, operating leases and potential future acquisitions, from the current cash, cash equivalents and short-term investment balances, funds generated from operations and amounts available under its existing credit facilities. The Company estimates cash payments related to the previously announced restructuring to be in a range from $50 million to $100 million in 2021. The Company's credit facilities are further discussed in Note 13, Financing Arrangements, to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. As noted in the Company's Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows in Item 8 of this Form 10-K, the Company has continued to generate strong cash flows from operations, which has been used to finance the Company's activities.
The cash held by foreign subsidiaries for permanent reinvestment is generally used to finance the subsidiaries' operating activities and future foreign investments. The Company has the ability to repatriate additional funds to the U.S., which could result in an adjustment to the tax liability for foreign withholding taxes, foreign and/or U.S. state income taxes, and the impact of foreign currency movements. At December 31, 2020, management believed that sufficient liquidity was available in the United States and expects this to remain for the next twelve months. The Company has repatriated and expects to continue repatriating certain funds from its non-U.S. subsidiaries that are not needed to finance local operations, however, these particular repatriation activities have not and are not expected to result in a significant incremental tax liability to the Company.
The Company continues to review its debt portfolio and may refinance additional debt or add debt in the near-term as interest rates remain at historically low levels. The Company believes there is sufficient liquidity available for the next twelve months.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2020, the Company held $54 million of precious metals on consignment from several financial institutions. Under these consignment arrangements, the financial institutions own the precious metal, and, accordingly, the Company does not report this consigned inventory as part of its inventory on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. These consignment agreements allow the Company to acquire the precious metal at market rates at a point in time, which is approximately the same time, and for the same price as alloys are sold to the Company's customers. In the event that the financial institutions would discontinue offering these consignment arrangements, and if the Company could not obtain other comparable arrangements, the Company may be required to obtain third party financing to fund an ownership position to maintain precious metal inventory at operational levels. For additional details, see