Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis provides material historical and prospective disclosures intended to enable investors and other users to assess our financial condition and results of operations. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Some of the numbers included herein have been rounded for the convenience of presentation. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed in the “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and under the heading “Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
Business Overview
We develop, manufacture and market regenerative medicine products and medical devices for domestic and international markets. Our products serve the specialized needs of orthopedic and neurological surgeons, including orthobiologics for the promotion of bone healing, implants and instrumentation for the treatment of spinal disease. We promote our products in the United States through independent distributors and stocking agents, supported by direct employees.
We have an extensive sales channel of independent commissioned agents and stocking distributors in the United States representing some or all of our products. We also maintain a national accounts program to enable our agents to gain access to IDN hospitals and through GPOs. We have biologics contracts with major GPOs, as well as extensive access to IDNs across the United States for both biologics and spine hardware systems. While our focus is the United States market, we promote and sell our products internationally through stocking distribution partners in Canada, Mexico, South America, Australia, and certain Pacific region countries.
While we focused on improving our balance sheet and operational efficiencies in 2020, we remain committed to continuing to develop and release new products, expand our marketing programs, including reengaging with our distribution network, and pursue operational improvements intended to assist us in our overall commercial performance. During 2020, we took several actions in furtherance of these objectives, including:
● Completing a debt restructuring, as detailed below, which dramatically reduced our indebtedness and cost to service our debt, which should make it easier for us to refinance or replace this debt in the future, as well as facilitate easier access to capital markets for investment in our growth initiatives;
● Executing an agreement with one of the largest GPOs in the country, which will give us access to a strategically important new customer base; and
● Launching the Matriform Si for spinal fusion procedures, which expanded our biologics portfolio offering and increased our footprint in the United States orthopedic bone graft substitute market.
Recent Debt Restructuring
On August 7, 2020, we entered into a Restructuring and Exchange Agreement (the “Restructuring Agreement”) with OrbiMed Royalty Opportunities II, LP and ROS Acquisition Offshore LP, pursuant to which the parties thereto agreed, subject to the terms and conditions set forth therein, to take certain actions as set forth therein and as described below (collectively, the “Restructuring Transactions”) in furtherance of a restructuring of our outstanding indebtedness under the Second A&R Credit Agreement with Royalty Opportunities and ROS.
The primary purpose of the Restructuring Transactions was to improve our capital structure by reducing the amount of our indebtedness and cost to service our debt, which should make it easier for us to refinance or replace this debt in the future, as well as facilitate easier access to capital markets for investment in our growth initiatives. The Restructuring Transactions also allowed us to regain compliance with the NYSE American continued listing standards, which we achieved on October 5, 2020. The Restructuring Transactions included, among others:
● an amendment to our Charter to increase the number of authorized shares of our common stock from 75 million to 300 million, which occurred on October 1, 2020;
● the exchange by the Company of shares of our common stock for approximately $40.8 million of the aggregate outstanding principal amount under the Second A&R Credit Agreement, as well as, without duplication, approximately $21.1 million of the outstanding amount of PIK Interest (as defined in the Second A&R Credit Agreement) (such loans and PIK Interest, the “Exchanging Loans”), plus all other accrued and unpaid interest on the Exchanging Loans outstanding as of the closing date, at an exchange price of $1.07 per share, representing the average closing price of our common stock over the 10 trading days immediately prior to the parties entering into the Restructuring Agreement, and resulting in the issuance of approximately 57.8 million shares of common stock (the “Share Issuance”), which occurred on October 1, 2020;
● the execution of an amendment to the Second A&R Credit Agreement by the parties thereto to change certain provisions therein, including extinguishing loans in an aggregate principal amount equal to the Exchanging Loans outstanding thereunder together with all accrued and unpaid interest thereon, paying a portion of the prepayment fee payable thereunder in respect of the Exchanging Loans with proceeds of additional loans under the Second A&R Credit Agreement, with the remaining portion of the prepayment fee exchanged for an additional 0.9 million shares of our common stock, reducing the amount of credit availability thereunder, decreasing the interest rate and eliminating certain financial covenants, which occurred on October 1, 2020; and
● the launch by the Company of a rights offering to allow our stockholders to purchase up to an aggregate of $15 million of our common stock at the same price per share as the $1.07 per share exchange price used to exchange the Exchanging Loans into our common stock as part of the Share Issuance (the “Rights Offering”), which commenced on November 5, 2020 and expired on December 4, 2020 and resulted in the issuance of 712,646 shares of our common stock and gross proceeds of $0.8 million.
Following completion of these Restructuring Transactions, the remaining principal balance of our outstanding debt totals $15.6 million.
As a result of the completion of the debt restructuring, on October 5, 2020 we received notification from NYSE Regulation that we had regained compliance with all of the continued listing standards of the NYSE American, including in particular the requirement under NYSE American Company Guide Section 1003(a)(iii) that requires a listed issuer to maintain stockholders’ equity of at least $6 million if it has reported losses from continuing operations, and/or net losses, in its five most recent fiscal years.
Recent Development -- Private Placement
On February 22, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with a single healthcare-focused institutional investor (the “Investor”) pursuant to which we agreed to issue 8,888,890 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $2.25 per share, and warrants to purchase up to 6,666,668 shares of our common stock (the “Investor Warrant”) in a private placement (the “Private Placement”). The closing of the Private Placement is expected to occur on February 24, 2021, subject to the satisfaction of customary closing conditions. We expect to receive gross proceeds of approximately $20 million before deducting fees and other estimated offering expenses from the Private Placement. We expect to use the net proceeds from the Private Placement for working capital and other general corporate purposes.
The Investor Warrant will have an exercise price of $2.25 per share, subject to customary anti-dilution, but not price protection, adjustments, and will be immediately exercisable and expire on the five-year anniversary of the date of issuance.
Under the terms of the Securities Purchase Agreement, we agreed that in the event we propose to offer and sell shares of our common stock or certain common stock equivalents to non-strategic investors primarily for capital raising purposes, we would provide the Investor the right, but not the obligation, to participate in such offering in an amount of up to 25% of the securities offered in such offering. This participation right will expire upon the earlier of 12 months after the closing of the Private Placement or upon the occurrence of certain change in control events.
We also agreed, under the terms of the Securities Purchase Agreement, to enter into a registration rights agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”) with the Investor pursuant to which we will agree to prepare and file a registration statement (the “Resale Registration Statement”) with the SEC within 45 days of the closing date for purposes of registering the resale of the shares of common stock issued to the Investor and the shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of the Investor Warrant. We will also agree to use our reasonable best efforts to cause the Resale Registration Statement to be declared effective by the SEC within 60 calendar days of the closing of the Private Placement (75 calendar days in the event the registration statement is reviewed by the SEC). If we fail to meet the specified filing deadlines or keep the Resale Registration Statement effective, subject to certain permitted exceptions, we will be required to pay liquidated damages to the Investor.
In connection with the Private Placement, we entered into a placement agent agreement with A.G.P./Alliance Global Partners (the “Placement Agent”) pursuant to which the Placement Agent is serving as our exclusive placement agent in connection with the Private Placement (the “Placement Agent Agreement”). Pursuant to the Placement Agent Agreement, we agreed to pay the Placement Agent a certain percentage of the aggregate gross proceeds from the Private Placement. In addition to the cash fee, we agreed to issue to the Placement Agent a warrant to purchase up to 5.0% of the shares sold to the Investor in the Private Placement, or 444,444 shares of our common stock (the “Placement Agent Warrant”). The Placement Agent Warrant will have an exercise price of $2.8125 per share, subject to customary anti-dilution, but not price protection, adjustments and will be immediately exercisable and expire on the five-year anniversary of the date of issuance.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
Since March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused business closures, severe travel restrictions and implementation of social distancing measures. At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, hospitals and other medical facilities cancelled or deferred elective procedures, diverted resources to patients suffering from infections and limited access for non-patients, including our direct and indirect sales representatives. Because of the COVID-19 pandemic, surgeons and their patients have been, and may continue to be, required, or are choosing, to defer procedures in which our products otherwise would be used, and many facilities that specialize in the procedures in which our products otherwise would be used have experienced temporary closures or reduced operating hours. These circumstances have negatively impacted, and may continue to negatively impact, the ability of our employees, independent sales representatives and distributors to effectively market and sell our products, which has had and will likely continue to have a material adverse effect on our revenues. In addition, even after the easing of such restrictions such that governmental orders no longer prohibit or recommend against performing such procedures, patients may continue to defer such procedures out of concern of being exposed to coronavirus or for other reasons. It is uncertain if our revenues will ever return to pre-COVID-19 levels.
The COVID-19 pandemic has also caused adverse effects on general commercial activity and the global economy, which has led to an economic recession and could cause other unpredictable events, any of which could adversely affect our business, operating results or financial condition. The adverse effect of the pandemic on the broader economy also will likely negatively affect demand for procedures using our products, both in the near- and long-term. This could cause one or more of our distributors, independent sales representatives, customers, contract manufacturers and suppliers to experience financial distress, cancel, postpone or delay orders, be unable to perform under a contract, file for bankruptcy protection, go out of business, or suffer disruptions in their business. This could impact our ability to manufacture and provide products and otherwise operate our business, as well as increase our costs and expenses.
The decline in our revenues and adverse impact on our other operating results could impact our debt covenants under our credit facility and our ability to access funding thereunder or refinance that debt or extend its maturity date. We may need to borrow funds from alternative sources, such as other lenders and institutions or government agencies. There can be no guarantee that such borrowing will be available or available on favorable terms or without restrictions that may otherwise impair our operating flexibility. The COVID-19 pandemic has also led to and could continue to lead to disruption and volatility in the global capital markets, which could increase our cost of future capital and adversely affect our ability to access the capital markets in the future.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, during the second quarter of 2020, we implemented a series of cost-saving actions intended to preserve capital to support our operations. These temporary cost-saving actions included:
● termination or furlough of 42% of our workforce;
● suspension in hiring most open positions;
● elimination of planned fiscal 2020 merit increases;
● institution of a temporary 20% base salary or wage reduction for all executive officers and employees;
● 20% reduction in non-employee director retainers for second quarter of 2020;
● suspension of future 401(k) plan matching contributions by the Company; and
● reduction in fiscal 2020 sales and marketing expenses and other discretionary spending.
Effective July 1, 2020, we reinstituted the full base salaries and wages of all our employees and restored future 401(k) plan matching contributions.
COVID-19 has resulted and will likely continue to result in a material adverse effect on our business, operating results, financial condition, prospects and the trading price of our common stock in the near-term and beyond 2020. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact our business will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19, the actions to contain it or treat its impact, and the availability and effectiveness of vaccines.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth our results of operations for 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
Revenue
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased 17.5% to $53.3 million compared to $64.7 million for the prior year. The decrease of $11.3 million is largely attributed to the impact of COVID-19 and the sudden drop in elective procedures beginning in early March 2020.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales consists primarily of manufacturing cost, product purchase costs and depreciation of surgical instruments. Cost of sales also includes reserves for estimated excess inventory, inventory on consignment that may be missing and not returned, and reserves for estimated missing and damaged consigned surgical instruments. Cost of sales decreased by 14.5%, or $3.2 million, to $18.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $22.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This reduction was due primarily to lower revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the prior year, as previously discussed. Cost of sales as a percent of total revenue was 35.5% of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 34.3% for the prior year. This increase in cost of sales as a percent of total revenue is also primarily due to lower revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 versus the prior year
Gross profit as a percentage of sales decreased to 64.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 65.7% for the year ended December 31, 2019. This reduction is primarily attributable to diminished economies of scale due to lower revenue, partially offset by reduced depreciation expense.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for corporate employees, cash based and stock-based compensation related costs and corporate expenses for legal, accounting and other professional fees, as well as occupancy costs. General and administrative expenses decreased 22.1%, or $3.8 million, to $13.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is primarily attributable to lower legal and consulting fees of $2.1 million, reduced legal settlement expenses of $0.9 million, reduced field action expenses of $0.5 million, reduced license fees of $0.5 million, reduced executive recruiting fees of $0.4 million and reduced salaries and wages of $0.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. These decreases were offset partially by severance expense of $0.7 million and additional stock-based compensation expense of $0.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The reduced salaries and wages were due to the reduction in headcount and the temporary 20% salary and wage decreases implemented during the second quarter of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of sales commissions, personnel costs for sales and marketing employees, costs for trade shows, sales conventions and meetings, travel expenses, advertising and other sales and marketing related costs. Sales and marketing expenses decreased 20.8%, or $5.5 million, to $21.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $26.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease is primarily due to a $3.1 million reduction in sales commissions due to lower revenues, reduced salaries and wages of $1.5 million and lower travel expenses of $0.5 million compared to the prior year.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of internal costs for the development of new product technologies. Research and development expenses decreased $0.3 million, or 29.5%, to $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was due primarily to a reduction in research and development headcount in 2020 compared to 2019.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $0.2 million to $6.0 million as compared to $5.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was due to an amendment to our credit agreement in May 2020 which increased the effective interest rate of our outstanding debt prior the partial exchange of outstanding paid-in-kind interest and principal for shares of our common stock in connection with our October 1, 2020 debt restructuring. Concurrent with this debt restructuring, we incurred expense of $0.7 million related to prepayment fees under our credit agreement. The debt restructuring transaction allowed us to forego $2.0 million of interest expense which otherwise would have accrued during the remainder of the year ended December 31, 2020 under the terms of our credit agreement.
Income Tax Provision
Income tax provision for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $0.2 million to $0.3 million as compared to $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was due to certain states suspending the utilization of net operating losses as offsets to taxable income.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Working Capital
Since our inception, we have historically financed our operations through operating cash flows, as well as the private placement of equity securities and convertible debt, an equity credit facility, a debt facility, a common stock rights offerings and other debt transactions.
The following table highlights several key measures of our working capital performance and debt levels (in thousands):
On February 22, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with a single healthcare-focused institutional investor pursuant to which we agreed to issue 8,888,890 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $2.25 per share, and warrants to purchase up to 6,666,668 shares of our common stock in a private placement. The closing of the Private Placement is expected to occur on February 24, 2021, subject to the satisfaction of customary closing conditions. We expect to receive gross proceeds of approximately $20 million before deducting fees and other estimated offering expenses from the Private Placement. We expect to use the net proceeds from the Private Placement for working capital and other general corporate purposes.
Long-term debt, net consists of long-term debt due to the lender under the Second A&R Credit Agreement. Since the maturity of the indebtedness outstanding under our credit facility is December 31, 2021, all outstanding indebtedness is classified as current as of December 31, 2020. In addition, although the remaining principal balance of our outstanding debt totals $15.6 million, the current portion of long-term debt as of December 31, 2020 was $16.8 million reflecting the carrying value of the loans outstanding under the credit facility, which is equal to the undiscounted future cash payments and principal associated with the loans thereunder.
Cash Flows
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.7 million compared to $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was due primarily to higher usage of cash from working capital to restore inventory levels to amounts necessary to support anticipated sales of certain higher-demand products, which was partially offset by collection of accounts receivable.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.3 million, primarily representing purchases of property and equipment of $1.5 million, partially offset by proceeds from sale of fixed assets of $0.2 million. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $0.5 million, primarily representing purchases of property and equipment of $0.9 million, partially offset by proceeds from sale of fixed assets of $0.3 million.
Net cash used in financing activities was $0.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisting primarily of $1.0 million in costs associated with our debt restructuring and $0.3 million in payments on long-term debt. These costs were partially offset by $0.6 million in proceeds from our rights offering. Net cash used in financing activities was $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisting primarily of $0.5 million of payments on financing leases.
Cash Requirements
The outstanding indebtedness under the Second A&R Credit Agreement matures December 31, 2021. We believe that we will be able to refinance the outstanding indebtedness under the Second A&R Credit Agreement or extend the maturity date of that facility such that our $2.3 million of cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020, together with anticipated cash flows from operations, the anticipated net proceeds from the Private Placement and the $5.0 million available at the lender’s sole discretion under the Second A&R Credit Agreement, or comparable refinanced credit agreement, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements through at least February 2022. While we intend to refinance our outstanding indebtedness or extend the maturity date of this facility, no assurance can be provided that we will do so on terms that are favorable to us or at all. In addition, we may require or seek additional capital to fund our future operations and business strategy prior to February 2022. Accordingly, there is no assurance that we will not need or seek additional financing prior to such time.
We may elect to raise additional financing even before we need it if market conditions for raising additional capital are favorable. We may seek to raise additional financing through various sources, such as equity and debt financings, additional debt restructurings or refinancings, or through strategic collaborations and license agreements. We can give no assurances that we will be able to secure additional sources of funds to support our operations, or if such funds are available to us, that such additional financing will be sufficient to meet our needs or on terms acceptable to us. This is particularly true if economic and market conditions deteriorate.
To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities or the restructuring or refinancing of our debt, the interests of our current stockholders may be diluted, and the terms may include discounted equity purchase prices, warrant coverage, liquidation or other preferences that would adversely affect the rights of our current stockholders. If we issue common stock, we may do so at purchase prices that represent a discount to our trading price and/or we may issue warrants to the purchasers, which could dilute our current stockholders. If we issue preferred stock, it could adversely affect the rights of our stockholders or reduce the value of our common stock. In particular, specific rights granted to future holders of preferred stock may include voting rights, preferences as to dividends and liquidation, conversion and redemption rights, sinking fund provisions, and restrictions on our ability to merge with or sell our assets to a third party. Additional debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. Prior to raising additional equity or debt financing, we must obtain the consent of ROS and Royalty Opportunities, and no assurance can be provided that they would provide such consent, which could limit our ability to raise additional financing and the terms thereof.
Second A&R Credit Agreement
In connection with our recent debt restructuring described above, on October 1, 2020, we entered into a Second Amendment to our Second A&R Credit Agreement (the “Second Amendment”) with ROS and Royalty Opportunities, which among other things, provided for:
● Extinguishment of approximately $61.9 million of principal and paid-in-kind interest outstanding on the loans in exchange for approximately 57.8 million shares of our common stock and the addition of a principal loan amount equal to prepayment fees associated with the loans not paid in cash or exchanged for shares of our common stock;
● Exchange of approximately $0.9 million of prepayment fees associated amounts outstanding under the Second A&R Credit Agreement for approximately 0.9 million shares of our common stock;
● Elimination of the availability of additional draw loan advances and reduction of available additional term loans to $5.0 million, the availability of which is in the sole and absolute discretion of the lender;
● Accrual of interest payable in cash for the remaining term of the Second A&R Credit Agreement at a rate per annum equal to the sum of (i) 7.00% plus (ii) the higher of (x) the LIBO Rate (as such term is defined in the Second A&R Credit Agreement) and (y) 1.00%; and
● Elimination of certain financial covenants.
In addition, as a result of the Second Amendment, Royalty Opportunities is now the sole holder of our outstanding indebtedness and the sole lender under the credit facility.
Long-term debt, plus premium and less issuance costs, consists of long-term debt due to the lender under the Second A&R Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. Since the maturity date of the indebtedness outstanding under our credit facility is December 31, 2021, all outstanding indebtedness is classified as current as of December 31, 2020.
As a result of our recent debt restructuring, as previously described, we recorded a gain on restructuring totaling $15.1 million. The gain represents the excess of the carrying value of our outstanding loans under the Second A&R Credit Agreement prior to the extinguishment of such debt in the debt restructuring transaction, $80.3 million, over the sum of the fair value of the 57.8 million shares issued therewith, $48.2 million, and $17.1 million of undiscounted future cash payments associated with the Second Amendment.
The carrying value of loans outstanding under the Second A&R Credit Agreement is equal to the undiscounted future cash payments associated with the Second Amendment and principal associated with loans thereunder. Cash interest payments in connection with the Second A&R Credit Agreement will reduce the carrying value of associated loans, and accordingly, no interest expense related to cash interest payments will be recorded for the duration of the Second A&R Credit Agreement.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity or capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to an investor in our shares.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Information regarding recent accounting pronouncements is included in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Critical Accounting Estimates
All of our significant accounting policies and estimates are described in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” Certain of our more critical accounting estimates require the application of significant judgment by management in selecting the appropriate assumptions in determining the estimate. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. We develop these judgments based on our historical experience, terms of existing contracts, our observance of trends in the industry, information provided by our customers, and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumption conditions.
We believe that the following financial estimates are both important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require subjective or complex judgments. Further, we believe that the items discussed below are properly recorded in our consolidated financial statements for all periods presented. Our management has discussed the development, selection, and disclosure of our most critical financial estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors and with our independent registered public accounting firm. The judgments about those financial estimates are based on information available as of the date of our financial statements. Those financial estimates include:
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of costs over fair value of assets of businesses acquired. Goodwill and intangible assets acquired in a purchase business combination and determined to have indefinite useful lives are not amortized, instead they are tested for impairment annually and whenever events or circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. We conduct our impairment test on an annual basis and review the analysis assumptions on a quarterly basis. We test goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is an operating segment or one level below an operating segment, referred to as a component. A component of an operating segment is a reporting unit if the component constitutes a business for which discrete financial information is available and segment management regularly reviews the operating results of that component.
We chose December 31 to assess our annual goodwill for any impairment in order to closely align with the timing of our annual planning process. In testing goodwill for impairment we perform a quantitative impairment test, including computing the fair value of the reporting unit and comparing that value to its carrying value. If the fair value is less than its carrying value, then the goodwill is determined to be impaired. In the event that goodwill is impaired, an impairment charge to earnings would become necessary. There was no impairment of goodwill recorded in 2020 or 2019.
We evaluate other intangible assets whenever current events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. Recoverability for assets to be held and used is based on our projection of the undiscounted future operating cash flows of the underlying assets. To the extent such projections indicate that future undiscounted cash flows are not sufficient to recover the carrying amounts of related assets, a charge might be required to reduce the carrying amount to equal estimated fair value. We did not have a triggering event in 2020 or 2019.
Inventory Valuation
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined using the specific identification method and includes materials, labor and overhead. We calculate an inventory reserve for estimated obsolescence and excess inventory based on historical usage and sales, as well as assumptions about anticipated future demand for products. A significant sustained decrease in demand could result in an increase in the amount of excess inventory quantities on hand. Additionally, our industry is characterized by regular new product development and introductions that could result in an increase in the amount of obsolete inventory quantities on hand due to cannibalization of existing products. Our estimates for excess and obsolete inventory are reviewed and updated on a quarterly basis. Our estimates of anticipated future product demand may prove to be inaccurate in which case we may be required to incur charges for excess and obsolete inventory. Increases in our inventory reserves result in a corresponding expense, which is recorded to cost of sales. We believe the total reserve at December 31, 2020 of $11.1 million is adequate.
Accounts Receivable and Allowances
Accounts receivable represents amounts due from customers for which revenue has been recognized. Normal terms on trade accounts receivable are net 30 days, and some customers are offered discounts for early pay. We perform credit evaluations when considered necessary, but generally do not require collateral to extend credit.
The allowance for doubtful accounts is our best estimate of the amount of probable credit losses in our existing receivables. We determine the allowance based on factors such as historical collection experience, customers’ current creditworthiness, customer concentration, age of accounts receivable balance, general economic conditions that may affect a customer’s ability to pay, and management judgment. In addition, we include provision for current expected credit loss based on historical collection experience adjusted for current economic conditions affecting collectability. Actual customer collections could differ from our estimates. Account balances are charged to the allowance after all means of collection have been exhausted and the potential for recovery is considered remote. Provisions to the allowance for doubtful accounts are charged to expense. We do not have any off-balance sheet credit exposure related to our customers.
Deterioration in the financial condition of any key customer or a significant slowdown in the economy could have a material negative impact on our ability to collect a portion or all of our accounts receivable. We believe that an analysis of historical trends and our current knowledge of potential collection issues provide us with sufficient information to establish a reasonable estimate for an allowance for doubtful accounts. However, since we cannot predict with certainty future changes in the financial stability of our customers, our actual future losses from uncollectible accounts may differ from our estimates. In the event we determined that a smaller or larger uncollectible accounts reserve is appropriate, we would record a credit or charge, as applicable, to bad debt expense in the period that we made such a determination. We believe our allowance for doubtful accounts at December 31, 2020 of $0.7 million is adequate.
Going Concern
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern which contemplates the realization of assets and liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business and do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability or classification of assets or the amounts of liabilities that might result from the outcome of these uncertainties. Our ability to continue as a going concern, realize the carrying value of our assets and discharge our liabilities in the ordinary course of business is dependent upon a number of factors, including, the level and timing of future revenues and expenditures; development, commercialization and market acceptance of our products; competing technologies and market developments; regulatory requirements and delays; and ability to attract and retain key personnel.
Management’s evaluation of going concern was conducted as part of its discussions with and the review by the Board of Directors of our 2021 Annual Operating Plan. Management believes that we will be able to refinance the amounts outstanding under the Second A&R Credit Agreement or extend the date of its maturity such that our $2.3 million of cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2020, together with the $5.0 million in availability at the sole discretion of the lender under our Second A&R Credit Agreement, or comparable refinanced credit agreement, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements and continue as a going concern through at least February 2022.
Although we have availability under our Second A&R Credit Agreement, this agreement is scheduled to terminate on December 31, 2021. Accordingly, we anticipate that we will need to refinance our outstanding indebtedness and obtain additional credit availability in the near future. No assurance can be provided that we will be able to do this on favorable terms or at all. We may elect to seek additional financing even before we need it if market conditions are favorable. We may seek to raise additional funds through various sources, such as equity and debt financings, additional debt restructurings or refinancings, or through strategic collaborations and license agreements. We can give no assurances that we will be able to secure additional sources of funds to support our operations, or if such funds are available to us, that such additional financing will be sufficient to meet our needs or on terms acceptable to us. This is particularly true if economic and market conditions deteriorate. Any failure by us to raise additional funds on terms favorable to us, or at all, could result in our inability to pay our expenses as they come due, limit our ability to expand our business operations, and harm our overall business prospects. If adequate funds are not otherwise available, we would be required to curtail operations significantly, including reducing our sales and marketing expenses and introduction of new products which could negatively impact product sales and we could even be required to cease operations, liquidate our assets and possibly seek bankruptcy protection.