Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” “MD&A”, contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. See the introductory section immediately prior to “Part I” and Risk Factors in “Item 1A” of this report regarding these statements.
Overview
This MD&A includes the following sections:
Our Business: a brief description of our business and a discussion of how we assess our operating results
Consolidated Results of Operations: an analysis of our consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
Certain Non-GAAP Financial Measures: an analysis of our results using certain non-GAAP financial measures, for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources: a discussion of our major sources and uses of cash as well as an analysis of our cash flows and aggregate contractual obligations and commercial commitments
Our Business
Yellow Corporation is a holding company that, through its operating subsidiaries, offers our customers a wide range of transportation services. The Company has one of the largest, most comprehensive LTL networks in North America with local, regional, national and international capabilities. Through its team of experienced service professionals, the Company offers industry-leading expertise in LTL shipments and flexible supply chain solutions, ensuring customers can ship industrial, commercial and retail goods with confidence.
We measure the performance of our business using several metrics, but rely primarily upon (without limitation) operating revenue, operating income (loss), and operating ratio. We also use certain non-GAAP financial measures as secondary measures to assess our operating performance.
•
Operating Revenue: Our operating revenue has two primary components: volume (commonly evaluated using tonnage, tonnage per day, number of shipments, shipments per day or weight per shipment) and yield or price (commonly evaluated using picked up revenue, revenue per hundredweight or revenue per shipment). Yield includes fuel surcharge revenue, which is common in the trucking industry and represents an amount charged to customers that adjusts with changing fuel prices. We base our fuel surcharges on the U.S. Department of Energy fuel index and adjust them weekly. Rapid material changes in the index or our cost of fuel can positively or negatively impact our revenue and operating income as a result of changes in our fuel surcharge. We believe that fuel surcharge is an accepted and important component of the overall pricing of our services to our customers. Without an industry accepted fuel surcharge program, our base pricing for our transportation services would require changes. We believe the distinction between base rates and fuel surcharge has blurred over time, and it is impractical to clearly separate all the different factors that influence the price that our customers are willing to pay. In general, under our present fuel surcharge program, we believe rising fuel costs are beneficial to us and falling fuel costs are detrimental to us in the short term, the effects of which are mitigated over time.
•
Operating Income (Loss): Operating income (loss) is operating revenue less operating expenses.
•
Operating Ratio: Operating ratio is a common operating performance measure used in the trucking industry. It is calculated as (i) 100 percent (ii) minus the result of dividing operating income by operating revenue or (iii) plus the result of dividing operating loss by operating revenue, and is expressed as a percentage.
•
Non-GAAP Financial Measures: We use EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, which are non-GAAP financial measures, to assess the following:
o
EBITDA: a non-GAAP measure that reflects our earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization expense. EBITDA is used for internal management purposes as a financial measure that reflects our core operating performance.
o
Adjusted EBITDA: a non-GAAP measure that reflects EBITDA, and further adjusts for letter of credit fees, equity-based compensation expense, net gains or losses on property disposals, restructuring charges, transaction costs related to issuances of debt, non-recurring consulting fees, non-cash impairment charges and the gains or losses from permitted dispositions, discontinued operations, and certain non-cash expenses, charges and losses (provided that if any of such non-cash expenses, charges or losses represents an accrual or reserve for potential cash items in any future period, the cash payment in respect thereof in such future period will be subtracted from Adjusted EBITDA in such future period to the extent paid). All references to “Adjusted EBITDA” throughout this section and the rest of this report refer to “Adjusted EBITDA” calculated under our UST Credit Agreements and the Term Loan Agreement, as amended, (collectively, the TL Agreements) (defined therein as “Consolidated EBITDA”) unless otherwise specified. Consolidated EBITDA is also a defined term in our ABL Facility and the definition there aligns with the prior definition of Consolidated EBITDA under the Prior Term Loan Agreement. Adjusted EBITDA is used for internal management purposes as a financial measure that reflects our core operating performance, to measure compliance with financial covenants in our TL Agreements and to determine certain management and employee bonus compensation.
We believe our presentation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors and other users as these measures represent key supplemental information our management uses to compare and evaluate our core underlying business results, particularly in light of our leverage position and the capital-intensive nature of our business. Further, EBITDA is a measure that is commonly used by other companies in our industry and provides a comparison for investors to evaluate the performance of the companies in the industry. Additionally, Adjusted EBITDA helps investors to understand how the company is tracking against our financial covenants in our TL Agreements as this measure is calculated as defined in our TL Agreements and serves as a driving component of our key financial covenants.
Our non-GAAP financial measures have the following limitations:
o
EBITDA does not reflect the interest expense or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or fund principal payments on our outstanding debt;
o
Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the interest expense or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or fund principal payments on our outstanding debt, letter of credit fees, restructuring charges, transaction costs related to the issuance of debt, non-cash expenses, charges or losses, or nonrecurring consulting fees, among other items;
o
Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will generally need to be replaced in the future and EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements;
o
Equity-based compensation is an element of our long-term incentive compensation package, although Adjusted EBITDA excludes employee equity-based compensation expense when presenting our ongoing operating performance for a particular period; and
o
Other companies in our industry may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do, potentially limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these limitations, our non-GAAP measures should not be considered a substitute for performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and use our non-GAAP measures as secondary measures.
Business Strategy Overview
Our strategy is focused on our multi-year enterprise transformation to optimize and structurally improve our network that includes more than 300 strategically located terminals throughout North America. The transformation is expected to increase asset utilization, expand service offerings, leverage operational flexibilities gained with our 2019 labor agreement, consolidate disparate company systems onto a single platform and rationalize the more than 300 physical locations in the network while maintaining geographic coverage. The result will be to operate as one Yellow company, one Yellow network, under one Yellow brand that provides great super-regional service.
Capital investment remains a top priority for us. Our UST Credit Agreements have and will continue to enable us to significantly increase the amount of capital we are able to invest in revenue equipment to improve the age of our fleet as there is an immediate return in improved fuel miles per gallon and reduced vehicle maintenance expense. To properly execute on our transformation plan, we are committed to investing in technology in order to enhance the customer experience and improve our operational flexibilities. We expect to spend somewhere between $450 million and $550 million on capital investments during 2021.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Presented below are consolidated results. In preparing this analysis, the Company determined that the Chief Operating Decision Maker (“CODM”) is the Chief Executive Officer who manages the business, regularly reviews financial information and allocates resources. The Company began operating under one segment in 2020. The consolidated results are consistent with historical consolidated reporting and have not been recast.
2020 Compared to 2019
The table below provides summary consolidated financial information and amounts as a percentage of operating revenue for the years ended December 31:
(*) not meaningful
Results of operations during 2020 were impacted by the outbreak of COVID-19 as shipping volumes decreased from typical levels mainly during the second quarter, especially in certain markets that have seen greater case levels of COVID-19. Downward pressure on diesel fuel prices reduced the amount of fuel surcharge revenues, which are typically priced into our services. Partially offsetting these decreases, during the second half of 2020 reduced shipping capacity relative to overall shipment demand created a favorable pricing environment across the industry. As such, our consolidated operating revenue decreased $357.5 million, during 2020 when compared to 2019.
Due to the trends in shipping volumes and shortages for certain labor resources, the Company maintained a lower headcount than historical levels to match shipment volume trends during the year. Lower headcount levels were also impacted by an imbalance in the available pool of qualified drivers versus overall shipment demand, which is an industry trend. In addition, the Company’s 2020 results reflect decreases from 2019 in variable expenses, including fuel and maintenance, among others. Offsetting these variable expense decreases the Company paid higher contractual wage and benefit rates for union employees. Total operating expenses decreased $397.8 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, primarily as a result of decreases in variable expenses. Further material changes are provided below.
Fuel, operating expenses and supplies. Fuel, operating expenses and supplies decreased $169.9 million, primarily due to a $100.3 million decrease in fuel expense, which was a result of lower fuel prices and fewer miles driven. Additional decreases resulted from cost reduction efforts, including a $21.0 million reduction in professional services, a $17.3 million decrease in other operating expenses, and a $16.4 million decrease in other employee expenses, and an $11.0 million decrease in vehicle maintenance.
Purchased transportation. Purchased transportation increased $24.6 million, primarily due to a $19.9 million increase in over-the-road purchased transportation due to increased rates which have been impacted by driver shortages, and a $16.9 million increase in third-party costs due to growth in customer-specific logistics solutions partially offset by a $6.0 million decrease from reduced usage of local purchased transportation and a $6.4 million decrease in long-term vehicle rentals.
Gains on property disposals, net. Net gains on disposals of property were $45.3 million during 2020 as compared to $13.7 million in 2019. The gains in 2020 and 2019 were primarily related to the sale of real properties.
Impairment charges. During 2019, we recorded an $8.2 million impairment charge in the first quarter that reflected the write-down of an intangible asset as a result of rebranding strategies, leading to discontinued use of that tradename.
Nonoperating expense, net. Included in the overall increase of approximately 4.1% is an increase in interest expenses that is partially offset by the reduction related to a 2019 debt extinguishment. Interest expense increased $24.7 million, primarily due to a $11.7 million increase in interest and associated amortization related to the UST Loans entered into during July 2020 and a $10.3 million increase in Term Loan interest due to higher rates and amortization. In 2019, the Company incurred $11.2 million of nonoperating expense related to the extinguishment of debt with no such charge in 2020.
Income tax. The Company’s effective tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was 26.8% and 4.0%, respectively. Significant items impacting the 2020 rate include a benefit recognized due to application of the exception to the rules regarding intraperiod tax allocation, a benefit from the reversal of liability for an uncertain tax position resulting from statute expiration, and a change in the valuation allowance established for the net deferred tax asset balance at December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company had a full valuation allowance against our domestic net deferred tax assets.
The table below summarizes the key revenue metrics for the years ended December 31:
(a)
Percent change based on unrounded figures and not the rounded figures presented.
(b)
Does not equal financial statement revenue due to revenue recognition adjustments between accounting periods and the impact of other revenue.
2019 Compared to 2018
The table below provides summary consolidated financial information and amounts as a percentage of operating revenue for the years ended December 31:
(*) not meaningful
Our consolidated operating revenue decreased $220.8 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018. The decrease in revenue is primarily attributed to a decrease in tonnage and fuel surcharge revenue, while partially offset by an increase in base yield excluding fuel surcharge.
Operating expenses decreased $94.1 million, for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to lower purchased transportation expense and lower fuel, operating expenses and supplies, partially offset by increased salaries, wages and employee benefits.
Salaries, wages and employee benefits. Salaries, wages and employee benefits increased $13.7 million, primarily due to a $35.5 million increase in benefits costs which was largely driven by a $25.8 increase in union vacation expense due to restoration of benefits from the passage of the five-year national master contract (“New NMFA”), a $15.7 million increase in workers’ compensation expense, and a $6.8 million increase in salaries expense. These increases were partially offset by a $32.9 million reduction in short-term incentive compensation and an $11.3 million decrease in wages expense as a result of tonnage decreases that reduced the number of hours needed to process freight which were partially offset by contractual rate increases due to the New NMFA.
Fuel, operating expenses and supplies. Fuel, operating expenses and supplies decreased $51.2 million, primarily due to a $48.1 million decrease in fuel expense, which was largely a result of lower fuel prices and fewer miles driven.
Purchased transportation. Purchased transportation decreased $69.0 million, primarily due to a $68.3 million decrease in rail and over-the-road purchased transportation expense as a result of reduced tonnage, a $9.3 million decrease from reduced usage of local purchased transportation, and a $5.9 million decrease in short-term vehicle rents. These decreases were partially offset by an $18.5 million increase in third-party costs due to the expansion in third-party logistics solutions.
Other operating expenses. Other operating expenses decreased $7.6 million, primarily due to a decrease of $4.2 million in cargo claims expense, and a $4.0 million reduction in operating taxes as a result of fewer miles driven.
Gains on property disposals, net. Net gains on disposals of property were $13.7 million during 2019 as compared to $20.8 million in 2018. The gains in 2019 and 2018 were primarily related to the sale of real properties, including a $29.3 million gain from the sale of one excess property during 2018.
Impairment charges. During the first quarter of 2019, the company recorded an $8.2 million impairment charge that reflects the write-down of an intangible asset as a result of rebranding strategies, leading to the discontinued use of a tradename.
Nonoperating expenses, net. Nonoperating expenses increased $12.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018 primarily due to an $11.2 million expense in 2019 related to the extinguishment of debt with no such charge in 2018, a $5.4 million increase in interest expense due to higher interest rates and outstanding debt balances during 2019, which were partially offset by a $6.3 million decrease in non-union pension costs due mainly to a reduction in non-cash pension settlement expenses.
Income tax. The Company’s effective tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 was 4.0% and 35.5%, respectively. Significant items impacting the 2019 rate included a provision for net state and foreign taxes, certain permanent items, and a change in the valuation allowance established for the net deferred tax asset balance at December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2019 and 2018, the Company had a full valuation allowance against domestic net deferred tax assets.
The table below summarizes the key revenue metrics for the years ended December 31:
(a)
Percent change based on unrounded figures and not the rounded figures presented.
(b)
Does not equal financial statement revenue due to revenue recognition adjustments between accounting periods and the impact of other revenue.
Certain Non-GAAP Financial Measures
As previously discussed in the “Our Business” section, we use certain non-GAAP financial measures to assess performance including EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA. We believe our presentation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors and other users as these measures represent key supplemental information our management uses to compare and evaluate our core underlying business results, particularly in light of our leverage position and the capital-intensive nature of our business. These secondary measures should be considered in addition to the results prepared in accordance with GAAP, but should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, our GAAP financial measures.
Adjusted EBITDA
The reconciliation of net income (loss) to EBITDA and EBITDA to Adjusted EBITDA the years ended December 31:
(a)
Non-cash reserve changes reflect the net non-cash reserve charge for union and nonunion vacation (which includes the impact of the New NMFA for the one week of restored vacation), with such non-cash reserve adjustment to be reduced by cash charges in a future period when paid.
(b)
Pursuant to the TL Agreements, Adjusted EBITDA limits certain adjustments in aggregate to 10% of the trailing-twelve-month ("TTM") consolidated Adjusted EBITDA, prior to the inclusion of amounts subject to the 10% threshold, for each period ending. Such adjustments include, but are not limited to, restructuring charges, integration costs, severance, and non-recurring charges. The limitation calculation is updated quarterly based on TTM Adjusted EBITDA, and any necessary adjustment resulting from this limitation, if applicable, will be presented here.
Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following sections provide aggregated information regarding our financial condition, liquidity and capital resources. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019 our total debt was $1,225.4 million and $862.2 million, respectively.
Liquidity
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash and cash equivalents, available borrowings under our ABL Facility and any prospective net cash flow from operations. As of December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents was $439.3 million.
As of December 31, 2020, our maximum availability under our ABL Facility was $43.7 million, and our managed accessibility was $4.0 million. Maximum availability is derived by reducing the amount that may be advanced against eligible receivables plus eligible borrowing base cash by certain reserves imposed by the ABL Agent and our $353.3 million of outstanding letters of credit. Our Managed Accessibility of $4.0 million represents the maximum amount we would access on the ABL Facility and is adjusted for eligible receivables plus eligible borrowing base cash measured as of December 31, 2020. If eligible receivables fall below the threshold management uses to measure availability, which is 10% of the borrowing line, the credit agreement governing the ABL Facility permits adjustments from eligible borrowing base cash to restricted cash prior to the compliance measurement date of January 15, 2021. As of January 15, 2021, we had less than 10% of the borrowing line in eligible receivables and moved $3.1 million of cash into restricted cash, as permitted under the ABL Facility, which effectively put our cash and cash equivalents and Managed Accessibility to $440.2 million as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2019, our availability under our ABL Facility was $37.7 million. Of the $37.7 million in availability, Managed Accessibility was $0.2 million. Our cash and cash equivalents and Managed Accessibility was $80.4 million as of December 31, 2019.
The table below summarizes cash and cash equivalents and Managed Accessibility at December 31:
Outside of funding normal operations, our principal uses of cash include making contributions to our various multi-employer pension funds and single-employer pension plans, and meeting our other cash obligations, including, but not limited to, paying principal and interest on our funded debt, payments on equipment leases and investments in capital expenditures.
Covenants
The TL Agreements include a financial covenant requirement for the Company to maintain a minimum Liquidity. The Company is in compliance with the applicable financial covenant as of December 31, 2020.
The Company has a requirement to maintain minimum Liquidity of $125.0 million. This Liquidity requirement is relieved at the end of the first quarter in which the Company’s Adjusted EBITDA for the trailing twelve-month period is greater than $200.0 million. With Liquidity as of December 31, 2020 of $440.2 million, UST loan availability, and forecasted operating results, management expects the Company will meet this covenant requirement for the next twelve months.
Beginning with the fiscal quarter ended December 31, 2021, the Company has a requirement to maintain a trailing twelve-month Adjusted EBITDA of $100.0 million. Management expects, based on forecasted operating results, the Company will meet this covenant requirement for the period it becomes effective in the next twelve months.
Cash Flow
For the years ended December 31:
Operating Cash Flow
The increase in cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is primarily related to deferrals of various payments recorded as other operating liabilities. The change in other operating liabilities during 2020 was $117.2 million, which includes accrued payroll tax deferrals. Under the CARES Act, we are deferring payment of certain employer payroll taxes incurred in 2020 that resulted in $85.6 million of liabilities as of December 31, 2020, with 50% due December 31, 2021 and 50% due December 31, 2022 as detailed in our Contractual Cash Obligations table. For the year ended 2020 the Company incurred $42.4 million of interest expenses that were paid-in-kind. Lastly, our operating cash flows from a reduction in lease payments was $20.1 million driven by a decrease in the number of operating lease agreements for revenue equipment and changes in payment timing.
Cash flow from operations decreased by $203.3 million to $21.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to $224.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease in cash flow is primarily related to a $124.2 million decrease in net income, and the remaining difference is primarily related to timing differences in working capital accounts.
Investing Cash Flow
The decrease of $32.8 million of cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was largely driven by cash proceeds from the sale of real property as well as a reduction to cash outflows of revenue equipment acquisitions. Cash used by investing cash flows is expected to increase in 2021 due to increased capital expenditures as the Company anticipates utilizing funds from the UST Credit Agreements, as discussed below in Capital Expenditures.
Cash used in investing activities was $117.3 million in 2019 compared to $109.0 million in 2018, primarily due to a net decrease in proceeds from the disposal of property and equipment of $10.5 million.
Financing Cash Flow
Net cash provided by financing activities for 2020 was $330.8 million compared to $22.6 million used in 2019. The increase in cash is primarily related to amounts drawn on our UST Credit Agreements. Net cash used in financing activities for 2019 was $22.6 million, which consists primarily of $579.0 million in repayments of our long-term debt, offset by the issuance of $570.0 million of long-term debt for the Term Loan, in addition to $12.7 million in deferred debt issuance costs incurred.
Capital Expenditures
Our capital expenditures focus primarily on the replacement of revenue equipment, investments in information technology and improvements to land and structures. Our business is capital intensive with significant investments in tractors, trailers, refurbished engines, and service center facilities. We determine the amount and timing of capital expenditures based on numerous factors, including availability and attractiveness of financing, anticipated liquidity levels, anticipated financial returns and other factors.
The table below summarizes our actual net capital expenditures (net of proceeds from disposals) by type of investment for the years ended December 31:
Our capital expenditures for revenue equipment were used primarily to fund the purchase of tractors, trailers and containers and to refurbish engines for our revenue fleet.
As of December 31, 2020, we entered into revenue equipment purchase commitments totaling approximately $141.6 million with such payments to be made over the first six months of 2021. We expect capital expenditures in 2021 to be in the range of $450
million to $550 million, with planned investments in tractors, trailers, technology, box trucks, containers, liftgates and other assets.
We also acquire our equipment through operating leases which will vary based on anticipated liquidity and lease financing options. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we entered into new operating lease commitments for revenue equipment totaling $0.6 million, with such payments to be made over an average lease term of 4 years with a capital equivalent value of $0.7 million. As of December 31, 2020, our operating lease obligations through 2031 totaled $350.8 million and are expected to decrease in the next twelve months as we plan to reduce leasing activity and increase revenue equipment acquisitions.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we entered into new operating lease commitments for revenue equipment totaling $111.0 million, with such payments to be made over an average lease term of 4 years with a capital equivalent value of $131.8 million. As of December 31, 2019, our operating lease obligations through 2030 totaled $451.1 million.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commercial Commitments
The following sections provide aggregated information regarding our contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of December 31, 2020.
Non-Union Pension Obligations
We sponsor defined benefit pension plans for certain employees not covered by collective bargaining agreements. The qualified plans, which include the Yellow Corporation Pension Plan, the Roadway LLC Pension Plan and the YRC Retirement Pension Plan (collectively held in the YRC Worldwide Inc. Master Pension Plans Trust or “Trust”) cover approximately 9,000 participants including those currently receiving benefits and those who have left the Company with deferred benefits. On January 1, 2004, the existing qualified benefit plans were closed to new participants. On July 1, 2008, the benefit accruals for participants were frozen. These plans have been and could be further amended in the future when deemed appropriate and when such amendments are consistent with the Company’s continued long-term strategy of de-risking these pension plans and improving the overall funded status.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, our net pension income was $6.5 million, which included a $3.6 million expense recognition of settlements from lump sum payouts during the year. Our cash contributions were $36.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Using our current plan assumptions for the discount rate of 2.81% and an updated assumed 5.00% return on assets, as discussed below, we expect to record income of $5.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Additional information on these pension plans is included in our discussion of Single Employer Pension Plans under the “Critical Accounting Policy” section, which includes specific details on the underlying key estimates and the associated sensitivity analysis, and is also available in Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Due to the historically underfunded nature of these plans we managed our investment portfolio to hedge risks, but primarily focused on risk seeking assets that would provide an opportunity to close the net funded deficit. With the net funded status now fully funded, meaning the aggregate fair value of the assets exceeds the aggregate projected benefit obligation, as of December 31, 2020 we are reducing the percentage of the portfolio comprised of risk seeking assets and increasing the amount of hedge assets. As such, we have lowered our 2021 expected rate of return to 5.0% based on an improved funded position and a lower risk profile. In addition, we will continue to review our expected long-term rate of return on an annual basis and revise appropriately.
We expect cash contributions, inclusive of those for our non-union sponsored pension plans, to be $4.7 million in 2021 and no significant annual contributions in years thereafter. We have tested the sensitivities of the expected future cash contributions under scenarios in which the future actual asset returns fall short of or exceed the 5.0% assumption by 1.0% per year and in which the future interest rates decrease or increase 100 basis points from January 1, 2020 levels. Under these scenarios, the total cash contributions would remain unchanged over the next five years.
Contractual Cash Obligations
The following table reflects cash outflows that we are contractually obligated to make as of December 31, 2020:
(a)
The ABL Facility includes future payments for the letter of credit and unused line fees and are not included on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets.
(b)
The Term Loan includes principal and interest payments but excludes unamortized discounts.
(c)
The UST Loan Tranche A includes principal and interest payments, including paid-in-kind interest.
(d)
The UST Loan Tranche B includes principal and interest payments.
(e)
The lease financing obligations consist primarily of interest payments.
(f)
Pension deferral obligations includes principal and interest payments on the Second A&R CDA.
(g)
Employer payroll taxes include amounts permitted for deferral by the CARES Act.
(h)
The workers’ compensation, property damage and liability claims obligations represent our estimate of future payments for these obligations, not all of which are contractually required.
(i)
Operating leases represent future payments under contractual lease arrangements primarily for revenue equipment.
(j)
Other contractual obligations include future service agreements and certain maintenance agreements and are not included on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets.
(k)
Capital expenditures and other obligations primarily include noncancelable orders for revenue equipment the Company will either purchase or lease. If leased, the cash obligations will be scheduled over the multi-year term of the lease and ROU assets and liabilities will be recorded upon lease execution.
Other Commercial Commitments
The following table reflects other commercial commitments or potential cash outflows that may result from a contingent event, such as a need to borrow short-term funds due to insufficient cash flow.
(a)
Availability under the ABL Facility is derived by reducing the amount that may be advanced against eligible receivables plus eligible borrowing base cash by certain reserves imposed by the ABL Agent and our outstanding letters of credit.
(b)
Letters of credit outstanding are generally required as collateral to support self-insurance programs and do not represent additional liabilities as the underlying self-insurance accruals are already included in our consolidated balance sheets.
(c)
Surety bonds are generally required for workers’ compensation to support self-insurance programs, which include certain bonds that do not have an expiration date but are redeemable on demand, and do not represent additional liabilities as the underlying self-insurance accruals are already included in our consolidated balance sheets.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements except for other contractual obligations for service agreements and capital purchases, letters of credit and surety bonds, which are reflected in the above tables.
Critical Accounting Policies
Preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires accounting policies that involve significant estimates and judgments regarding the amounts included in the consolidated financial statements and disclosed in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements. We continually review the appropriateness of our accounting policies and the accuracy of our estimates including discussion with the Audit & Ethics Committee of our Board of Directors who make recommendations to management regarding these policies. Even with a thorough process, estimates must be adjusted based on changing circumstances and new information. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Management has identified the policies, further described in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this report, described below as requiring significant judgment and having a potential material impact to our consolidated financial statements.
Self-Insurance for Claims
We are self-insured up to certain limits for workers’ compensation and third-party liability claims. We measure the liabilities associated with workers’ compensation and third-party liability claims primarily through actuarial methods performed by an independent third-party. Actuarial methods include estimates for the undiscounted liability for claims reported, for claims incurred but not reported and for certain future administrative costs. These estimates are based on historical loss experience and judgments about the present and expected levels of costs per claim and the time required to settle claims. The effect of future inflation for costs is considered in the actuarial analysis. Actual claims may vary from these estimates due to a number of factors, including but not limited to, accident frequency and severity, claims management, changes in healthcare costs, legal and judicial developments, and overall economic conditions. We discount the actuarial calculations of claims liabilities for each calendar year to present value based on the average U.S. Treasury rate, during the calendar year of occurrence, for maturities that match the initial expected payout of the liabilities. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had $323.3 million and $335.6 million accrued for outstanding claims, respectively.
Single Employer Pension Plans
Effective July 1, 2008, we froze the qualified and nonqualified defined benefit pension plans for all participating employees not covered by collective bargaining agreements. Given the frozen status of the plans, the key estimates in determining pension cost are discount rate and return on plan assets, each of which are discussed below. Additional information on these pension plans is included above in our discussion of Non-Union Pension Obligations under the “Contractual Obligations and Other Commercial Commitments” section, which includes specific details on our management of the investment portfolio that impacts plan assets and the assumption for the expected return, and is also available in Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Discount Rate
The discount rate refers to the interest rate used to discount the estimated future benefit payments to their present value, also referred to as the benefit obligation. The discount rate allows us to estimate what it would cost to settle the pension obligations as of the measurement date, December 31, and impacts the following year’s annual pension expense. We determine the discount rate by selecting a portfolio of high quality non-callable bonds with interest payments and maturities generally consistent with our expected benefit payments.
Changes in the discount rate can impact our overall net pension asset, however, plans to reduce the percentage of the asset portfolio comprised of risk seeking assets and increasing the amount of hedge assets, works to partially mitigate this impact with changes in asset returns. A 100-basis-point decrease in our discount rate would increase our net pension asset by approximately $3.7 million. That same change would decrease our net pension expense by approximately $7.9 million, driven by the return on assets. The discount rate can fluctuate considerably over periods depending on overall economic conditions that impact long-term corporate bond yields. At December 31, 2020 and 2019, we used a discount rate to determine benefit obligations of 2.81% and 3.56%, respectively.
Return on Plan Assets
The assumption for expected return on plan assets represents a long-term assumption of our portfolio performance that can impact our annual pension expense. With $1,190.7 million of plan assets for the Company’s funded pension plans, a 100-basis-point decrease in the assumption for expected rate of return on assets would increase the net annual pension expense by approximately $9.7 million and would have no effect on the overfunded pension assets nor the underfunded pension liability reflected on the consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2020.
Based on various market factors, we selected an expected rate of return on assets of 7.0% effective for the 2020 and 2019 valuations. As detailed below, we have reviewed our expected long-term rate of return based upon several factors, including the substantial improvement to the overall funded status on our qualified and nonqualified defined benefit pension plans.
With the net funded status now fully funded we are reducing the percentage of the portfolio comprised of risk seeking assets and increasing the amount of hedge assets. As such, we have lowered our 2021 expected rate of return to 5.0% based on an improved funded position and a lower risk profile. In addition, we will continue to review our expected long-term rate of return on an annual basis and revise appropriately.
At December 31, 2020, our plan assets included $285.3 million of investments that are measured at net asset value (“NAV”) per share (or its equivalent) using the practical expedient in accordance with the fair value measurement and $45.3 million of Level 3 investments. Level 3 market values are based on inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and are significant to the fair value of the investment. These investments are subject to estimation to determine fair value which is used to determine components of our annual pension expense and the net asset.
Multi-Employer Pension Plans
We contribute to over 30 separate multi-employer pension plans for employees covered by our collective bargaining agreements (approximately 79% of total employees of Yellow Corporation and its subsidiaries). Our collective bargaining agreements with the unions determine the amount of our contributions to these plans. The pension plans provide defined benefits to retired participants. We do not directly manage the multi-employer pension plans to which we contribute. The trusts covering these plans are generally managed by trustees, half of whom the unions appoint and half of whom various contributing employers appoint.
In 2006, the Pension Protection Act (“PPA”) became law and modified both the applicable Internal Revenue Code, as it applies to multi-employer pension plans, and the Employment Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended. Federal law establishes minimum funding requirements for multi-employer pension plans. The funding status of these plans is determined by many factors.
In 2014, the Multi-Employer Pension Reform Act (“MPRA”) became law which modified the ability to suspend accrued benefits of plans facing insolvency by adding a new zone status of Critical and Declining.
If any of the multi-employer pension plans that we contribute to fail to:
•
meet minimum funding requirements,
•
meet a required funding improvement or rehabilitation plan that the PPA may require for certain of our underfunded plans,
•
obtain from the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) certain changes to or a waiver of the requirements in how the applicable plan calculates its funding levels, or
•
reduce pension benefits to a level where the requirements are met,
we could be required to make additional contributions to these multi-employer pension plans.
If any of our multi-employer pension plans enters critical status or worse and our contributions are not sufficient to satisfy any rehabilitation plan schedule, the PPA could require us to make additional surcharge contributions to the multi-employer pension plan in the amount of five to ten percent of the existing contributions required by our labor agreement for the remaining term of the labor agreement.
If we fail to make our required contributions to a multi-employer pension plan under a funding improvement or rehabilitation plan, it would expose us to penalties including potential withdrawal liability. If the benchmarks that an applicable funding improvement or rehabilitation plan provides for a multi-employer pension plan are not met by the end of a prescribed period, the IRS could impose an excise tax on us and the plan’s other contributing employers. These excise taxes are not contributed to the deficient funds, but rather are deposited in the United States general treasury funds.
Depending on the amount involved, a requirement to increase contributions beyond our contractually agreed rate or the imposition of an excise tax on us could have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition, liquidity, and results of operations.
Funded Status of the Multi-Employer Pension Plans and Contingent Withdrawal Liabilities
We receive an Annual Funding Notice and, for certain plans, a Notice of Critical Status that provide an indication of the plan’s financial health. The plan administrators and trustees of multi-employer pension plans do not, however, routinely provide us with detailed, current information regarding their financials. Much of our information regarding the plan financials historically has been (i) obtained from public filings using publicly available plan asset values, which are often dated, and (ii) based on the limited information available from plan administrators or trustees, which has not been independently validated.
Based on information obtained from public filings and from plan administrators and trustees, we believe our portion of the contingent liability in the case of a full withdrawal or termination from all of the multi-employer pension plans to which we contribute would be an estimated $8 billion on a pre-tax basis. We have no current intention of taking any action that would subject us to payment of material withdrawal liability.
We are aware that many of the multi-employer pension plans to which we contribute are in critical or critical and declining status, as further detailed in Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition and Revenue-related Reserves
The Company’s revenues are primarily derived from the transportation services we provide through the delivery of goods over the duration of a shipment. Upon receipt of the bill of lading, the contract existence criteria is met as evidenced by a legally enforceable agreement between two parties where collectability is probable, thus creating the distinct performance obligation. The Company has elected to expense initial direct costs as incurred because the average shipment cycle is less than one week. The Company recognizes revenue and substantially all the purchased transportation expenses on a gross basis because we direct the use of the transportation service provided and remain responsible for the complete and proper shipment.
Inherent within our revenue recognition practices are estimates for revenue associated with shipments in transit and future adjustments to revenue and accounts receivable for collectability and billing adjustments, which are included in our consolidated balance sheets as a reduction to “Accounts receivable”.
For shipments in transit, we record revenue based on the percentage of service completed as of the period end and recognize delivery costs as incurred. The percentage of service completed for each shipment is based on how far along in the shipment cycle each shipment is in relation to standard transit days. The total revenue earned is accumulated for all shipments in transit at a particular period end and recorded as operating revenue. The magnitude of the impacts of in transit adjustment estimates to the consolidated financial statements are limited due to the short duration, generally less than one week, of the average shipment cycle.
The Company’s revenue-related reserves will primarily consist of an allowance for doubtful accounts and rerate reserves. We record an allowance for doubtful accounts based on expected future losses. When estimating the expected future losses, we consider historical uncollectible amounts, known factors surrounding specific customers, as well as overall collection trends. Given the nature of our transportation services, future adjustments may arise which creates variability when establishing the transaction price used to recognize revenue. Rerate reserves, which are common for LTL carriers, are established during a robust process to capture incorrect ratings that require adjustment and could be identified based on many factors, including weight and commodity verifications.