Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs, and involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results and the timing of certain events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors, including those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included under Part I, Item 1A and elsewhere in this Annual Report. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report.
Overview
As one of the best known internet brands in the United States, Yelp is a trusted local resource for consumers and a partner in success for businesses of all sizes. Consumers trust us for our more than 200 million ratings and reviews of businesses across a broad range of categories, while businesses advertise with us to reach our large audience of generally affluent, purchase-oriented consumers. We believe our ability to provide value to both consumers and businesses not only fulfills our mission to connect consumers with great local businesses, but also positions us well in the local, digital advertising market in the United States.
We generate substantially all of our revenue through the sale of performance-based advertising products, which our advertising platform matches to individual consumers through auctions priced on a CPC basis. In the year ended December 31, 2020, our net revenue was $872.9 million, down 14% from the year ended December 31, 2019, and we recorded a net loss of $19.4 million and adjusted EBITDA of $140.3 million. In the year ended December 31, 2019, our net revenue was $1.0 billion, which represented an increase of 8% from the year ended December 31, 2018, and we recorded net income of $40.9 million and adjusted EBITDA of $213.5 million. For information on how we define and calculate adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation of this non-GAAP financial measure to net income (loss), see “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below.
In 2019, we announced an ambitious, multi-year business transformation plan designed to drive and sustain long-term profitable growth. The strategy underlying this plan aimed to increase our value proposition to businesses while also driving growth through the combination of product innovation, marketing and our Multi-location business rather than Local sales headcount. Over the course of 2019 and 2020, we successfully executed against this strategy by:
•building increasingly differentiated category experiences for our Services categories, which increased the value of the leads we delivered to Services businesses as well as improved the product experience for both advertisers and consumers;
•expanding our Multi-location business, which increased our market opportunity and contributed higher-margin revenue than our Local sales business;
•completing our transition to the exclusive sale of non-term contracts to our SMB customers, which allow them to start, modify, cancel or restart their advertising programs at any time;
•enabling customers to purchase and more fully manage their advertising on a self-serve basis, which improved customer retention and reduced our reliance on sales as well as customer support headcount;
•substantially reducing our Local sales team, including by more than 50% in April 2020, a process made possible by our investments in product development and significantly accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic, as discussed below, and increasing its productivity; and
•shifting our employee base to lower-cost markets by moving many of our general and administrative roles from San Francisco to the Phoenix Area and growing our product development team primarily in Canada, Germany and the United Kingdom.
Our performance in January and February 2020 demonstrated that our strategic initiatives were succeeding in growing revenue while reducing Local sales headcount. Although consumer engagement and non-term advertising budgets fell substantially in March and April as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic - with net revenue ultimately declining 32% year over year in the second quarter - we continued investing in product development and accelerated the realignment of our go-to-market channels toward Multi-location and Self-serve.
In addition to helping consumers and local businesses adapt to the new economic environment, these actions helped our revenue recover in the second half of the year; net revenue increased 32% sequentially in the third quarter and a further 6% sequentially in the fourth quarter. After making the difficult decision to significantly reduce the size of our Local sales team, we continued to increase our operating discipline and rationalize our cost structure.
In 2021, we plan to build on the changes we have made to our business and our financial recovery in the second half of 2020 by continuing to invest in product development and our Multi-location sales team, while keeping Local sales headcount relatively consistent. Our investment priorities include continuing many of our key strategic initiatives from 2020:
•Improve monetization of our Services categories. Because the needs of consumers and businesses in Services categories are generally distinct from those in our Restaurants, Retail & Other categories, we believe that we will be able to both monetize more of our consumer traffic and convert more Services businesses into advertisers by offering an increasingly tailored product experience in the Services categories. In 2021, we plan to build new lead generation products, like Nearby Jobs, that result in higher quality leads while also improving the user experience by providing consumers with the tools they need to find and connect with the right Services businesses for their projects.
•Expand our Self-serve and Multi-location channels. We plan to drive a larger percentage of SMB customer acquisition through our self-serve channel in 2021 than in 2020 by providing advertisers with more targeting capabilities and controls over their advertising budgets, improving the reporting and analytics available in the business owner account, and using performance marketing to direct more businesses to the self-serve purchase flow. We also plan to further expand our Multi-location sales and technical support teams, introduce new ad products tailored to larger advertisers, and enhance our reporting and analytics to both acquire new multi-location customers and expand our business with existing customers.
•Deliver more value to advertisers. In 2021, we plan to continue improving the relevance and value of our ads by driving more of our users' high-purchase intent leads to advertisers through increasingly targeted ad products. We also plan to expand the number of products we offer on a bundled, subscription basis at a discount to their standalone pricing in 2021, including our Enhanced Profile and Yelp Connect products, which we believe will increase retention.
We plan to invest heavily in our growth initiatives in the first half of 2021, primarily by increasing headcount in our product development, Multi-location sales and marketing teams to support the execution of our strategic roadmap. We expect that these
investments, together with our plans to reduce costs by continuing to operate on a distributed basis, will provide leverage in the second half of the year and into 2022.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
COVID-19. The COVID-19 pandemic has had, and we expect it to continue to have, a significant adverse impact on our business and results of operations. Measures implemented to control the spread of COVID-19 have had and are continuing to have significant macroeconomic impacts and have been particularly challenging for the SMBs on which we rely. We implemented a number of measures in 2020 to preserve liquidity, reduce our operating costs and manage the near-term financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including: changing our investment strategy and liquidating our portfolio of marketable securities; arranging for a revolving credit facility with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association; implementing workforce reductions, furloughs and reduced-hour work weeks for employees; halting share repurchases under our stock repurchase program; and changing our method of settling the employee tax liabilities associated with the vesting of RSUs to preserve cash. Please refer to "-Liquidity and Capital Resources" below for further details on these measures. We also offered relief incentives to our customers that were most impacted by the pandemic in the form of waived advertising fees, paused ad campaigns and free products, which reduced net revenue during the year.
Although vaccines are currently being administered in the United States and some restrictions have eased, the number of COVID-19 cases continues to fluctuate, creating continued uncertainty about the economic recovery. Although our business showed improvement in the second half of 2020 from its low points in March and April 2020, traffic and advertising budgets generally remained below pre-COVID levels; traffic in particular was negatively impacted by the resurgence of COVID-19 cases in the late fourth quarter of 2020. It is not possible for us to estimate the duration or magnitude of the adverse results of the pandemic and its effects on our business. Even after the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided, health measures taken by governments and private industry in response to the pandemic may have a long-term adverse effect on the economy, and any protracted economic downturn would have significant negative effects on our business.
Product Innovation. Our growth strategy includes priorities such as improving monetization of our Services categories, expanding our Self-serve and Multi-location channels, and delivering more value to advertisers, all of which depend on our ability to develop innovative, relevant and useful products in a timely manner. Developing successful products requires substantial investments, and such investments may not prioritize short-term financial results and may involve significant risks and uncertainties. For example, new products may fail to generate sufficient revenue, operating margin or other value to justify the investments we made in them, which is a particular risk for new products that are unproven or that are outside of our historical core business.
Our Ability to Attract and Retain Advertisers. Our revenue growth is driven by our ability to attract and retain advertising customers. To do so, we must deliver tailored advertising products at a competitive price in a highly competitive market. A substantial portion of our advertisers have the ability to cancel their advertising campaigns at any time. Their decisions to renew depend on the degree of satisfaction with our products as well as a number of factors that are outside of our control, including their ability to continue their operations and spending levels. Although the opportunity presented by our Multi-location channel is a strategic priority, we continue to rely heavily on SMBs that often have limited advertising budgets, may view online advertising products like ours as experimental and unproven, and are disproportionately impacted by macroeconomic conditions.
Our Ability to Attract and Retain Talent. Our ability to execute on our strategic initiatives depends on our continuing ability to attract, develop, motivate and retain highly qualified and skilled employees. Qualified individuals are in high demand and we expect to continue to face significant competition from other companies in hiring such personnel, particularly for technical roles. In 2021, we plan to make substantial investments in our engineering, sales and marketing organizations, which will require us to effectively integrate, develop and motivate a large number of new employees in a remote environment while maintaining the beneficial aspects of our company culture. Our employee operations are complex and place substantial demands on management and our operational infrastructure, particularly in the primarily remote work environment that we plan to maintain. For example, our increased focus on our Self-serve and Multi-location sales channels involves changes to our sales organization and sales force hiring priorities, which may be disruptive to our sales operations and affect our ability to generate revenue.
Investment in Growth. We plan to invest heavily in our strategic initiatives for 2021, particularly in developing new advertising products, further developing our analytics tools for advertisers, improving our offerings for the Services categories and refining our advertising auction system. While we believe these initiatives will ultimately drive revenue growth, our
investments in them will increase our operating expenses, and any increase in revenue resulting from these product innovations will likely trail the increase in expenses.
Stock Repurchases. Since July 2017, our board of directors has authorized us to repurchase up to $950.0 million of our outstanding common stock, $219.6 million of which remained available as of February 19, 2021 and which does not have an expiration date. During the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, we repurchased on the open market and subsequently retired 14,190,409 and 4,896,003 shares, respectively, for aggregate purchase prices of $481.0 million and $187.4 million, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased on the open market 803,691 shares for an aggregate purchase price of $24.4 million, of which 704,673 shares were retired. The remaining 99,018 shares were retired in January 2021. The actual timing and amount of repurchases remain subject to a variety of factors, including liquidity, cash flow and market conditions. In addition, the terms of our Credit Agreement with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association impose limitations on our ability to repurchase shares during the term of our revolving credit facility. We have funded the repurchases, and expect to fund future repurchases under the stock repurchase program, with cash available on our balance sheet. As a result, this program could diminish our cash reserves and reduce our ability to invest in our business, in addition to affecting the trading price and volatility of our stock.
Corporate Development Activities. As part of our business strategy, we may decide to expand our product offerings and grow our business through the acquisition of complementary businesses or technologies, as well as through partnerships. In addition to diverting our management's attention and otherwise disrupting our operations, our corporate development activities will affect our future financial results due to factors such as expenses incurred in identifying, investigating and pursuing transactions, whether or not they are consummated, possible dilutive issuances of equity securities or the incurrence of debt, unidentified liabilities and the amortization of acquired intangible assets. Maintaining relationships with partners also requires significant time and resources, as does integrating their data, services and technologies onto our platform. We may not realize the full benefits of synergies, innovation and operational efficiencies that may be possible from a corporate transaction; similarly, if our relationships with partners deteriorate, we could suffer increased costs and delays in our ability to provide consumers and advertisers with our content or services.
Seasonality and Cyclicality. Our business is affected by seasonal fluctuations in Internet usage and advertising spending. Based on historical trends, our revenue is typically lowest in the first quarter and increases through the year to its highest level in the fourth quarter; although SMBs typically decrease their advertising spending in the fourth quarter, our multi-location customers tend to increase their spending at that time. Our traffic is also typically weakest in the fourth quarter of the year in connection with year-end holidays. However, the impact of seasonality on our business in 2020 was overshadowed by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which began having a substantial negative impact on our traffic and non-term advertiser budgets in March 2020 and from which we had not fully recovered by the end of the year.
While some restrictive measures to control the spread of COVID-19 have eased recently, they have had and are continuing to have significant macroeconomic impacts that have been particularly challenging for the SMBs on which we rely. These circumstances, along with uncertainty regarding the pace of vaccinations and the timing of the economic recovery, are having an ongoing adverse impact on our business and results of operations. While we believe the U.S. economy will continue to strengthen in 2021, we do not anticipate a full recovery before 2022.
Key Metrics
As our business has changed in recent years, so too have the metrics we use to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends in our business, prepare financial projections and make strategic decisions. To provide better insight into the way we manage and monitor our business, we are updating our key metrics to reflect the transformation we have made to our business as well as what we believe will be the key drivers of our next phase of growth. These changes consist of two new metrics - ad clicks and average CPC - as well as new breakdowns of advertising revenue and paying advertising locations by category. In addition, we expect to provide our reviews, traffic and active claimed local business locations metrics on an annual basis going forward instead of quarterly, as detailed below.
Ad Clicks
Ad clicks represent user interactions with our pay-for-performance advertising products, including clicks on advertisements on our website and mobile app, clicks on syndicated advertisements on third-party platforms and Request-A-Quote submissions. Ad clicks include only user interactions that we are able to track directly, and therefore do not include user interactions with ads sold through our advertising partnership. We do not expect the exclusion of such user interactions to materially affect this metric.
Because we generate revenue primarily from the sale of performance-based ads, our ability to increase our revenue depends largely on our ability to increase ad clicks. We plan to report the year-over-year percentage change in ad clicks on a quarterly basis going forward as a measure of our success in monetizing more of our consumer traffic and delivering more value to advertisers.
The following table presents year-over-year changes in our ad clicks for the periods indicated (expressed as a percentage):
Average CPC
We define average CPC as revenue from our performance-based ad products, excluding revenue from our advertising partnerships, divided by the total number of ad clicks for a given three-month period.
Average CPC, when viewed together with ad clicks, provides important insight into the value we deliver to advertisers, which we believe is a significant factor in our ability to retain both revenue and customers. For example, a negative change in average CPC for a given three-month period combined with a positive change in ad clicks over the same period would indicate that we delivered more ad clicks at lower prices, thereby delivering more value to our advertisers; we would expect this to have a positive impact on retention. We believe that average CPC and ad clicks together reflect one of the largest dynamics affecting our advertising revenue performance, and also expect to report the year-over-year percentage change in average CPC on a quarterly basis.
The following table presents year-over-year changes in our average CPC for the periods indicated (expressed as a percentage):
Ad Revenue by Category
Our advertising revenue comprises revenue from the sale of our advertising products, including the resale of our advertising products by partners and syndicated ads appearing on third-party platforms.
To reflect our strategic focus on creating two differentiated experiences on Yelp, we plan to provide a quarterly breakdown of our advertising revenue attributable to businesses in two high-level category groupings: Services and Restaurants, Retail & Other. Our Services categories consist of home, local, auto, professional, pets, events, real estate and financial services. Our Restaurants, Retail & Other categories consist of restaurants, shopping, beauty & fitness, health and other.
The following table presents our advertising revenue by category for the periods presented (in thousands):
Paying Advertising Locations
Paying advertising locations comprise all business locations associated with a business account from which we recognized advertising revenue in a given month, excluding business accounts that purchased advertising through partner programs other than Yelp Ads Certified Partners, averaged over a given three-month period.
In addition to providing our paying advertising locations on a quarterly basis as a measure of the reach and scale of our business, we intend to provide a breakdown of paying advertising locations between our Services categories and Restaurants, Retail & Other categories.
The following table presents the number of paying advertising locations for the periods presented (in thousands):
Reviews, Traffic and Active Claimed Local Business Locations
We currently report our reviews, traffic and active claimed local business locations metrics on a quarterly basis as measures of the size of our audience, the volume of our content and the scope of our business, respectively. However, we currently monetize relatively low percentages of consumer activity and businesses claimed on our platform, and, as a result, we do not believe the quarterly fluctuations in these metrics are material to an understanding of our business. Accordingly, we expect to cease providing quarterly updates and only update these figures on an annual basis in future presentations going forward. We believe that updating these metrics annually, while still providing investors with an understanding of the scope of our business, reduces the chance that an investor could place undue importance on quarterly fluctuations in these numbers when assessing the prospects for our business.
Reviews
Number of reviews represents the cumulative number of reviews submitted to Yelp since inception, as of the period end, including reviews that were not recommended or had been removed from our platform. In addition to the text of the review, each review includes a rating of one to five stars. We include reviews that are not recommended and that have been removed because all of them are either currently accessible on our platform or were accessible at some point in time, providing information that may be useful to users to evaluate businesses and individual reviewers. Because our automated recommendation software continually reassesses which reviews to recommend based on new information that becomes available, the “recommended” or “not recommended” status of reviews may change over time. Reviews that are not recommended or that have been removed do not factor into a business’s overall star rating. By clicking on a link on a reviewed business’s page on our website, users can access the reviews that are not currently recommended for the business, as well as the star rating and other information about reviews that were removed for violation of our terms of service.
As of December 31, 2020, approximately 206.3 million reviews were available on business listing pages, including approximately 48.7 million reviews that were not recommended, after 17.9 million reviews had been removed from our platform, either by us for violation of our terms of service or by the users who contributed them. The following table presents the number of cumulative reviews as of the dates indicated (in thousands):
Traffic
Traffic to our website and mobile app has three components: mobile devices accessing our mobile app, visitors to our non-mobile optimized website, which we refer to as our desktop website, and visitors to our mobile-optimized website, which we refer to as our mobile website. App users generate a substantial majority of activity on Yelp, including the page views and ad clicks that we monetize, and we expect that traffic to our website will fluctuate and generally decline over time. While we anticipate that our mobile traffic will be the most significant source of ad clicks for the foreseeable future, we believe our largest growth opportunity will be to monetize a greater portion of our existing traffic, rather than to grow traffic generally.
While our consumer traffic remained below 2019 levels at the end of the fourth quarter of 2020 and we saw a slight decrease in activity during the winter, the positive trends we observed over the summer give us confidence that it will increase organically as more people are inoculated and the pandemic recedes: as restrictions on businesses eased and consumers eagerly returned to restaurants, our app unique devices rebounded by four million from the second quarter to 32 million in the third
quarter. However, the pace of vaccinations in the United States and the timeframe for the lifting of COVID-19-related restrictions remain uncertain and subject to risk; as a result, we expect our traffic to be volatile in the near term, although we are unable to predict the duration or degree of such volatility with any certainty.
We use the metrics set forth below to measure each of our traffic streams. An individual user who accesses our platform through multiple traffic streams will be counted in each applicable traffic metric; as a result, the sum of our traffic metrics will not accurately represent the number of people who visit our platform on an average monthly basis.
App Unique Devices. We calculate app unique devices as the number of unique mobile devices using our mobile app in a given month, averaged over a given three- or twelve-month period, as applicable. Under this method of calculation, an individual who accesses our mobile app from multiple mobile devices will be counted as multiple app unique devices. Multiple individuals who access our mobile app from a shared device will be counted as a single app unique device.
The following table presents app unique devices for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Desktop and Mobile Website Unique Visitors. We calculate desktop unique visitors as the number of “users,” as measured by Google Analytics, who have visited our desktop website at least once in a given month, averaged over a given three- or twelve-month period, as applicable. Similarly, we calculate mobile website unique visitors as the number of “users” who have visited our mobile website at least once in a given month, averaged over a given three- or twelve-month period, as applicable.
Google Analytics, a product from Google Inc. that provides digital marketing intelligence, measures “users” based on unique cookie identifiers. Because the numbers of desktop unique visitors and mobile website unique visitors are therefore based on unique cookies, an individual who accesses our desktop website or mobile website from multiple devices with different cookies may be counted as multiple desktop unique visitors or mobile website unique visitors, as applicable, and multiple individuals who access our desktop website or mobile website from a shared device with a single cookie may be counted as a single desktop unique visitor or mobile website unique visitor.
The following table presents our web traffic for the periods indicated (in thousands):
We have discovered in the past, and expect to discover in the future, that portions of our desktop traffic, as measured by Google Analytics, have been attributable to robots and other invalid sources. Because traffic from such sources does not represent valid consumer traffic, our reported desktop unique visitor metric for impacted periods reflects an adjustment to the Google Analytics measurement of our traffic to remove traffic that we have identified as originating from invalid sources to provide greater accuracy and transparency. However, we cannot assure you that we will be able to identify all such traffic for any particular period. For additional information, please see the risk factor included under Part I, Item 1A under the heading “We rely on data from both internal tools and third parties to calculate certain of our performance metrics. Real or perceived inaccuracies in such metrics may harm our reputation and negatively affect our business.”
Active Claimed Local Business Locations
The number of active claimed local business locations represents the number of claimed local business locations - business addresses for which a business representative has visited our platform and claimed the free business listing page for the business located at that address - that are both (a) active on Yelp and (b) associated with an active business owner account as of a given date. We consider a claimed local business location to be active if it has not closed, been removed from our platform or merged with another claimed local business.
The table set forth below presents the number of active claimed local business locations as of the dates presented (in thousands). The numbers of active claimed local business locations as of December 31, 2019 and 2018 have been updated to reflect our current methodology for calculating this metric.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from those estimates. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the uncertainty regarding the extent and duration of its impacts, many of the estimates and assumptions required increased judgment and carry a higher degree of variability and volatility in the year ended December 31, 2020 than prior to the pandemic. As events continue to evolve and additional information becomes available, these estimates may materially change in future periods.
We consider the policies discussed below to be our critical accounting policies and estimates as we believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with these policies have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. For further information on these and our other significant accounting policies, see Note 2, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Revenue Recognition-We generate revenue from the sale of advertising products, transactions with consumers and other revenue sources, which correspond to our major product lines. We recognize revenue by applying the following steps: the contract with the customer is identified; the performance obligations in the contract are identified; the transaction price is determined; the transaction price is allocated to the performance obligations in the contract; and revenue is recognized when (or as) we satisfy these performance obligations in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. We apply the portfolio practical expedient to account for contracts with customers in each category of revenue. We do not disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations for (i) contracts with an original expected length of one year or less and (ii) contracts for which the amount of revenue we recognize is equal to the amount we have a right to invoice.
Contracts with customers can include multiple performance obligations, where the transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price ("SSP"). We determine SSP based on the prices of the promised goods or services charged when sold separately to customers, which are determined using contractually stated prices. We allocate revenue to each of the performance obligations included in a contract with multiple performance obligations at the inception of the contract. The various products and services comprising contracts with multiple performance obligations are typically capable of being distinguished and accounted for as separate performance obligations.
For all contracts with customers, estimates and assumptions include determining variable consideration and identifying the nature and timing of satisfaction of performance obligations. We may accept lower consideration than the amount promised per the contract for certain revenue transactions and certain customers may receive cash based incentives, credits, or refunds, which are accounted for as variable consideration when estimating the amount of revenue to recognize. We estimate these amounts based on the expected amount to be provided to customers and reduce revenue. We believe that there will not be significant changes to our estimates of variable consideration. For contracts satisfied over time, we apply the invoice practical expedient to depict the value transferred to the customer and measure of progress towards completion of its obligations. We consider the right to receive consideration from a customer to correspond directly with the value to the customer of our performance completed to date. We do not consider the effects of the time value of money as substantially all of our contracts are invoiced on a monthly basis, one month in arrears.
Revenue is recognized net of any taxes collected from customers, which are remitted to governmental authorities. We do not typically refund customers for services once we determine the performance obligations of the contract have been satisfied, but will assess any refund requests from customers and partners on a case by case basis. We record an allowance for potential future refunds, which is estimated based on historical trends and recorded as a reduction of net revenue.
Website and Internal-Use Software Development Costs-Costs related to website and internal-use software are primarily related to our website and mobile app, including support systems. We capitalize our costs to develop software when: preliminary development efforts are successfully completed; management has authorized and committed project funding; and it is probable that the project will be completed and the software will be used as intended. We use judgement to determine which
projects will be capitalized and the estimated useful life over which the related asset will be amortized. Costs incurred for enhancements that are expected to result in additional material functionality are capitalized and amortized over the estimated useful life of the upgrades. Such costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the related asset, which is generally three years.
We capitalize certain implementation costs incurred related to cloud computing arrangements that are service contracts. Such costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over the term of the associated hosting arrangement plus any reasonably certain renewal period. Any capitalized amounts related to such arrangements are recorded within prepaid expense and other current assets and within non-current assets on the consolidated balance sheets.
Leases-We lease our office facilities under operating lease agreements that expire from 2021 to 2031, some of which include options to renew at our sole discretion. If exercised, such options would extend the lease terms by up to ten years. Additionally, certain lease agreements contain options to terminate the leases, which require 6 to 12 months prior written notice to the landlord. We do not have any finance lease agreements.
We recognize operating lease liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets, which represent the present value of future lease payments, and an associated operating lease right-of-use asset for any operating lease with a term greater than one year. We recognize the amortization of the right-of-use asset each month within lease expense. We elected to use the practical expedient for short-term leases, and therefore do not record operating lease right-of-use assets or lease liabilities associated with leases with durations of 12 months or less.
When recording the present value of lease liabilities, a discount rate is required. We have concluded that the rates implicit in the various operating lease agreements are not readily determinable. As a result, we instead use our incremental borrowing rate, which is calculated based on hypothetical borrowings to fund each respective lease over the lease term, as of the lease commencement date, assuming that borrowings are secured by the various leased properties. The incremental borrowing rates are determined based on an assessment of our implied credit rating, using ratings scales from reputable rating agencies that consider a number of qualitative and quantitative factors. Market rates are derived as of the lease commencement dates with reference to companies with the same debt rating that operate in a similar industry to us.
Business Combinations-We account for acquisitions of entities that consist of inputs and processes that have the ability to contribute to the creation of outputs as business combinations. We allocate the purchase price of the acquisition to the tangible assets, identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired users, acquired technology, and trade names from a market participant perspective, useful lives, and discount rates. The excess of the purchase price over the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. Acquisition-related expenses and integration costs are expensed as incurred. During the measurement period, which is not to exceed one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. After the measurement period, subsequent adjustments are recorded to our consolidated statements of operations.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts-We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts receivable. The allowance reflects the our best estimate of probable losses associated with the accounts receivable balance. It is based upon historical experience and loss patterns, the number of days that billings are past due, an evaluation of the potential risk of loss associated with delinquent accounts based on the credit risk of those accounts, known delinquent accounts, as well as current conditions and reasonable and supportable economic forecasts. When new information becomes available that allows us to more accurately estimate the allowance, we make an adjustment, which is considered a change in accounting estimate. The carrying value of accounts receivable approximates their fair value.
Income Taxes-Significant judgment is required to determine our provision (benefit) for income taxes and income tax assets and liabilities, including evaluating uncertainties in the application of accounting principles, complex tax laws, or variances between our actual and anticipated operating results. Therefore, actual income taxes could materially vary from these estimates.
We record income taxes using the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns. In estimating future tax consequences, we generally consider all expected future events other than enactments or changes in the tax law or rates. In assessing the realization of deferred tax assets, we consider whether it is more likely than not that all or some portion of deferred tax assets will not be realized. The ultimate realization of the deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible. Valuation allowances are provided to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be
realized. In determining the need for a valuation allowance, the weight given to positive and negative evidence is commensurate with the extent to which the evidence may be objectively verified. We evaluate the ability to realize net deferred tax assets and the related valuation allowance on a quarterly basis.
We operate in various tax jurisdictions and are subject to audit by various tax authorities. We provide for tax contingencies whenever it is deemed probable that a tax asset has been impaired or a tax liability has been incurred for events such as tax claims or changes in tax laws. Tax contingencies are based upon their technical merits, relative tax law and the specific facts and circumstances as of each reporting period. Changes in facts and circumstances could result in material changes to the amounts recorded for such tax contingencies.
We recognize a tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement.
Stock-Based Compensation-We account for stock-based employee compensation plans under the fair value recognition and measurement provisions, which require all stock-based payments to employees, including grants of stock options, restricted stock awards, restricted stock units ("RSUs"), performance-based restricted stock units ("PRSUs") and issuances under our 2012 Employee Stock Purchase Plan, as amended ("ESPP"), to be measured based on the grant-date fair value of the awards. We account for forfeitures as they occur.
The fair value of options granted to employees is estimated on the grant date using the Black-Scholes-Merton option valuation model. This valuation model for stock-based compensation expense requires us to make assumptions and judgments about the variables used in the calculation, including the expected term (weighted-average period of time that the options granted are expected to be outstanding), the expected volatility in the fair market value of our common stock, a risk-free interest rate and expected dividends. No compensation cost is recorded for options that do not vest. We use the simplified calculation of expected life as the contractual term for options of 10 years is longer than we have been publicly traded. Expected volatility is based on an average of the historical volatilities of the common stock of several entities with characteristics similar to us. The risk-free rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected life of the option. We use the straight-line method for expense attribution.
The fair value of RSUs is measured using the closing price of our common stock on the New York Stock Exchange on the grant date. We use the straight-line method for expense attribution. No compensation cost is recorded for RSUs that do not vest.
We have two types of PRSUs outstanding - awards for which the vesting is subject to both a time-based vesting schedule and either (a) a market condition or (b) the achievement of performance goals.
For the awards subject to a market condition, we use a Monte Carlo model to determine the fair value of the PRSUs. We use the accelerated method for expense attribution. Compensation costs are recorded if the service condition is met regardless of whether the market performance condition is satisfied. No compensation cost is recorded if the service condition is not met.
For the awards subject to performance goals, compensation costs are recorded when we conclude that it is probable that the performance conditions will be achieved. We perform an analysis in each reporting period to determine the probability that the performance goals will be met, and recognize a cumulative catch-up adjustment to compensation cost for changes in its probability assessment in subsequent reporting periods, if required, until the performance period has expired. The fair value of the PRSUs is measured using the closing price of our common stock on the New York Stock Exchange on the grant date. We use the accelerated method for expense attribution. No compensation cost is recorded if the service condition is not met.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for 2020, 2019 and 2018 (in thousands, except percentages). The period-to-period comparison of financial results is not necessarily indicative of future results.
(1) Percentage changes are calculated based on rounded numbers and may not recalculate exactly due to rounding.
(2) Percentage change is not meaningful.
Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
Net Revenue
Advertising. We generate advertising revenue from the sale of our advertising products - including enhanced listing pages and performance and impression-based advertising in search results and elsewhere on our platform - to businesses of all sizes, from single-location local businesses to multi-location national businesses. Advertising revenue also includes revenue generated from the resale of our advertising products by certain partners and monetization of remnant advertising inventory through third-party ad networks.
To reflect our strategic focus on creating differentiated experiences for our Services categories and Restaurants, Retail & Other categories, we have disaggregated advertising revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 to reflect these two high-level category groupings.
The decrease in advertising revenue in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily reflected lower revenue from businesses in our Restaurants, Retail & Other categories due to the COVID-19 pandemic and related shelter-in-place orders, which forced many of them to either close or reduce their advertising budgets. The decrease was also the result of the relief that we provided to our customers most impacted by COVID-19, particularly those in our Restaurants, Retail & Other categories. This relief was primarily in the form of $13.5 million of waived advertising fees, which reduced the amount of revenue that we recognized. We
also paused certain advertising campaigns that were scheduled to run from April to May 2020 and offered free advertising products during those months with a total value of $14.5 million. All paused advertising campaigns that were not cancelled by the customers resumed by the end of May 2020. Advertising revenue from our Services categories remained relatively consistent year over year.
The increase in advertising revenue in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to growth in revenue from the Services categories, which reflected an increase in the number of paying advertiser locations from improved local customer retention and increased revenue from existing multi-location customers. The growth in paying advertiser locations on the local business side resulted from stronger sales force productivity. The improvements in retention were driven by delivering more value to local customers through the efficiency of our advertising auction system and our ad targeting. Our Multi-location advertising products and larger Multi-location sales force drove the increase in revenue from multi-location customers, particularly from more tenured national customers.
Transactions. We generate revenue from various transactions with consumers, primarily through our partnership integrations. Our partnership integrations are primarily revenue-sharing arrangements that provide consumers with the ability to complete food ordering and delivery transactions through third parties directly on Yelp. We earn a fee for acting as an agent for transactions placed through these integrations, which we record on a net basis and include in revenue upon completion of a transaction.
The increase in transactions revenue in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to an increase in takeout and delivery orders, particularly from Grubhub, as the COVID-19 pandemic forced many restaurants to eliminate or reduce dine-in services.
The decrease in transactions revenue in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to a decrease in fees earned from Grubhub for processing credit card transactions related to Grubhub orders that originated on Yelp. Over the transition period following its acquisition of Eat24 from us in October 2017, Grubhub increasingly processed the credit card transactions related to such orders directly, thereby reducing the fees it paid us to process them on its behalf. Excluding the processing fees earned from Grubhub orders during the transition, transactions revenue from our revenue-sharing arrangements increased in 2019 compared to 2018.
Other Revenue. We generate revenue through our subscription services, which include our Yelp Reservations, Yelp Waitlist and other subscription products. We also generate revenue through our Yelp Knowledge program, which provides access to Yelp data for a licensing fee, as well as other non-advertising partnerships.
The decrease in other revenue in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily a result of the relief that we provided to customers impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, mainly in the form of waived fees.
The increase in other revenue in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to an increase in the number of customers purchasing our subscription products driven by our expanded Yelp Reservations and Yelp Waitlist sales force, as well as an increase in revenue from our Yelp Knowledge program mainly due to an increase in the number of partnerships.
Trends and Uncertainties of Net Revenue. We saw encouraging signs of recovery during the second half of 2020. Although a rise in COVID-19 cases led to renewed shelter-in-place orders during the second half of the fourth quarter, net revenue during the three months ended December 31, 2020 increased by 38% compared to the three months ended June 30, 2020, driven by resilience in our Services categories and recovery in our Restaurants, Retail & Other categories.
Despite our continued recovery in the fourth quarter, we currently expect net revenue in the three months ending March 31, 2021 to decrease slightly compared to the three months ended December 31, 2020, in line with seasonal trends.
Costs and Expenses
Cost of Revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization). Our cost of revenue consists primarily of credit card processing fees and website infrastructure expense, which includes website hosting costs and employee costs (including stock-based compensation expense) for the infrastructure teams responsible for operating our website and mobile app, and excludes depreciation and amortization expense. Cost of revenue also includes third-party advertising fulfillment costs.
The decrease in cost of revenue in 2020 was primarily attributable to:
•a decrease of $6.0 million in website infrastructure expense as a result of reduced traffic and cost-cutting measures; and
•a decrease of $2.1 million in merchant credit card fees due to fewer transactions associated with the decline in advertising revenue.
These decreases were partially offset by an increase of $3.4 million in advertising fulfillment costs driven by expanded efforts to syndicate advertising budgets on third-party sites.
The increase in 2019 was primarily attributable to:
•an increase of $3.7 million in advertising fulfillment costs primarily through third-party advertising networks; and
•an increase in website infrastructure expense of $3.0 million due to increases in the use of our website and in the number of employees supporting the website infrastructure.
These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $0.7 million in merchant fees related to credit card transactions as a result of the decline in transactions revenue following the sale of Eat24 in October 2017.
Sales and Marketing. Our sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of employee costs (including sales commission and stock-based compensation expenses) for our sales and marketing employees. Sales and marketing expenses also include business and consumer acquisition marketing, community management, as well as allocated workplace and other supporting overhead costs.
The decrease in sales and marketing expenses in 2020 was primarily attributable to:
•a decrease of $49.0 million in employee costs primarily due to lower sales headcount following the terminations and furloughs associated with the restructuring plan we announced on April 9, 2020 to help manage the near-term financial impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic ("Restructuring Plan"); and
•a decrease of $12.5 million in allocated workplace costs due to lower office operating costs as a result of our office closures.
The increase in sales and marketing expenses in 2019 was primarily attributable to an increase of $31.8 million in employee costs resulting from an increase in sales commission expenses due to improved sales team productivity and, to a lesser extent, from increased salary costs driven by higher Multi-location sales teams headcount and a larger share of tenured sales representatives throughout our sales organization. The increase in 2019 was partially offset by a decrease of $15.8 million in marketing and advertising costs primarily due to our continued efforts to optimize our marketing spend, particularly as our Yelp Reservations and Yelp Waitlist products drove consumer usage, which allowed us to reduce our reliance on consumer marketing.
Product Development. Our product development expenses primarily consist of employee costs (including stock-based compensation expense, net of capitalized employee costs associated with capitalized website and internal-use software development) for our engineers, product management and corporate infrastructure employees. In addition, product development expenses include allocated workplace and other supporting overhead costs.
The slight increase in product development expenses in 2020 was primarily attributable to an increase of $3.7 million in employee costs associated with higher headcount in the three months ended March 31, 2020, partially offset by the impact of reduced-hour work weeks as part of the Restructuring Plan in the second and third quarters and lower headcount in the fourth quarter.
The increase in product development expenses in 2019 was primarily attributable to:
•an increase of $15.6 million in employee costs associated with increased headcount to support more research and development activities, primarily for new and enhanced business-owner products as well as, to a lesser extent, enhancements to the consumer experience; and
•an increase of $2.6 million in allocated workplace and other supporting overhead costs as we leased additional office space and incurred additional overhead costs for our expanding headcount.
General and Administrative. Our general and administrative expenses primarily consist of employee costs (including stock-based compensation expense) for our executive, finance, user operations, legal, people operations and other administrative employees. Our general and administrative expenses also include our provision for doubtful accounts, consulting costs, as well as workplace and other supporting overhead costs.
The decrease in general and administrative expenses in 2020 was primarily attributable to:
•fees related to shareholder activism of $7.1 million incurred during the prior year that were not repeated in 2020; and
•a decrease of $6.5 million in employee and consulting costs driven by lower headcount following the terminations and furloughs associated with the Restructuring Plan and other workforce reductions.
These decreases were partially offset by an increase of $9.7 million in our provision for doubtful accounts primarily associated with an increase in the rate of customer delinquencies related to the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly in the first half of the year.
The increase in general and administrative expenses in 2019 was primarily attributable to $10.3 million in additional employee costs, consulting costs, and workplace and other overhead costs required to support the growth of the business, as well as $7.1 million in fees related to shareholder activism. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in the provision for doubtful accounts of $2.0 million due to an improvement in collection rates from advertising customers.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense primarily consists of depreciation on computer equipment, software, leasehold improvements, capitalized website and software development costs, and amortization of purchased intangible assets.
The increases in depreciation and amortization expense in 2020 and 2019 were primarily attributable to increases in depreciation associated with capitalized website and internal use software development costs as we invested in new and enhanced products for business owners and consumers.
Restructuring. On April 9, 2020, we announced the Restructuring Plan to help manage the near-term financial impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. On July 13, 2020, we announced an additional workforce reduction. We incurred $3.9 million in restructuring costs during the year ended December 31, 2020, which consisted of severance, payroll taxes and related benefits costs for terminated employees. The additional costs we incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020 to support furloughed employees are excluded from restructuring expenses and are recorded in operating expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. No further material expense in connection with terminations is expected. No goodwill, intangibles or other long-lived assets were impaired as a result of the Restructuring Plan. See Note 19, "Restructuring," of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further detail.
Trends and Uncertainties of Costs and Expenses. Although our total costs and expenses declined significantly from the three months ended March 31, 2020 to the three months ended June 30, 2020, primarily as a result of the Restructuring Plan, they increased over the remainder of the year. We expect costs and expenses to increase again in the three months ending March 31, 2021 compared to the three months ended December 31, 2020 as a result of our planned investments in product development, marketing and our Multi-location sales teams.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net consists primarily of the interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, the portion of our sublease income in excess of our lease cost, and foreign exchange gains and losses.
The decrease in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily driven by the change in our investment strategy to reduce our holdings of marketable securities in favor of holdings that are more liquid, primarily money market funds, which offer lower interest rates. We changed our strategy to preserve liquidity as a result of the uncertainties surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our business. For more information on this change, see "Liquidity and Capital Resources" below as well as Note 5, "Marketable Securities," of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. We expect other income, net to decline again in 2021 as a result of this change.
Other income, net remained relatively consistent in 2019 compared to 2018, primarily due to higher rates of interest earned on marketable securities, offset by a decrease in cash held in interest bearing accounts as a result of the stock repurchase program.
(Benefit from) Provision for Income Taxes
(Benefit from) provision for income taxes consists of: federal and state income taxes in the United States and income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions; deferred income taxes reflecting the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes; and the realization of net operating loss carryforwards.
The increase in benefit from income taxes in 2020 (from a recorded provision in 2019 to a recorded benefit in 2020) was primarily due to pre-tax losses, income tax credits and benefits from net operating loss carrybacks to 35.0% tax years as permitted under the CARES Act. The CARES Act was enacted on March 27, 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. See Note 16, "Income Taxes," of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further details.
The increase in the provision for income taxes in 2019 (from a recorded benefit in 2018 to a recorded provision in 2019) was primarily due to the release of our valuation allowance in 2018, which was previously recorded against certain deferred tax assets.
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $31.2 million in net deferred tax assets ("DTAs"). At this time, we consider it more likely than not that we will have sufficient taxable income in the future to allow us to realize these DTAs. However, it is possible that some or all of these DTAs will not be realized. Therefore, unless we are able to generate sufficient taxable income from our operations, a substantial valuation allowance to reduce our U.S. DTAs may be required, which would materially increase our expenses in the period in which we recognize the allowance and have a materially adverse impact on our consolidated financial statements. The exact timing and amount of the valuation allowance recognition are subject to change on the basis of the net income that we are able to actually achieve. We will continue to evaluate the possible recognition of a valuation allowance on a quarterly basis.
SELECTED QUARTERLY FINANCIAL DATA (UNAUDITED)
(In thousands, except per share data and percentages)
The following tables set forth the Company's unaudited quarterly consolidated statements of operations data and other operational data for each of the eight quarters in the two-year period ended December 31, 2020 (in thousands, except per share data and percentages). The Company has prepared this quarterly data on a consistent basis with the audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. In the opinion of management, the quarterly financial information reflects all necessary adjustments, consisting only of normal recurring adjustments, necessary for a fair presentation of this data. This information should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. The results of historical periods are not necessarily indicative of the results of operations for any future period.
The following tables present other operational data (in thousands, except percentages):
(1)For information on how we define these operational and other metrics, see “-Key Metrics.”
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. However, we have also disclosed below EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin, each of which is a non-GAAP financial measure. We have included adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin because they are key measures used by our management and board of directors to understand and evaluate our operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget and to develop short- and long-term operational plans. In particular, the exclusion of certain expenses in calculating adjusted EBITDA can provide a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our primary business operations. Accordingly, we believe that adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin provide useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and board of directors. As of 2021, our management and board of directors no longer consider EBITDA to be a key measure used to manage our business, and we will cease providing this amount going forward.
EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation or as substitutes for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. In particular, EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA should not be viewed as substitutes for, or superior to, net (loss) income prepared in accordance with GAAP as a measure of profitability or liquidity. Some of these limitations are:
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA do not reflect all cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
•EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA do not reflect the impact of the recording or release of valuation allowances or tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us;
•adjusted EBITDA does not consider the potentially dilutive impact of equity-based compensation;
•adjusted EBITDA does not take into account any income or costs that management determines are not indicative of ongoing operating performance, such as restructuring costs and fees related to shareholder activism; and
•other companies, including those in our industry, may calculate EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA differently, which reduces their usefulness as comparative measures.
Because of these limitations, you should consider EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin alongside other financial performance measures, net (loss) income, and our other GAAP results.
EBITDA. EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure that we calculate as net (loss) income, adjusted to exclude: (benefit from) provision for income taxes; other income (expense), net; and depreciation and amortization.
Adjusted EBITDA. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure that we calculate as net (loss) income, adjusted to exclude: provision for (benefit from) income taxes; other income (expense), net; depreciation and amortization; stock-based compensation expense; and, in certain periods, certain other income and expense items, such as restructuring costs and fees related to shareholder activism.
Adjusted EBITDA margin. Adjusted EBITDA margin is a non-GAAP financial measure that we calculate as Adjusted EBITDA divided by net revenue.
The following is a reconciliation of net (loss) income to EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA, as well as the calculation of net income margin and adjusted EBITDA margin, for each of the periods indicated (in thousands, except percentages):
(1)Recorded within general and administrative expenses on our consolidated statements of operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $595.9 million, which consisted of cash, money market funds and investments with original maturities of less than three months. Our cash held internationally as of December 31, 2020 was $10.7 million.
To date, we have been able to finance our operations and our acquisitions through proceeds from private and public financings, including our initial public offering in March 2012 and our follow-on offering in October 2013, cash generated from operations, and, to a lesser extent, cash provided by the exercise of employee stock options and purchases under the ESPP, as well as proceeds from our sale of Eat24 to Grubhub in October 2017.
In March 2020, we changed our investment strategy regarding marketable securities from held-to-maturity to available-for-sale in response to the COVID-19 pandemic in order to preserve liquidity. While our investment policy requires securities to be investment grade, and the marketable securities we held in our portfolio were therefore highly rated, we decided to actively reduce our limited risk exposure of principle loss from these marketable securities and move the proceeds into money market funds. Accordingly, during the six months ended June 30, 2020, we sold all of our available-for-sale short- and long-term marketable securities for proceeds of $253.4 million and recorded an immaterial amount of net realized gains to other income, net. We reinvested the proceeds from the sales, along with $73.0 million from maturities and redemptions of marketable securities, into money market funds. As of December 31, 2020, we continued to hold the majority of our investments in these money market funds, with a portion of our investments being held in certificates of deposit. See Note 5, "Marketable
Securities," and Note 6, "Prepaid Expenses and Other Current Assets," of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further details.
In addition to the change in our investment strategy, we implemented further measures to reduce our operating costs and manage the near-term financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the Restructuring Plan in April 2020. We also changed our method of settling the employee tax liabilities associated with the vesting of RSUs ahead of our second quarter vest date from withholding a portion of the vested shares and covering such taxes with cash from our balance sheet ("Net Share Withholding") to selling a portion of the vested shares to cover taxes ("Sell-to-Cover"). In July 2020, we announced an additional workforce reduction affecting a small number of employees.
In May 2020, we also entered into a Credit Agreement with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association (the "Credit Agreement"), which provides us with the ability to access backup liquidity to fund working capital and for other capital requirements, as needed, through a $75.0 million senior unsecured revolving credit facility including a letter of credit sub-limit of $25.0 million. We moved our letters of credit in an aggregate amount of approximately $21.5 million under the letter of credit sub-limit in the three months ended June 30, 2020. The bank deposits previously used to collateralize our letters of credit no longer have restrictions on their use and approximately $53.5 million remained available under the revolving credit facility as of December 31, 2020. The cost of capital associated with this credit facility was not significantly more than the cost of capital that we would have expected prior to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Credit Agreement includes a minimum liquidity covenant that requires us to maintain at least $300 million of cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities and funds available under the revolving credit facility at all times until the later of (a) March 31, 2021 or (b) our adjusted EBITDA meets a minimum level. After such time, the Credit Agreement requires us to comply with a maximum consolidated total leverage ratio and minimum consolidated interest coverage ratio. The Credit Agreement also contains customary limitations on our ability to: create, incur, assume or be liable for indebtedness; dispose of assets outside the ordinary course; acquire, merge or consolidate with or into another person or entity; create, incur or allow any lien on any of our property; make investments; or pay dividends, make distributions or repurchase shares. Such limitations are subject to certain exceptions; for example, the Credit Agreement permits us to repurchase shares subject to an increased minimum liquidity covenant of $400 million. In addition, the Credit Agreement provides for certain events of default such as nonpayment of principal and interest when due, breaches of representations and warranties, noncompliance with covenants, acts of insolvency and default on indebtedness held by third parties (subject to certain limitations and cure periods). As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with all covenants and there were no loans outstanding under the Credit Agreement.
Improvements in our business in the second and third quarters of 2020 gave us the confidence to reverse certain cost-saving measures we implemented in the Restructuring Plan. We restored reduced salaries in August 2020 and completed the staggered return of many furloughed employees in October 2020. We also reverted to the Net Share Withholding method of settling employee tax liabilities in connection with the vesting of RSUs in November 2020 ahead of our fourth quarter vest date.
Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including those set forth under the heading “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report. We believe that, as a result of the steps we have taken in response to COVID-19, our existing cash and cash equivalents, together with any cash generated from operations, will be sufficient to meet our material cash commitments, including: working capital requirements; our anticipated repurchases of common stock pursuant to our stock repurchase program; payment of taxes related to the net share settlement of equity awards; payment of lease costs related to our operating leases; and purchases of property, equipment and software and website hosting services for at least the next 12 months. However, this estimate is based on a number of assumptions that may prove to be materially different and we could exhaust our available cash and cash equivalents earlier than presently anticipated. We may be required to draw down funds from our revolving credit facility or seek additional funds through equity or debt financings in the next 12 months to respond to business challenges associated with the COVID-19 pandemic or other challenges, including the need to develop new features and products or enhance existing services, improve our operating infrastructure or acquire complementary businesses and technologies. The cost of capital associated with any additional funds sought in the future might be adversely impacted by the extent and duration of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Amounts deposited with third-party financial institutions exceed the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and Securities Investor Protection Corporation insurance limits, as applicable. These cash and cash equivalents could be impacted if the underlying financial institutions fail or are subjected to other adverse conditions in the financial markets. To date, we have experienced no loss or lack of access to our cash and cash equivalents; however, we can provide no assurances that access to our invested cash and cash equivalents will not be impacted by adverse conditions in the financial markets.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Operating Activities. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to a decrease in cash inflows from customers as a result of lower net revenue recognized during the period. This decrease was partially offset by a decrease in cash outflows for employee-related costs as a result of lower headcount following the terminations and furloughs associated with the Restructuring Plan.
The increase in cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to the timing of invoice payments and other liabilities, mainly driven by an increase in accrued employee compensation and related costs due to a change in the frequency of pay cycles.
Investing Activities. The increase in cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 was due to the liquidation of our marketable securities portfolio following the change in our investment strategy to preserve liquidity. This increase was partially offset by the purchases of certificates of deposit and intangible assets during 2020 as well as the release of an escrow deposit during 2019 in connection with our sale of Eat24, which did not recur in 2020.
The increase in cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to less reinvestment of securities after maturity to meet the financing needs of the business and the release of the Eat24 escrow deposit.
Financing Activities. The decrease in cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily due to the suspension of share repurchases under our stock repurchase program for most of 2020 as well as our use of the Sell-to-Cover method of settling employee tax liabilities incurred in connection with the vesting of RSUs for a portion of the year, which reduced the amount of taxes paid during 2020.
The increase in cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily due to an increase in repurchases of common stock pursuant to our stock repurchase program. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in the amount of taxes paid related to the net share settlement of equity awards for our employees due to a decrease in the average stock price.
Stock Repurchase Program
In July 2017, our board of directors authorized the repurchase of $200.0 million of our outstanding common stock. In each of November 2018, February 2019 and January 2020, our board of directors authorized us to repurchase up to an additional $250.0 million of our outstanding common stock, bringing the total amount of repurchases authorized under our stock repurchase program to $950.0 million as of December 31, 2020, $244.6 million of which remained available as of December 31, 2020 and $219.6 million of which remained available as of February 19, 2021.
We may purchase shares at our discretion in the open market, privately negotiated transactions, in transactions structured through investment banking institutions, or a combination of the foregoing. The program is not subject to any time limit and may be modified, suspended or discontinued at any time. The amount and timing of repurchases are subject to a variety of factors, including liquidity, cash flow and market conditions.
Pursuant to the Restructuring Plan, we suspended share repurchases under our stock repurchase program in April 2020 to maintain liquidity as a result of the uncertain impact of COVID-19 on our business. We resumed share repurchases in November 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased on the open market 803,691 shares, for an aggregate purchase price of $24.4 million, of which 704,673 shares were retired. The remaining 99,018 shares were retired in January 2021. During the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, we repurchased on the open market and subsequently retired 14,190,409 and 4,896,003 shares, respectively, for aggregate purchase prices of $481.0 million and $187.4 million, respectively.
We have funded all repurchases to date and expect to fund future repurchases with cash available on our balance sheet. As a result, we expect that cash used in financing activities will continue to increase as we make repurchases pursuant to this program.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Regulation S-K, Item 303(a)(4)(ii) promulgated by the SEC under the Securities Act, in 2020, 2019 or 2018.
Contractual Obligations
We lease various office facilities, including our corporate headquarters in San Francisco, California, under operating lease agreements that expire from 2019 to 2031. The terms of the lease agreements provide for rental payments on a graduated basis. We recognize rent expense on a straight-line basis over the lease periods. We do not have any debt or material capital lease obligations, and all of our property, equipment and software have been purchased with cash. As of December 31, 2020, we had no material long-term purchase obligations outstanding with vendors or third parties other than purchases of website hosting services. The following table summarizes our future minimum payments under non-cancelable operating leases and purchase obligations for equipment and office facilities as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(1) In October 2020, we entered into a lease agreement for an office facility in Toronto, Canada for which the lease term is expected to commence in 2021 and expire in 2031. We expect to classify this as an operating lease and, as of December 31, 2020, we expected to recognize operating lease cost of approximately $9.4 million over the life of the lease.
The contractual commitment amounts in the table above are associated with binding agreements and do not include obligations under contracts that we can cancel without a significant penalty. In addition, as of December 31, 2020, our total liability for uncertain tax positions was $1.9 million. We are not reasonably able to estimate the timing of future cash flow related to this liability. As a result, this amount is not included in the contractual obligations table above.
We have subleased certain office facilities under operating lease agreements that expire in 2025. The terms of these lease agreements provide for rental receipts on a graduated basis. We recognize sublease rentals on a straight-line basis over the lease periods reflected as a reduction in rental expense. As of December 31, 2020, our future minimum rental receipts to be received under non-cancelable subleases were $29.5 million.