Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws, and should be read in conjunction with the disclosures we make concerning risks and other factors that may affect our business and operating results, including those set forth in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” of this Report. The information contained in this section should also be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and the information contained elsewhere in this Report. See also “Forward-Looking Statements” immediately prior to Part I, Item 1, “Business” in this Report.
Business Overview
Headquartered in Austin, Texas, YETI is a global designer, retailer, and distributor of a variety innovative outdoor products. From coolers and drinkware to backpacks and bags, YETI products are built to meet the unique and varying needs of diverse outdoor pursuits, whether in the remote wilderness, at the beach, or anywhere life takes our customers. By consistently delivering high-performing, exceptional products, we have built a strong following of brand loyalists throughout the world, ranging from serious outdoor enthusiasts to individuals who simply value products of uncompromising quality and design. We have an unwavering commitment to outdoor and recreation communities, and we are relentless in our pursuit of building superior products for people to confidently enjoy life outdoors and beyond.
Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) a global pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted global economies, resulting in travel restrictions, business slowdowns or shutdowns in affected areas, reduced economic activity, and changes in consumer behavior.
These COVID-19 pandemic disruptions have affected our businesses, as well as those of our consumers, wholesale partners, and suppliers. As we entered 2020, the great momentum from 2019 continued to be reflected in the strong sales performance throughout most of the first quarter of 2020. Unfortunately, our sales were adversely impacted during the final weeks of the first quarter of 2020 due to the decrease in consumer spending and temporary store closures attributed to the COVID-19 pandemic. However, during the second quarter of 2020, our DTC channel significantly benefited from a demand surge for outdoor recreation and leisure lifestyle products as we saw consumers change their views towards how they spend their time experiencing nature and exploring the outdoors as home restriction were lifted, as well as more consumers shopping online while sheltering-in-place. The unprecedented demand across the DTC channel continued throughout the remainder of the year. In our wholesale channel, these changes in consumer behavior helped to fuel strong wholesale orders at the end of the second quarter of 2020 as our wholesale partners began to reopen stores and replenish inventories for anticipated demand for the remainder of 2020. Despite the strong demand, the full-year performance of our wholesale channel was limited by inventory constraints throughout the second half of the year, as further discussed below.
To date, we have experienced minimal supply-chain disruptions as a direct result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, restrictions or disruptions of transportation did not result in significantly higher costs or delays for us during 2020. However, in the final weeks of the second quarter of 2020 in the midst of the pandemic, we reduced inventory purchase orders to align with demand forecasts at the time and to provide enhanced financial flexibility. These actions coupled with the overall strong demand during 2020 contributed to lower than expected inventory levels throughout the second half of the year and, in turn, resulted in inventory constraints to meet demand in our wholesale channel, particularly in the fourth quarter of 2020.
As part of our response strategy to the disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and as a precautionary measure, we enhanced our liquidity position at the end of the first quarter of 2020 through a $50.0 million draw down on our Revolving Credit Facility and began instituting cost reduction initiatives, including the reduction of discretionary spending, lowering of capital expenditures and investments, temporary hiring suspensions, employee furloughs, and workforce reductions. Our senior leadership also agreed to temporarily reduce their base salaries and our Board of Directors agreed to temporarily waive their annual cash compensation starting in May 2020. In the second quarter of 2020, we repaid in full the $50.0 million borrowed under the Revolving Credit Facility. The cost reduction initiatives were scaled back during the second half of 2020. In August 2020, salaries of senior leadership team members were restored to previously approved levels. Additionally, the Board of Directors’ annual cash compensation was reinstated.
Throughout the pandemic, we have prioritized the health and safety of our employees and our consumers. In March 2020, we temporarily closed our retail stores, domestic customization operations, and offices, including our innovation center, and implemented a remote work policy for all of our corporate employees, which, in most cases, we are still continuing to follow. As our retail stores and certain of our facilities were re-opened, we followed local health guidelines and we implemented additional safety and cleaning protocols.
As we continue to monitor and navigate the COVID-19 pandemic and its effects and may take additional actions based on the requirements and recommendations of local health guidelines, we intend to focus on disciplined investments for future, long-term growth. In certain circumstances, there may be developments outside our control requiring us to adjust our operating plan. As such, given the dynamic nature of this situation, we cannot reasonably estimate the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows in the future. In addition, see Part I-Item 1A, “Risk Factors - Risks Related to Market and Global Economic Conditions,” included herein for updates to our risk factors regarding risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
General
Components of Our Results of Operations
Net Sales. Net sales are comprised of wholesale channel sales to our retail partners and sales through our DTC channel. Net sales in both channels reflect the impact of product returns as well as discounts for certain sales programs or promotions.
We discuss the net sales of our products in our two primary categories: Coolers & Equipment and Drinkware. Our Coolers & Equipment category includes hard coolers, soft coolers, outdoor equipment and other products, as well as accessories and replacement parts for these products. Beginning in 2019, we began reporting Boomer Dog Bowl net sales in our Coolers & Equipment instead of in our Other category. Our Drinkware category includes our stainless-steel drinkware products and related accessories. In addition, our Other category is primarily comprised of ice substitutes, and YETI-branded gear, such as shirts, hats, and other miscellaneous products.
Gross profit. Gross profit reflects net sales less cost of goods sold, which primarily includes the purchase cost of our products from our third-party contract manufacturers, inbound freight and duties, product quality testing and inspection costs, depreciation expense of our molds and equipment, and the cost of customizing Drinkware products. We calculate gross margin as gross profit divided by net sales. Our DTC channel generally generates higher gross margin than our wholesale channel due to differentiated pricing between these channels.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses. Selling, general, and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses consist primarily of marketing costs, employee compensation and benefits costs, costs of our outsourced warehousing and logistics operations, costs of operating on third-party DTC marketplaces, professional fees and services, non-cash stock-based compensation, cost of product shipment to our customers, depreciation and amortization expense, and general corporate infrastructure expenses. Our variable expenses, specifically our distribution expenses, will vary as they are dependent on our sales volume and our channel mix. Our DTC channel distribution costs are generally higher as a percentage of net sales than our wholesale channel distribution costs. In 2020, due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic as described below, our channel mix significantly shifted towards our DTC channel from 42% in 2019 to 53% in 2020. As a result, variable distribution expenses as a percentage of net sales increased during 2020.
Fiscal Year. We have a 52- to 53-week fiscal year that ends on the Saturday closest in proximity to December 31, such that each quarterly period will be 13 weeks in length, except during a 53-week year when the fourth quarter will be 14 weeks. Our fiscal year 2020 included 53 weeks and ended on January 2, 2021. Our fiscal years 2019 and 2018 ended on December 28, 2019 and December 29, 2018, respectively, and spanned 52 weeks each. Unless otherwise stated, references to particular years, quarters, months and periods refer to our fiscal years ended in December and the associated quarters, months, and periods of those fiscal years.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth selected statement of operations data, and their corresponding percentage of net sales, for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Year Ended January 2, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 28, 2019
Net Sales
Net sales increased $178.0 million, or 19%, to $1,091.7 million in 2020 from $913.7 million in 2019. The increase in net sales was driven by growth in our faster growing DTC channel. DTC channel net sales increased $194.8 million, or 50%, to $580.9 million in 2020 from $386.1 million in 2019, driven by both Drinkware and Coolers & Equipment categories. Net sales in our DTC channel were favorably impacted by increased demand for outdoor recreation and leisure lifestyle products as the COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted consumers’ views towards how they spend their time experiencing nature and the outdoors as well as more consumers shopping online while sheltering-in-place, resulting in increased sales volume during the period. As a result, our channel mix significantly shifted towards our DTC channel from 42% in 2019 to 53% in 2020. Net sales in our wholesale channel decreased $16.8 million, or 3%, to $510.9 million in 2020 from $527.6 million in 2019, primarily driven by Coolers & Equipment. While wholesale net sales trends returned to positive growth at the end of the second quarter of 2020 and continued during the second half of the year, the sharp decline of net sales during March and April 2020, as a result of COVID-19 related temporary store closures, adversely impacted the performance of the wholesale channel.
Net sales in our two primary product categories were as follows:
•Drinkware net sales increased $102.3 million, or 19%, to $628.6 million in 2020 from $526.2 million in 2019, primarily driven by the increase in sales volume, reflecting the continued expansion of our Drinkware product offerings, including the introduction of new colorways and sizes, and strong demand for customization.
•Coolers & Equipment net sales increased $77.7 million, or 21%, to $446.6 million in 2020 from $368.9 million in 2019, primarily driven by the strong performance of hard coolers, soft coolers, outdoor living products, and cargo.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased $153.5 million, or 32%, to $628.8 million in 2020 from $475.3 million in 2019. Gross margin increased 560 basis points to 57.6% in 2020 from 52.0% in 2019. The increase in gross margin was primarily driven by:
•an increase in the mix of higher margin DTC channel net sales, which favorably impacted gross margin by approximately 280 basis points;
•product cost improvements across our product portfolio, which favorably impacted gross margin by approximately 150 basis points;
•decreased tariffs, which favorably impacted gross margin by 60 basis points;
•lower inbound freight, which favorably impacted gross margin by 50 basis points; and
•other impacts, which favorably impacted gross margin by 40 basis points.
These gains were partially offset by 20 basis points from higher inventory reserves related to new product transitions and other impacts.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses increased by $29.0 million, or 8%, to $414.6 million in 2020 from $385.5 million in 2019. As a percentage of net sales, SG&A expenses decreased 420 basis points to 38.0% in 2020. The increase in SG&A expenses resulted from:
•an increase in variable expenses of $41.1 million, or a 210 basis point increase, driven by our faster growing and higher margin DTC channel, which grew to 53% of net sales, comprised of:
-higher distribution costs including outbound freight, online marketplace fees, credit card processing fees, and third-party logistics fees; and
•a decrease in non-variable expenses of $12.1 million, or a 630 basis point decrease, comprised of:
-lower non-cash stock-based compensation expense, primarily driven by the $40.7 million expense associated with the pre-IPO performance-based restricted stock units (“RSUs”) that vested and were fully recognized in the fourth quarter of 2019; and
-decreased professional fees.
These decreases were partially offset by:
-increased marketing expenses;
-increased personnel expenses primarily due to higher incentive compensation, partially offset by lower travel expense and the effect of COVID-19 related cost saving initiatives;
-increased non-variable distribution costs, including third-party logistics fees;
-increased depreciation and amortization expense;
-increased insurance expenses; and
-increased facilities costs and other operating expenses.
Non-Operating Expenses
Interest expense was $9.2 million in 2020, compared to $21.8 million in 2019. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to lower interest rates and decreased outstanding long-term debt under our Credit Facility.
Income tax expense was $49.4 million in 2020, compared to $16.8 million in 2019. Our effective tax rate for 2020 was 24% compared to 25% for 2019. The decrease in the effective tax rate was primarily due to a lower state tax rate and higher tax benefit related to stock-based compensation in 2020 compared to 2019, partially offset by a decrease in our research and development tax credit in 2020.
Year Ended December 28, 2019 Compared to Year Ended December 29, 2018
Net Sales
Net sales increased $134.9 million, or 17%, to $913.7 million in 2019 from $778.8 million in 2018. The increase in net sales was driven by increases in net sales from our DTC and wholesale channels. DTC channel net sales increased $98.7 million, or 34%, to $386.1 million in 2019 from $287.4 million in 2018. The DTC channel net sales increase was driven by strong performance in both primary product categories, particularly Drinkware. Wholesale channel net sales increased $36.2 million, or 7%, to $527.6 million in 2019 from $491.4 million in 2018. The wholesale channel net sales increase was primarily driven by strong performance across both primary product categories.
Net sales in our two primary product categories were as follows:
•Drinkware net sales increased $102.1 million, or 24%, to $526.2 million in 2019 from $424.2 million in 2018. The increase in Drinkware net sales was primarily driven by the expansion of our Drinkware product offerings during 2019, including the introduction of new colorways, sizes, and accessories, and strong demand for customization.
•Coolers & Equipment net sales increased $37.7 million, or 11%, to $368.9 million in 2019 from $331.2 million in 2018. The increase in Coolers & Equipment net sales was primarily driven by strong performance in outdoor living products, bags, hard coolers, soft coolers, and cargo.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased $92.2 million, or 24%, to $475.3 million in 2019 from $383.1 million in 2018. Gross margin increased 280 basis points to 52.0% in 2019 from 49.2% in 2018. The increase in gross margin was primarily driven by the following:
•cost improvements across our product portfolio, particularly in our Drinkware category, which favorably impacted gross margin by approximately 270 basis points;
•an increase in the mix of higher margin DTC channel net sales, which favorably impacted gross margin by approximately 150 basis points; and
•lower inbound air freight, reflecting higher costs to expedite Drinkware inventory supply in the prior period, which favorably impacted gross margin by approximately 80 basis points.
These factors, which contributed to the increase in gross margin were partially offset by the unfavorable impact of:
•increased tariff rates, which reduced gross margin by approximately 100 basis points;
•higher inventory reserves, which reduced gross margin by approximately 70 basis points; and
•end-of-life price reductions on our Hopper Two 30 soft cooler implemented in the second quarter of 2019 and other impacts, which reduced gross margin by approximately 50 basis points.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses increased by $104.6 million, or 37%, to $385.5 million in 2019 from $281.0 million in 2018. As a percentage of net sales, SG&A expenses increased 610 basis points to 42.2% in 2019. The increase in SG&A expenses were primarily driven by:
•an increase in variable expenses of $22.8 million, or a 120 basis point increase, driven by our higher margin DTC channel:
-higher distribution costs included outbound freight, online marketplace fees, credit card processing fees, and third-party logistics fees; and
•an increase in non-variable expenses of $81.7 million, or a 490 basis point increase, comprised of:
-higher non-cash stock-based compensation expense, primarily driven by pre-IPO performance-based restricted stock units that vested and were fully recognized in the fourth quarter of 2019;
-increased personnel to support long-term growth in our business;
-higher marketing expenses, which were broad-based across both brand and performance marketing efforts;
-higher temporary labor and information technology expenses to support growth and continued development of our omni-channel capabilities;
-incremental costs incurred in connection with our ongoing transition to a public company, including costs incurred in connection with our secondary offerings in May 2019 and November 2019;
-increased depreciation and amortization expense;
-increased non-variable distribution costs, including third-party logistics fees; and
-increased facilities costs;
These increases were partially offset by a decrease in other operating expenses.
Non-Operating Expenses
Interest expense was $21.8 million in 2019, compared to $31.3 million in 2018. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to decreased outstanding long-term debt under our Credit Facility.
Income tax expense was $16.8 million in 2019, compared to $11.9 million in 2018. Our effective tax rate for 2019 was 25% compared to 17% for 2018. The increase in effective tax rate was primarily due to an increase in state income tax expense due to expanding our operations to additional states and a discrete tax expense associated with the pre-IPO performance-based RSUs that vested and were fully recognized in the fourth quarter of 2019. In addition, income tax expense in 2018 was lower due to a benefit from a revaluation of state deferred tax assets and the stock compensation tax benefit of exercised options primarily in connection with our IPO.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
Our cash requirements have principally been for working capital purposes, long-term debt repayments, and capital expenditures. We fund our working capital, primarily inventory and accounts receivable, and capital investments from cash flows from operating activities, cash on hand, and borrowings available under our Revolving Credit Facility (as defined below). As discussed under “-Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic” above, although the potential magnitude and economic impacts of COVID-19 are uncertain, we believe that the actions taken to date, together with our current operating performance, operating plan, our strong cash position, including cash generated from operations, inventory on hand and borrowings available under the Revolving Credit Facility, will be sufficient to satisfy our liquidity needs and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next twelve months.
Current Liquidity
As of January 2, 2021, we had a cash balance of $253.3 million, a $64.5 million working capital deficit (excluding cash), and $150.0 million of borrowings available under the Revolving Credit Facility.
Credit Facility
We are party to a senior secured credit agreement (the “Credit Facility”) that provides for a $150.0 million Revolving Credit Facility maturing on December 17, 2024 and a $300.0 million Term Loan A maturing on December 17, 2024 (the “Term Loan A”). In December 2019, we amended our existing Credit Facility to, among other changes, increase the remaining principal amount of the Term Loan A from approximately $298.0 million to $300.0 million, increase the commitments under the Revolving Credit Facility from $100.0 million to $150.0 million, and extend the maturity date of both the Term Loan A and the Revolving Credit Facility from May 19, 2021 to December 17, 2024.
During 2020, we made $15.0 million and $150.0 million in mandatory and voluntary repayments, respectively.
At the end of the first quarter of 2020, as a precautionary measure to enhance our liquidity position and to increase available cash on hand amidst the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, we drew down $50.0 million on the Revolving Credit Facility. During the second quarter of 2020, we repaid in full the $50.0 million borrowed under the Revolving Credit Facility. As of January 2, 2021, we had no outstanding borrowings and $150.0 million of borrowings available under the Revolving Credit Facility.
At January 2, 2021, we had $135.0 million principal amount of indebtedness outstanding under the Credit Facility.
The weighted average interest rates for borrowings under Term Loan A and our outstanding balance under the Revolving Credit Facility until it was repaid in June 2020 were 2.72% and 2.92%, respectively, as of January 2, 2021. We were in compliance with all covenants under the Credit Facility as of January 2, 2021.
The Credit Facility requires us to comply with certain covenants, including financial covenants regarding our total net leverage ratio and interest coverage ratio. Fluctuations in these ratios may increase our interest expense. Failure to comply with these covenants and certain other provisions of the Credit Facility, or the occurrence of a change of control, could result in an event of default and an acceleration of our obligations under the Credit Facility or other indebtedness that we may incur in the future. At January 2, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants and expect to remain in compliance with all covenants under the Credit Facility.
Cash Flows from Operating, Investing and Financing Activities
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Operating Activities
2020. Net cash provided by operating activities of $366.4 million for 2020 was primarily driven by net income of $155.8 million, total non-cash items of $38.7 million, and the favorable impact of a decrease in net working capital items of $171.9 million. Non-cash items primarily consisted of depreciation and amortization of $30.5 million, stock-based compensation expense of $9.0 million, loss on prepayment of debt of $1.1 million, impairment of long-lived assets of $1.1 million, and amortization of deferred financing fees of $0.9 million, partially offset by deferred income taxes of $3.8 million, and other items of $0.1 million, primarily consisting of unrealized foreign currency transaction gains. The change in net working capital items was primarily due to a $89.1 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses, driven by the favorable timing of increased purchase orders at the end of 2020 and other working capital fluctuations; a $46.1 million decrease in inventory due to the impact of delayed purchase orders resulting from the precautionary measures to provide enhanced financial flexibility during the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the unplanned nature of the demand in our DTC channel net sales; a $16.4 million decrease in accounts receivable; a $14.9 million increase in taxes payable; a $3.5 million increase in other, primarily related to higher long-term tax liabilities; and a $2.0 million decrease in other current assets.
2019. Net cash provided by operating activities of $86.9 million for 2019 was primarily driven by net income of $50.4 million and total non-cash items of $100.4 million, offset by the unfavorable impact of an increase in net working capital items of $63.9 million. Non-cash items primarily consisted of stock-based compensation expense of $52.3 million, depreciation and amortization of $29.0 million, deferred income taxes of $15.6 million, the amortization of deferred financing fees of $2.2 million, the loss on modification and extinguishment related to the Amendment of our Credit Facility of $0.6 million, and the impairment of long-lived assets of $0.6 million. The change in net working capital items was primarily due to a $40.5 million increase in inventory, primarily reflecting a strategic buildup of Drinkware in advance of potential tariffs as well as investments to support anticipated sales growth; a $19.9 million increase in accounts receivable; a $6.8 million increase in other current assets primarily related to an increase in prepaid information technology expenses; and a $3.1 million decrease in taxes payable, offset by a $6.6 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses related to trade payables primarily related to extending payment terms with vendors.
2018. Net cash provided by operating activities of $176.1 million for 2018 was primarily driven by net income of $57.8 million, total non-cash items of $46.6 million, and the favorable impact of a decrease in net working capital items of $71.7 million. Non-cash items primarily consisted of depreciation and amortization of $24.7 million and stock-based compensation expense of $13.2 million. The change in net working capital items was primarily due to a $43.7 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses related to extending payment terms with vendors, as well as increased accrued incentive compensation, and a $29.6 million decrease in inventory driven by effective inventory management coupled with increased sales in the fourth quarter of 2018.
Investing Activities
2020. Net cash used in investing activities of $22.9 million for 2020 was primarily related to $15.6 million of purchases of property and equipment for technology systems infrastructure, production molds, tooling, and equipment, and facilities, and $7.4 million of additions of intangibles such as trademarks, patents, and trade dress assets.
2019. Net cash used in investing activities of $48.7 million for 2019 was primarily related to $32.1 million of purchases of property and equipment for technology systems infrastructure, production molds, tooling, and equipment, and facilities, and $16.6 million of additions of intangibles such as trade dress, patents, and trademark assets.
2018. Net cash used in investing activities of $31.7 million for 2018 was primarily related to $20.9 million of purchases of property and equipment for technology systems infrastructure, production molds, tooling, and equipment, and facilities, and $11.0 million of additions of intangibles such as trade dress and trademark assets.
Financing Activities
2020. Net cash used in financing activities was $163.2 million for 2020 primarily resulted from $165.0 million of mandatory and voluntary repayments of long-term debt and $1.0 million of taxes paid related to the net share settlement of stock-based compensation, partially offset by $3.0 million of proceeds from employee stock transactions.
2019. Net cash used in financing activities was $45.7 million for 2019 primarily resulted from $34.9 million of repayments of long-term debt, $13.5 million of taxes paid related to the net share settlement of stock-based compensation, $0.6 million in dividend payments to certain option holders, and $0.1 million of net borrowings related to the Amendment of our Credit Facility, net of deferred financing fees. These financing activity outflows were partially offset by $3.5 million of proceeds from employee stock transactions.
2018. Net cash used in financing activities was $118.0 million for 2018 primarily resulted from $151.8 million of repayments of long-term debt, $2.5 million in dividend payments, and $2.0 million to repurchase common stock from one stockholder that was subsequently retired. These financing activity outflows were partially offset by $38.1 million of net proceeds from our IPO.
For 2021, we expect capital expenditures for property and equipment to be between $55 million and $60 million, primarily to support our growing business with investments in technology, and new product innovation and launches, including production molds and tooling and equipment.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of January 2, 2021 (in thousands):
_________________________________________
(1)We have entered into commitments for service and maintenance agreements related to our management information systems, distribution contracts, advertising, sponsorships, and licensing agreements.
The contractual obligations table above excludes unrecognized tax benefits as we are unable to reasonably predict the timing of settlement of liabilities, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits. As of January 2, 2021, we had unrecognized tax benefits of $8.7 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements.
As of January 2, 2021, we had no off-balance sheet debt or arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. In preparing the consolidated financial statements, we make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, sales, expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We re-evaluate our estimates on an on-going basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Because of the uncertainty inherent in these matters, actual results may differ from these estimates and could differ based upon other assumptions or conditions.
See Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for our significant accounting policies. The following describes significant judgments and estimates used in the application of these policies. Within the context of these critical accounting policies, we are not currently aware of any reasonably likely events or circumstances that would result in materially different amounts being reported.
Revenue Recognition
As discussed in the “Recently Adopted Accounting Standards” section in Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, we adopted the new revenue recognition standard at the beginning of 2019. Revenue transactions associated with the sale of YETI branded coolers, equipment, drinkware, apparel and accessories comprise a single performance obligation, which consists of the sale of products to customers either through our wholesale or DTC channels. Revenue is recognized when performance obligations are satisfied through the transfer of control of promised goods to the customers, based on the terms of sale. The transfer of control typically occurs at a point in time based on consideration of when the customer has an obligation to pay for the goods, and physical possession of, legal title to, and the risks and rewards of ownership of the goods has been transferred, and the customer has accepted the goods. Revenue from wholesale transactions is generally recognized at the time products are shipped based on contractual terms with the customer. Revenue from our DTC channel is generally recognized at the point of sale in our retail stores and at the time products are shipped for e-commerce transactions and corporate sales based on contractual terms with the customer.
Revenue is recognized net of estimates of variable consideration, including product returns, customer discounts and allowances, sales incentive programs, and miscellaneous claims from customers. We determine these estimates based on contract terms, evaluations of historical experience, anticipated trends, and other factors. The actual amount of customer returns and customer allowances, which is inherently uncertain, may differ from our estimates.
The duration of contractual arrangements with our customers is typically less than 1 year. Payment terms with wholesale customers vary depending on creditworthiness and other considerations, with the most common being net 30 days. Payment is due at the time of sale for retail store transactions and at the time of shipment for e-commerce transactions.
Certain products that we sell include a limited warranty which does not meet the definition of a performance obligation within the context of the contract. Product warranty costs are estimated based on historical and anticipated trends and are recorded as cost of goods sold at the time revenue is recognized.
Revenue from the sale of gift cards is initially deferred and recognized as a contract liability until the gift card is redeemed by the customer.
We elected to account for shipping and handling as fulfillment activities, and not as separate performance obligations. Shipping and handling fees billed to customers are included in net sales. All shipping and handling activity costs are recognized as selling, general and administrative expenses at the time the related revenue is recognized. Sales taxes collected from customers and remitted directly to government authorities are excluded from net sales and cost of goods sold.
Our terms of sale provide limited return rights. We may accept, and have at times accepted, returns outside our terms of sale at our sole discretion. We may also, at our sole discretion, provide our retail partners with sales discounts and allowances. We record estimated sales returns, discounts, and miscellaneous customer claims as reductions to net sales at the time revenues are recorded. We base our estimates upon historical experience and trends, and upon approval of specific returns or discounts. Actual returns and discounts in any future period are inherently uncertain and thus may differ from our estimates. If actual or expected future returns and discounts were significantly greater or lower than the reserves we had established, we would record a reduction or increase to net sales in the period in which we made such determination. A 10% change in our estimated reserve for sales returns, discounts, and miscellaneous claims for 2020 would have impacted net sales by $1.1 million.
For periods prior to adoption, revenue was recognized when persuasive evidence of an arrangement existed, and title and risks of ownership had passed to the customer, based on the terms of sale. Goods were usually shipped to customers with free-on-board (“FOB”) shipping point terms; however, our practice was to bear the responsibility of the delivery to the customer. In the case that product was lost or damaged in transit to the customer, we generally took the responsibility to provide new product. In effect, we applied a synthetic FOB destination policy and therefore recognized revenue when the product was delivered to the customer. For our national accounts, delivery of our products typically occurred at shipping point, as such customers took delivery at our distribution center.
Inventory
Inventories are comprised primarily of finished goods and are carried at the lower of cost (weighted-average cost method) or market (net realizable value). We make ongoing estimates relating to the net realizable value of inventories based upon our assumptions about future demand and market conditions. If the estimated net realizable value is less than cost, we reflect the lower value of that inventory. This methodology recognizes inventory exposures at the time such losses are identified rather than at the time the inventory is actually sold. Due to customer demand and inventory constraints, we have not historically taken material adjustments to the carrying value of our inventory.
Our inventory valuation reflects adjustments for anticipated inventory losses that have occurred since the last physical inventory. We estimate inventory shrinkage based on historical trends from physical inventory counts and cycle counts. We perform physical inventory counts and cycle counts throughout the year and adjust the shrink provision accordingly. Historically, physical inventory shrinkage has not been significant.
Valuation of Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
Goodwill and intangible assets are recorded at cost, or at their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. We review goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount may be impaired.
As a result of the events and impacts surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, including the sharp decline in sales beginning in mid-March 2020 and reduced cash flow forecasts during the beginning of the second quarter of 2020, we considered whether these conditions indicated that it was more likely than not that our goodwill of $54.3 million and indefinite-lived intangible assets were impaired as of March 28, 2020. Based on the qualitative assessment of the facts and circumstances in existence as of March 28, 2020 and the results of our annual impairment test performed during the fourth quarter of 2019, we determined that the fair values more likely than not significantly exceeded the carrying values of both our reporting unit and indefinite-lived intangible assets and, therefore, an interim quantitative impairment test was not performed. Based on our qualitative assessment performed during the fourth quarter of 2020, we determined that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of each reporting unit is lower than its carrying value; therefore, the quantitative impairment test was not required.
In conducting our annual impairment test, we first review qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the asset, or reporting units, is less than its carrying amount. If factors indicate that the fair value is less than its carrying amount, we perform a quantitative assessment, analyzing the expected present value of future cash flows to quantify the amount of impairment, if any. Based on our qualitative assessment performed during the fourth quarter of 2020, we determined that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of each reporting unit is lower than its carrying value; therefore, the quantitative impairment test was not required. We did not record any goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets impairment charges during the years ended January 2, 2021, December 28, 2019, or December 29, 2018.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets
We assess the recoverability of our long-lived assets, which include property and equipment, operating lease right-of-use-assets, and definite-lived intangible assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. An impairment loss on our long-lived assets exists when the estimated undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition are less than its carrying amount. If the carrying amount exceeds the sum of the undiscounted cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized based on the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the estimated fair value of the assets. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or estimated fair value less costs to sell.
Product Warranty
Warranty liabilities are recorded at the time of sale for the estimated costs that may be incurred under the terms of our limited warranty. We make and revise these estimates primarily on the number of units under warranty, historical experience of warranty claims, and an estimated per unit replacement cost. The liability for warranties is included in accrued expenses in our consolidated balance sheets. The specific warranty terms and conditions vary depending upon the product sold but are generally warranted against defects in material and workmanship ranging from three to five years. Our warranty only applies to the original owner. If actual product failure rates or repair costs differ from estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liabilities would be required and could materially affect our financial condition and operating results.
Stock Options
We measure compensation expense for all stock-based awards at fair value on the date of grant and recognize compensation expense over the service period for awards expected to vest. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton (“Black-Scholes”) option pricing model to determine the fair value of stock option awards, which uses the expected option term, stock price volatility, and the risk-free interest rate. The expected option term assumption reflects the period for which we believe the option will remain outstanding. We elected to use the simplified method to determine the expected option term, which is the average of the options’ vesting and contractual terms. Our computation of expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of selected comparable publicly traded companies over a period equal to the expected term of the option. The risk-free interest rate reflects the U.S. Treasury yield curve for a similar instrument with the same expected term in effect at the time of the grant. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based compensation awards represent management’s best estimates, but the estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. If any of the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes model changes significantly, stock-based compensation expense for future option awards may differ materially compared with the awards granted previously. Costs relating to stock-based compensation are recognized in SG&A expenses in our consolidated statements of operations, and forfeitures are recognized as they occur. No stock options were granted during the year ended January 2, 2021.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recent accounting pronouncements, see “Recently Adopted Accounting Guidance” and “Recent Accounting Guidance Not Yet Adopted” in Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein.