Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements, including the notes thereto, appearing elsewhere in this annual report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Our audited financial statements are stated in United States Dollars and are prepared in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act. As a result, we are permitted to, and intend to, rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements. For so long as we are an emerging growth company, we will not be required to: have an auditor report on our internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act; provide an auditor attestation with respect to management’s report on the effectiveness of our internal controls over financial reporting; comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (i.e., an auditor discussion and analysis); submit certain executive compensation matters to shareholders advisory votes, such as “say-on-pay” and “say-on-frequency” and disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. In addition, Section 107 of the JOBS Act also provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies.
We have elected to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period. Our financial statements may therefore not be comparable to those of companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards. We will remain an “emerging growth company” for up to five years, or until the earliest of (i) the last day of the first fiscal year in which our total annual gross revenues exceed $1 billion, (ii) the date that we become a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which would occur if the market value of our ordinary shares that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter or (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1 billion in non-convertible debt during the preceding three year period. Even if we no longer qualify for the exemptions for an emerging growth company, we may still be, in certain circumstances, subject to scaled disclosure requirements as a smaller reporting company. For example, smaller reporting companies, like emerging growth companies, are not required to provide a compensation discussion and analysis under Item 402(b) of Regulation S-K or auditor attestation of internal controls over financial reporting.
Results of operations
We have incurred recurring losses to date. Our financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern and, accordingly, do not include adjustments relating to the recoverability and realization of assets and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue in operation.
We will require additional capital to meet our long term operating goals. We expect to raise additional capital through, among other things, the sale of equity or debt securities.
Results of operation for the years ended April 30, 2021 and April 30, 2020:
Revenue
There was no revenue and cost of sales for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020. Operating expenses for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020 were $52,094 and $72,334, respectively.
Net Loss
The net loss for the years ended April 30, 2021 and 2020 was $52,094 and $72,334 accordingly.
Liquidity and capital resources
As of April 30, 2021 and 2020, our total assets were $0.
As of April 30, 2021, our current liabilities were $174,670 ($122,576 as of April 30, 2020) and stockholders’ deficit was $174,670 ($122,576 as of April 30, 2020).
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES
For the year ended April 30, 2021, we have not generated positive cash flows from operating activities. Net cash flows used in operating activities was $42,286, which consisted of increase in accruals and other payables.
For the year ended April 30, 2020, we have not generated positive cash flows from operating activities. Net cash flow used in operating activities was $53,579, which consisted of increase in accruals and other payables.
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES
For the year ended April 30, 2021, net cash flow provided by financing activities was $42,286 from proceeds from a related party.
For the year ended April 30, 2020, net cash flow provided by financing activities was $53,579 from proceeds from a related party.
Our cash balance is $0 as of April 30, 2021. We believe our cash balance is insufficient to fund our operations for any period of time. Management anticipates that the Company will be dependent, in the near future, on additional investment capital to fund operating expenses. The Company intends to position itself so that it will be able to raise additional funds through the capital markets. In light of management’s efforts, there are no assurances that the Company will be successful.
Limited operating history; need for additional capital
There is no historical financial information about us upon which to base an evaluation of our performance. We are in a start-up stage of operations and have generated limited revenues since inception. We cannot guarantee that we will be successful in our business operations. Our business is subject to risks inherent in the establishment of a new business enterprise, including limited capital resources and possible cost overruns due to price and cost increases in services and products.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on the Company's financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.