Item 7.
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
(All dollar amounts are stated in thousands of dollars.)
Overview
The York Water Company (the “Company”) is the oldest investor-owned water utility in the United States, operated continuously since 1816. The Company also owns and operates two wastewater collection systems and five wastewater collection and treatment systems. The Company is a purely regulated water and wastewater utility. Profitability is largely dependent on water revenues. Due to the size of the Company and the limited geographic diversity of its service territory, weather conditions, particularly rainfall, economic, and market conditions can have an adverse effect on revenues. The Company experienced increased revenues in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to changes in consumption patterns, a rate increase effective March 1, 2019, and an increase in the number of customers, which were partially offset by lower revenues from the distribution system improvement charge, or DSIC.
The Company’s business does not require large amounts of working capital and is not dependent on any single customer or a very few customers for a material portion of its business. In 2020, operating revenue was derived from the following sources and in the following percentages: residential, 66%; commercial and industrial, 26%; and other, 8%, which is primarily from the provision for fire service, but includes other water and wastewater service-related income. The diverse customer mix helps to reduce volatility in consumption.
The Company seeks to grow revenues by increasing the volume of water sold through increases in the number of customers served, making timely and prudent investments in infrastructure replacements, expansion and improvements, and timely filing for rate increases. The Company continuously looks for acquisition and expansion opportunities both within and outside its current service territory as well as through contractual services and bulk water supply. The Company’s wastewater business provides additional opportunities to expand.
The Company has entered into agreements with several municipalities to provide sewer billing and collection services. The Company also has a service line protection program on a targeted basis. The Company continues to review and consider opportunities to expand both initiatives to further diversify the business.
In addition to increasing revenue, the Company consistently focuses on minimizing costs without sacrificing water quality or customer service. Paperless billing, expanding online services, negotiation of favorable electric, banking, and other costs, as well as taking advantage of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, or the 2017 Tax Act, and the IRS tangible property regulations, or TPR, are examples of the Company’s recent efforts to minimize costs.
Impact of COVID-19
In December 2019, an outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”) was reported. On March 6, 2020, Governor Tom Wolf signed an emergency disaster declaration for the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania which was extended for an additional ninety days on June 3, 2020, September 1, 2020, and November 29, 2020. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic. Developments in this area continue daily at the local, state, and national levels. The Company is taking steps, consistent with directions from local, state, and federal authorities, to mitigate known risks with the health and safety of its employees and customers as its first priority.
The Company is an essential, life-sustaining business and has continued normal operations. The Company continues to monitor guidance from state and local authorities and has made some modifications to its operations in order to comply with Pennsylvania’s guidelines. This includes implementing enhanced safety procedures in its lobby and when entering customers’ homes and businesses as well as implementing social distancing practices such as halting unnecessary gatherings and travel. The Company has evaluated and re-prioritized some of its capital projects, but the restrictions are not expected to materially impede the Company’s ability to complete its planned capital expenditures or acquisitions. The Company has not experienced any supply chain disruptions and continues to maintain relationships with its vendors to identify issues as early as possible. The Company believes it has sufficient liquidity and access to the capital markets if needed.
As a water and wastewater utility, it is the Company’s mission to provide uninterrupted water and wastewater service. Due to the effect of COVID-19 on the general public, in compliance with an order from the PPUC, the Company paused shut-off procedures for delinquent customers on March 13, 2020. In addition, the Company stopped billing late payment charges. These customers were billed at normal tariff rates for the water they used, and wastewater service provided. Based on the October 8, 2020 order from the PPUC, the Company resumed normal shut-off procedures and began billing late payment charges for most customers in January 2021. However, the Company will not terminate service and will waive late payment charges for certain “protected customers” as defined by the order.
The Company may continue to experience an increase in residential demand while commercial and industrial demand may decline based on many government, commercial, and industrial concerns which have curtailed production, or limited capacity, due to government orders or in response to changing economic conditions, and simultaneously, many employees are now teleworking or have been laid off or furloughed. The duration and magnitude of these changes is currently unknown and difficult to predict.
To date, there has been no material impact on the Company’s workforce, operations, financial performance, liquidity, or supply chain as a result of COVID-19. However, the ultimate duration and severity of the pandemic or its effects on the economy, the capital and credit markets, or the Company’s workforce, customers, and suppliers, as well as governmental and regulatory responses, are uncertain.
Performance Measures
Company management uses financial measures including operating revenues, net income, earnings per share and return on equity to evaluate its financial performance. Additional statistical measures including number of customers, customer complaint rate, annual customer rates and the efficiency ratio are used to evaluate performance quality. These measures are calculated on a regular basis and compared with historical information, budget and the other publicly-traded water and wastewater companies.
The Company’s performance in 2020 was strong under the above measures. Operating revenues increased in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to changes in consumption patterns, a rate increase effective March 1, 2019, and an increase in the number of customers. This increase was partially offset by the lower revenues from the DSIC. The increase in operating revenues offset the increases in operating expenses. Other net expenses decreased primarily due to reduced interest expense and a non-recurring gain on life insurance. The Company incurred lower income taxes primarily due to a higher deduction for the tax benefit under the IRS TPR. The overall effect was an increase in net income in 2020 over 2019 of 15.2% and a return on year end common equity of 11.6%, higher than the 2019 result of 10.7% and the five-year historical average of 10.8%.
The efficiency ratio, which is calculated as net income divided by revenues, is used by management to evaluate its ability to control expenses. Over the five previous years, the Company’s ratio averaged 26.7%. In 2020, the ratio was higher than the average at 30.8% due primarily to lower income taxes than are included in the historical average. Management is confident that its ratio will compare favorably to that of its peers. Management continues to look for ways to decrease expenses and increase efficiency as well as to file for rate increases promptly when needed.
2020 Compared with 2019
Net income for 2020 was $16,598, an increase of $2,196, or 15.2%, from net income of $14,402 for 2019. The primary contributing factors to the increase were higher operating revenues and a gain on life insurance which were partially offset by higher operating expenses.
Operating revenues for the year increased $2,274, or 4.4%, from $51,578 for 2019 to $53,852 for 2020. The primary reasons for the increase were changes in consumption patterns and a rate increase effective March 1, 2019. Total per capita consumption for 2020 was approximately 1.1% lower than the same period of last year. However, the Company experienced an increase in residential demand as many employees are now teleworking or have been laid off or furloughed, while commercial and industrial demand declined based on many government, commercial, and industrial concerns which have curtailed production, or limited capacity, due to government orders or in response to changing economic conditions. The Company reduced revenue by $1 in 2020 and $325 in 2019, by recording a regulatory liability for the benefit of the lower tax rate effective January 1, 2018 resulting from the enactment of the 2017 Tax Act, which the Company agreed to give back to customers as part of the new rate order, including the gross-up of revenue necessary to return the effect of the temporary tax difference. Growth in the customer base also added to revenues. The average number of water customers served in 2020 increased as compared to 2019 by 631 customers, from 68,288 to 68,919 customers. The average number of wastewater customers served in 2020 increased as compared to 2019 by 560 customers, from 2,519 to 3,079 customers, due to the recent acquisitions. The increased revenues were partially offset by a $249 decrease from a lower DSIC allowed by the PPUC. The DSIC reset to zero on March 1, 2019 when the rate order took effect. In 2021, the Company expects revenues to show a modest increase due to an increase in the number of water and wastewater customers from acquisitions and growth within the Company’s service territory. The duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic including any resulting economic slowdown or changes in consumption patterns could impact results. Other regulatory actions and weather patterns could also impact results.
Operating expenses for 2020 increased $1,629, or 5.9%, from $27,792 for 2019 to $29,421 for 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher expenses of approximately $489 for depreciation, $355 for a higher provision for uncollectible accounts, $287 for wastewater treatment, and $219 for outside services. Also adding to the increase were expenses of $76 for water treatment chemicals and $66 for purchased power. Other expenses increased by a net of $330. The increased expenses were partially offset by reduced expenses of $72 for health insurance, $71 for water treatment plant maintenance, and $50 for wages. In 2021, the Company expects depreciation expense to continue to rise due to additional investment in utility plant, and other expenses to increase at a moderate rate as costs to treat water and wastewater and to maintain and extend the distribution and collection systems continue to rise.
Interest on debt for 2020 decreased $417, or 8.1%, from $5,124 for 2019 to $4,707 for 2020. The decrease was primarily due to lower interest on long-term debt due to the refinancing of various debt issues. The average debt outstanding under the lines of credit was $7,467 for 2020 and $5,070 for 2019. The weighted average interest rate on the lines of credit was 1.59% for 2020 and 3.47% for 2019. Interest expense for 2021 is expected to be slightly higher due to additional long-term debt and continued borrowings under the line of credit.
Allowance for funds used during construction increased $164, from $366 in 2019 to $530 in 2020 due to a higher volume of eligible construction. Allowance for funds used during construction in 2021 is expected to increase based on a projected increase in the amount of eligible construction.
A non-recurring gain on life insurance of $515 was recorded in 2020 as a result of a death benefit from a life insurance policy. No similar gains are anticipated in 2021.
Other income (expenses), net for 2020 reflects decreased expenses of $144 as compared to 2019. Lower retirement expenses of approximately $43 and higher earnings on life insurance policies of approximately $42 were the primary reasons for the decrease. Other expenses decreased by a net of $78. Higher charitable contributions of $19 partially offset the decrease. In 2021, other income (expenses) will be largely determined by the change in market returns and discount rates for retirement programs and related assets.
Income taxes for the 2020 decreased $222, or 9.9%, compared to 2019, due primarily to higher deductions from the IRS TPR partially offset by higher taxable income. The Company’s effective tax rate was 10.8% for 2020 and 13.5% for 2019. The lower effective tax rate is primarily due to higher deductions from the TPR and a non-taxable gain on life insurance. The Company's effective tax rate for 2021 will largely be determined by the level of eligible asset improvements expensed for tax purposes under TPR.
Rate Matters
See Note 10 to the Company’s financial statements included herein for a discussion of its rate matters.
The benefit from the implementation of the IRS TPR impacts the rate matters of the Company. The most recent rate order took into account the lower income taxes which resulted from the implementation of the IRS TPR, as well as the lower income taxes from the 2017 Tax Act, effectively reducing the amount of revenue required and lowering the Company’s rate increase.
Acquisitions and Growth
See Note 2 to the Company’s financial statements included herein for a discussion of completed acquisitions included in financial results.
On October 8, 2013, the Company signed an agreement to purchase the wastewater collection and treatment assets of SYC WWTP, L.P. in Shrewsbury and Springfield Townships, York County, Pennsylvania. On July 1, 2020, the Company signed an agreement to purchase the Albright Trailer Park water assets and wastewater collection assets of R.T. Barclay, Inc. in Springfield Township, York County, Pennsylvania. Completion of the acquisitions is contingent upon receiving approval from all required regulatory authorities. Closing is expected in 2021, at which time the Company will add approximately 90 combined wastewater customers and approximately 60 water customers through an interconnection with its current water distribution system. The wastewater customers of the Albright Trailer Park are currently served by SYC WWTP, L.P. and the water customers are currently served by the Company, each through a single customer connection to the park.
On March 4, 2019, the Company signed an agreement to purchase the wastewater collection assets of West Manheim Township in York County, Pennsylvania. Completion of the acquisition is contingent upon receiving approval from all required regulatory authorities. Closing is expected in 2021 at which time the Company will add approximately 1,800 wastewater customers. These wastewater customers are currently water customers of the Company.
On May 27, 2020, the Company signed an agreement to purchase the water assets and wastewater collection and treatment assets of Country View Manor Community, LLC in Washington Township, York County, Pennsylvania. Completion of the acquisition is contingent upon receiving approval from all required regulatory authorities. Closing is expected in 2021 at which time the Company will add approximately 50 water and wastewater customers.
In total, these acquisitions are expected to be immaterial to Company results. The Company is also pursuing other bulk water contracts and acquisitions in and around its service territory to help offset any further declines in per capita water consumption and to grow its business.
On May 10, 2017, the Company signed an emergency interconnect agreement with Dallastown-Yoe Water Authority. The effectiveness of this agreement is contingent upon receiving approval from all required regulatory authorities. Approval is expected to be granted in 2021 at which time the Company will begin construction of a water main extension to a single point of interconnection and either supply a minimum agreed upon amount of water to the authority, receive a payment in lieu of water, or provide water during an emergency, at current tariff rates.
Capital Expenditures
During 2020, the Company invested $32,123 in construction expenditures for routine items, the replacement of a standpipe, reimbursement to the developer for its construction of the water and wastewater system of the Amblebrook development in Adams County, Pennsylvania upon approval from the PPUC to provide service, improvements to a raw water pumping station, expansion of a wastewater treatment plant, as well as various replacements and improvements to infrastructure. In addition, the Company invested $1,176 in the acquisition of two wastewater systems. The Company replaced or relined approximately 56,000 feet of main in 2020. The Company was able to fund construction expenditures using internally-generated funds, line of credit borrowings, proceeds from its stock purchase plans, and customer advances and contributions from developers, municipalities, customers, or builders. See Notes 1, 4 and 5 to the Company’s financial statements included herein.
The Company anticipates construction and acquisition expenditures for 2021 and 2022 of approximately $36,000 and $40,000, respectively, exclusive of any acquisitions not yet approved. In addition to routine transmission and distribution projects, a portion of the anticipated 2021 and 2022 expenditures will be for additional main extensions, dam improvements, an elevated water tank, an upgrade to the enterprise software system, completion of a wastewater treatment plant, and various replacements of infrastructure. The Company intends to use primarily internally-generated funds for its anticipated 2021 and 2022 construction and fund the remainder through line of credit borrowings, proceeds from its stock purchase plans and customer advances and contributions (see Note 1 to the Company’s financial statements included herein). Customer advances and contributions are expected to account for between 5% and 10% of funding requirements in 2021 and 2022. Potential debt and equity offerings may be utilized if required. The Company believes it will have adequate credit facilities and access to the capital markets, if necessary, during 2021 and 2022, to fund anticipated construction and acquisition expenditures.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash
The Company manages its cash through a cash management account that is directly connected to its line of credit. Excess cash generated automatically pays down outstanding borrowings under the line of credit arrangement. If there are no outstanding borrowings, the cash is used as an earnings credit to reduce banking fees. Likewise, if additional funds are needed beyond what is generated internally for payroll, to pay suppliers, to fund capital expenditures, or to pay debt service, funds are automatically borrowed under the line of credit. As of December 31, 2020, the Company borrowed $6,700 under its line of credit and incurred a cash overdraft on its cash management account of $1,263. The cash management facility connected to the line of credit is expected to provide the necessary liquidity and funding for the Company’s operations, capital expenditures, acquisitions, and potential buybacks of stock for the foreseeable future.
Restricted Cash
The Company held $5,000 in restricted cash which was the bid deposit for a potential acquisition. The Company expects the $5,000 in restricted cash to become unrestricted in the first quarter of 2021.
Accounts Receivable
The accounts receivable balance tends to follow the change in revenues but is also affected by the timeliness of payments by customers and the level of the reserve for doubtful accounts. In 2020, higher revenue as compared to 2019 and a weakening in the timeliness of payments resulted in an increase in accounts receivable - customers. A reserve is maintained at a level considered adequate to provide for losses that can be reasonably anticipated based on inactive accounts with outstanding balances. Management periodically evaluates the adequacy of the reserve based on past experience, agings of the receivables, adverse situations that may affect a customer’s ability to pay, current economic conditions, and other relevant factors. During 2020, management’s assessment included consideration of the COVID-19 pandemic along with past trends during times of economic instability and regulations from the PPUC regarding customer turn-offs and collections, and determined an increase in its allowance for doubtful accounts was warranted. If the status of these factors deteriorates, the Company may incur additional expenses for uncollectible accounts and experience a reduction in its internally-generated funds.
Internally-generated Funds
The amount of internally-generated funds available for operations and construction depends on the Company’s ability to obtain timely and adequate rate relief, changes in regulations, customers’ water usage, weather conditions, customer growth and controlled expenses. In 2020, the Company generated $20,235 internally as compared to $18,881 in 2019. The increase from 2019 was primarily due to higher net income and lower interest paid.
Credit Lines
Historically, the Company has borrowed $15,000 to $20,000 under its lines of credit before refinancing with long-term debt or equity capital. As of December 31, 2020, the Company maintained an unsecured line of credit in the amount of $50,000 at an interest rate of LIBOR plus 1.05% with an unused commitment fee and an interest rate floor which matures September 2022. The Company had $6,700 in outstanding borrowings under its line of credit as of December 31, 2020. The interest rate on line of credit borrowings as of December 31, 2020 was 1.30%. The Company expects to renew this line of credit as it matures under similar terms and conditions.
The Company has taken steps to manage the risk of reduced credit availability. It has established a committed line of credit with an increase in the total amount available and a 2-year revolving maturity that cannot be called on demand. There is no guarantee that the Company will be able to obtain sufficient lines of credit with favorable terms in the future. If the Company is unable to obtain sufficient lines of credit or to refinance its line of credit borrowings with long-term debt or equity when necessary, it may have to eliminate or postpone capital expenditures. Management believes the Company will have adequate capacity under its current line of credit to meet financing needs throughout 2021.
Long-term Debt
The Company’s loan agreements contain various covenants and restrictions. Management believes it is currently in compliance with all of these restrictions. See Note 6 to the Company’s financial statements included herein for additional information regarding these restrictions.
On September 30, 2020, the Company entered into a note purchase agreement with certain institutional investors relating to the private placement of $30,000 aggregate principal amount of the Company’s senior notes. The senior notes bear interest at 3.24% per annum payable semiannually and mature on September 30, 2050. The senior notes are unsecured and unsubordinated obligations of the Company. The Company received net proceeds, after deducting issuance costs, of approximately $29,838. The net proceeds were used to refinance the $6,500 aggregate principal amount of the Company’s 10.05% Senior Notes, Series C, due September 30, 2020, to refinance line of credit borrowings incurred by the Company as interim financing for various capital projects, to fund acquisitions and for general corporate purposes.
The Company’s total long-term debt as a percentage of the total capitalization, defined as total common stockholders’ equity plus total long-term debt, was 46.9% as of December 31, 2020, compared with 43.7% as of December 31, 2019. The Company expects to allow the debt percentage to trend upward until it approaches fifty percent before considering additional equity. A debt to total capitalization ratio between forty-six and fifty percent has historically been acceptable to the PPUC in rate filings. Due to its ability to generate more cash internally, the Company has been able to keep its ratio below fifty percent. See Note 6 to the Company’s financial statements included herein for the details of its long-term debt outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
The variable rate lines of credit and the interest rate swap of the Company use the London Interbank Offering Rate (“LIBOR”) as a benchmark for establishing the rates. The United Kingdom’s Financial Conduct Authority, which regulates LIBOR, has announced that it intends to stop encouraging or compelling banks to submit rates for the calculation of LIBOR rates after 2021. This indicates that the continuation of LIBOR on the current basis is not guaranteed after 2021 and, based on the foregoing, it appears likely that LIBOR will be discontinued or modified by 2021. The Company’s line of credit agreement explicitly states that another index may be used if LIBOR is discontinued or otherwise unavailable. The Company believes that it is implicit in its other agreements that a successor rate to LIBOR may be used. The Company is not yet aware what successor rate will be used and therefore cannot estimate the impact to the Company’s financial position, results of operations and cash flows, but it could include an increase in the cost of the variable rate indebtedness.
Income Taxes, Deferred Income Taxes and Uncertain Tax Positions
The 2017 Tax Act, among other things, reduces the federal statutory corporate tax rate for tax years beginning in 2018 from 34% to 21%, eliminates certain deductions, and eliminates bonus depreciation on qualified water and wastewater property.
The Company filed for a change in accounting method under the IRS TPR effective in 2014. Under the change in accounting method, the Company is permitted to deduct the costs of certain asset improvements that were previously being capitalized and depreciated for tax purposes as an expense on its income tax return. As a result of the ongoing deduction, the net income tax benefits of $1,720 and $1,426 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, reduced income tax expense and flowed through to net income. The ongoing deduction results in a reduction in the effective income tax rate, a net reduction in income tax expense, and a reduction in the amount of income taxes currently payable. It also results in increases to deferred tax liabilities and regulatory assets representing the appropriate book and tax basis difference on capital additions. The Company expects to continue to expense these asset improvements in the future. The Company was permitted to make this deduction for prior years. As a result of the catch-up deduction, income tax benefits of $3,887 were deferred as a regulatory liability. After receiving approval from the PPUC in its most recent rate order, the Company began to recognize the catch-up deduction, recorded as a regulatory liability, over 15 years beginning March 1, 2019. As a result, the Company recognized $259 and $216 in income taxes during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The Company’s effective tax rate will largely be determined by the level of eligible asset improvements expensed for tax purposes that would have been capitalized for tax purposes prior to the implementation of the TPR.
The Company has a substantial deferred income tax asset primarily due to the excess accumulated deferred income taxes on accelerated depreciation from the 2017 Tax Act and the differences between the book and tax balances of the customers’ advances for construction and contributions in aid of construction and deferred compensation plans. The Company does not believe a valuation allowance is required due to the expected generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible.
The Company has seen an increase in its deferred income tax liability amounts primarily as a result of the accelerated depreciation deduction available for federal tax purposes which creates differences between book and tax depreciation expense. The Company expects this trend to continue as it makes significant investments in capital expenditures subject to accelerated depreciation or TPR.
The Company has determined there are no uncertain tax positions that require recognition as of December 31, 2020. See Note 14 to the Company’s financial statements included herein for additional details regarding income taxes.
Common Stock
Common stockholders’ equity as a percent of the total capitalization was 53.1% as of December 31, 2020, compared with 56.3% as of December 31, 2019. The ratio decreased in 2020 due to higher debt primarily from increased capital expenditures. The volume of share repurchases and higher debt from capital expenditures, among other things, could reduce this percentage in the future. It is the Company’s intent to target a ratio between fifty and fifty-four percent.
Credit Rating
On April 9, 2020, Standard & Poor’s affirmed the Company’s credit rating at A-, with a stable outlook. The Company’s ability to maintain its credit rating depends, among other things, on adequate and timely rate relief, which it has been successful in obtaining, its ability to fund capital expenditures in a balanced manner using both debt and equity and its ability to generate cash flow. In 2021, the Company’s objectives are to continue to maximize its funds provided by operations and maintain a strong capital structure in order to be able to attract capital.
Physical and Cyber Security
The Company maintains security measures at its facilities, and collaborates with federal, state, and local authorities, and industry trade associations regarding information on possible threats and security measures for water and wastewater utility operations. The costs incurred are expected to be recoverable in water and wastewater rates and are not expected to have a material impact on its business, financial condition, or results of operations.
The Company relies on information technology systems in connection with the operation of the business, especially with respect to customer service, billing, accounting, and in some cases, the monitoring and operation of treatment, storage, and pumping facilities. In addition, the Company relies on these systems to track utility assets and to manage maintenance and construction projects, materials and supplies, and human resource functions. The information technology systems may be vulnerable to damage or interruption from cyber security attacks or other cyber-related events, including, but not limited to, power loss, computer systems failures, internet, telecommunications or data network failures, physical and electronic loss of data, computer viruses, intentional security breaches, hacking, denial of service actions, misappropriation of data, and similar events. In some cases, administration of certain functions may be outsourced to third-party service providers that could also be targets of cyber security attacks. A loss of these systems, or major problems with the operation of these systems, could harm the business, financial condition, and results of operations of the Company through the loss or compromise of customer, financial, employee, or operational data, disruption of billing, collections or normal field service activities, disruption of electronic monitoring and control of operational systems, and delays in financial reporting and other normal management functions.
Possible impacts associated with a cyber security attack or other events may include remediation costs related to lost, stolen, or compromised data, repairs to data processing systems, increased cyber security protection costs, adverse effects on our compliance with regulatory and environmental laws and regulation, including standards for drinking water, litigation, and reputational damage.
The Company has implemented processes, procedures, and controls to prevent or limit the effect of these possible events and maintains insurance to help defray costs associated with cyber security attacks. The Company has not experienced a material impact on business or operations from these attacks. Although the Company does not believe its systems are at a materially greater risk of cyber security attacks than other similar organizations and despite the implementation of robust security measures, the Company cannot provide assurance that the insurance will fully cover the costs of a cyber security event, and its robust security measures do not guarantee that reputation and financial results will not be adversely affected by such an incident.
Environmental Matters
The Company entered into a consent order agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection in December 2016 after the Company determined it exceeded the action level for lead as established by the Lead and Copper Rule, or LCR, issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. The Company did not have an exceedance in any subsequent compliance test. Under the agreement, the Company committed to exceed the LCR replacement schedule by replacing all of the remaining known company-owned lead service lines within four years from the agreement. The cost for these service line replacements was approximately $2,740 and $2,713 through December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and is included in utility plant. As of December 31, 2020, all known company-owned lead service lines have been replaced. Any additional company-owned lead service lines that are discovered will be replaced but are not expected to have a material impact on the financial position of the Company.
The Company was granted approval by the PPUC to modify its tariff to include the cost of the annual replacement of up to 400 lead customer-owned service lines over nine years from the agreement. The tariff modification allows the Company to replace customer-owned service lines at its own initial cost. The Company will record the costs as a regulatory asset to be recovered in future base rates to customers, over a four-year period. The cost for the customer-owned lead service line replacements was approximately $1,204 and $1,000 through December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and is included as a regulatory asset. Based on its experience, the Company estimates that lead customer-owned service lines replacements will cost $1,500. This estimate is subject to adjustment as more facts become available.
Dividends
During 2020, the Company's dividend payout ratios relative to net income and net cash provided by operating activities were 57.2% and 46.4%, respectively. During 2019, the Company's dividend payout ratios relative to net income and net cash provided by operating activities were 63.1% and 47.6%, respectively. During the fourth quarter of 2020, the Board of Directors increased the dividend by 4.00% from $0.1802 per share to $0.1874 per share per quarter.
The Company’s Board of Directors declared a dividend in the amount of $0.1874 per share at its January 2021 meeting. The dividend is payable on April 15, 2021 to shareholders of record as of February 26, 2021. While the Company expects to maintain this dividend amount in 2021, future dividends will be dependent upon the Company’s earnings, financial condition, capital demands and other factors and will be determined by the Company’s Board of Directors. See Note 6 to the Company’s financial statements included herein for restrictions on dividend payments.
Inflation
The Company is affected by inflation, most notably by the continually increasing costs incurred to maintain and expand its service capacity. The cumulative effect of inflation results in significantly higher facility replacement costs which must be recovered from future cash flows. The ability of the Company to recover this increased investment in facilities is dependent upon future rate increases, which are subject to approval by the PPUC. The Company can provide no assurances that its rate increases will be approved by the PPUC; and, if approved, the Company cannot guarantee that these rate increases will be granted in a timely or sufficient manner to cover the investments and expenses for which the rate increase was sought.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The methods, estimates, and judgments the Company used in applying its accounting policies have a significant impact on the results reported in its financial statements. The Company’s accounting policies require management to make subjective judgments because of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. The Company’s most critical accounting estimates include: regulatory assets and liabilities, revenue recognition, accounting for its pension plans, and income taxes.
Regulatory Assets and Liabilities
Generally accepted accounting principles define accounting standards for companies whose rates are established by or are subject to approval by an independent third-party regulator. In accordance with the accounting standards, the Company defers costs and credits on its balance sheet as regulatory assets and liabilities when it is probable that these costs and credits will be recognized in the rate-making process in a period different from when the costs and credits were incurred. These deferred amounts are then recognized in the statement of income in the period in which they are reflected in customer rates. If the Company later finds that these assets and liabilities cannot be included in rate-making, they are adjusted appropriately. See Note 1 for additional details regarding regulatory assets and liabilities.
Revenue Recognition
Operating revenues include amounts billed to metered water and certain wastewater customers on a cycle basis and unbilled amounts based on both actual and estimated usage from the latest meter reading to the end of the accounting period. Estimates are based on average daily usage for those particular customers. The unbilled revenue amount is recorded as a current asset on the balance sheet. Actual results could differ from these estimates and would result in operating revenues being adjusted in the period in which the actual usage is known. Based on historical experience, the Company believes its estimate of unbilled revenues is reasonable.
Pension Accounting
Accounting for defined benefit pension plans requires estimates of future compensation increases, mortality, the discount rate, and expected return on plan assets as well as other variables. These variables are reviewed annually with the Company’s pension actuary. The Company used compensation increases of 2.5% to 3.0% in 2019 and 2020.
The Company adopted a new mortality table in 2019, the Pri-2012, using the white collar table for the administrative and general plan and the blue collar table for the union plan, and the Company adopted the MP-2020 mortality improvement scale in 2020. Using the new mortality table slightly decreased the life expectancy of pension plan participants, resulting in a slight decrease to the pension benefit obligation, and ultimately, an increase in the Company’s funded status of the plans.
The Company selected its December 31, 2020 and 2019 discount rates based on the FTSE Pension Liability Index. This index uses spot rates for durations out to 30 years and matches them to expected disbursements from the plan over the long term. The Company believes this index most appropriately matches its pension obligations. The present values of the Company’s future pension obligations were determined using a discount rate of 2.30% at December 31, 2020 and 3.10% at December 31, 2019.
Adopting a new mortality table that represents a change in life expectancy and choosing a different discount rate normally changes the amount of pension expense and the corresponding liability. In the case of the Company, these items change its liability, but do not have an impact on its pension expense. The PPUC, in a previous rate settlement, agreed to grant recovery of the Company’s contribution to the pension plans in customer rates. As a result, under the accounting standards regarding rate-regulated activities, expense in excess of the Company’s pension plan contribution can be deferred as a regulatory asset and expensed as contributions are made to the plans and are recovered in customer rates. Therefore, these changes affect regulatory assets rather than pension expense.
The Company’s estimate of the expected return on plan assets is primarily based on the historic returns and projected future returns of the asset classes represented in its plans. The target allocation of pension assets is 50% to 70% equity securities, 30% to 50% fixed income securities, and 0% to 10% cash reserves. The Company used 6.50% as its expected rate of return in 2019 and 2020. A decrease in the expected pension return would normally cause an increase in pension expense; however due to the aforementioned rate settlement, the Company’s expense would continue to be equal to its contributions to the plans. The change would instead be recorded in regulatory assets.
Lower discount rates and underperformance of assets could cause future required contributions and expense to increase substantially. If this were to happen, the Company would have to consider changes to its pension plan benefits and possibly request additional recovery of expenses through increased rates charged to customers. See Note 11 to the Company’s financial statements included herein for additional details regarding the pension plans.
Income Taxes
The Company estimates the amount of income tax payable or refundable for the current year and the deferred income tax liabilities and assets that results from estimating temporary differences resulting from the treatment of certain items, such as depreciation, for tax and financial statement reporting. Generally, these differences result in the recognition of a deferred tax asset or liability on the balance sheet and require the Company to make judgments regarding the probability of the ultimate tax impact of the various transactions entered into. Based on these judgments, it may require tax reserves or valuation allowances on deferred tax assets to reflect the expected realization of future tax benefits. The Company believes its determination of what qualifies as a repair expense tax deduction versus a capital cost as it relates to the IRS TPR ongoing and catch-up deductions is consistent with the regulations. The Company also believes it has appropriately applied the provisions of the 2017 Tax Act including properly applying the accounting standards related to the 2017 Tax Act. Actual income taxes could vary from these estimates and changes in these estimates could increase income tax expense in the period that these changes in estimates occur.
Other critical accounting estimates are discussed in the Significant Accounting Policies Note to the Financial Statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Transactions
The Company does not use off-balance sheet transactions, arrangements or obligations that may have a material current or future effect on financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, capital resources or significant components of revenues or expenses. The Company does not use securitization of receivables or unconsolidated entities. For risk management purposes, the Company uses a derivative financial instrument, an interest rate swap agreement discussed in Note 7 to the financial statements included herein. The Company does not engage in trading or other risk management activities, does not use other derivative financial instruments for any purpose, has no material lease obligations, no guarantees and does not have material transactions involving related parties.
Impact of Recent Accounting Pronouncements
There are currently no recent accounting pronouncements that are expected to have a material impact to the Company’s financial statements.