ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. All dollar amounts are stated in thousands. On January 15, 2020, the Company effected a 1-for-40 reverse stock split of its common stock. Unless otherwise indicated, all share amounts, per share data, share prices, and conversion rates set forth in these notes and the accompanying financial statements have, where applicable, been adjusted to reflect this reverse stock split.
Overview
Yield10 Bioscience, Inc. is an agricultural bioscience company that is using its differentiated trait gene discovery platform, which we refer to as the "Trait Factory", to develop improved Camelina varieties to produce proprietary products, and to produce other high value seed traits for the agriculture and food industries. Yield10 is headquartered in Woburn, Massachusetts and has an Oilseed Center of Excellence in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada. Our goals are to efficiently develop and commercialize a high value crop products business based on developing superior varieties of Camelina for the production of feedstock oils, nutritional oils, and PHA bioplastics, and to license our yield traits to major seed companies for commercialization in commercial row crops, including corn, soybean and canola.
Government Grants
On May 20, 2020, Metabolix Oilseeds, Inc. (“MOI”), the Company’s wholly-owned Canadian research subsidiary, received a research grant through the Industrial Research Assistance Program ("IRAP") administered by National Research Council Canada ("NRC"). The objective of the grant was to provide financial research assistance to innovative, early-stage small and medium-sized enterprises. Under the terms of the agreement, NRC agreed to contribute up to a maximum of $67 for payroll costs incurred by MOI during the period April - June, 2020. During the second quarter of 2020, MOI submitted claims for eligible payroll costs and recognized grant revenue for the full amount of the award. On December 3, 2020, MOI received a second IRAP funded research grant with a similar objective of providing financial research assistance. Under the terms of this second grant, NRC agreed to contribute up to a maximum of $86 for payroll costs incurred by MOI during the
period July - December, 2020. The full amount of the grant was recognized as grant revenue during the fourth quarter and is recorded as accounts receivable in the Company's consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2020.
During 2018 we entered into a sub-award with Michigan State University ("MSU") to support a Department of Energy ("DOE") funded grant entitled "A Systems Approach to Increasing Carbon Flux to Seed Oil." Our participation under this projected five-year grant is awarded incrementally on an annual basis with the first year commencing September 15, 2017. Cumulative funding for this sub-award in the amount of $2,403 has been appropriated by the U.S. Congress through the fourth contractual year ending in September 2021. During 2021, we anticipate that the final option year ending on September 14, 2022 will be awarded to Yield10, resulting in aggregate total sub-award funding of $2,957, provided the U.S. Congress continues to appropriate funds for the program, we are able to make progress towards meeting grant objectives and we remain in compliance with other terms and conditions of the sub-award.
As of December 31, 2020, proceeds of $531 remain to be earned from the MSU sub-award amounts awarded to date. This includes amounts for reimbursement to our subcontractors, as well as reimbursement for our employees’ time, benefits and other expenses related to future performance.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Judgments
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates.
We believe that our significant accounting policies, which are described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements, involve a degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, we believe that the specific accounting policies and significant judgments described below are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of operations.
Grant Revenue
Government research grants currently represent our sole source of revenue. We recognize government grants as revenue because the grants are central to the Company's ongoing crop science program. Revenue is earned as research expenses related to the grants are incurred. Revenue earned on government grants, but not yet invoiced as of the balance sheet date, is recorded as unbilled receivables in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. Funds received from government grants in advance of work being performed are recorded as deferred revenue until earned.
Performance-Based Compensation Accrual
Our employee compensation program includes a potential for bonus payments based on company and individual performance against annual goals that are established early in the fiscal year by management and the Company's Board of Directors. Bonus payments are generally paid at the end of February following the most recently completed fiscal year. The Compensation Committee of our Board of Directors is responsible for reviewing annual performance against goals and approving bonus payments for the Company's executive officers. Annual cash bonuses are accrued evenly throughout the fiscal year unless management and/or the Compensation Committee determine that bonus compensation payments are unlikely to be paid at the existing rate. In that event, we make a cumulative year-to-date adjustment to our bonus accrual and adjust quarterly accruals for the remainder of the year in order to achieve a bonus compensation accrual at year-end that matches expected bonus payments. Our quarterly performance-based compensation expense and accrual balances may vary significantly during the year as performance judgments change and we revise our estimates.
Stock-Based Compensation
The accounting standards for stock-based compensation require that all stock-based awards be recognized as an expense in the consolidated financial statements and that such expense be measured based on the fair value of the award.
Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of stock-based payment awards requires the use of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected life of the stock-based payment awards and stock price volatility. We use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to value our service-based option grants and to determine the related compensation expense. Generally, we recognize the fair value of stock awards evenly over their vesting periods provided the individual receiving the award meets continuing service conditions. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based awards represent management's best estimates, but the estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. See Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion on the key assumptions used to determine the fair values of option grants pursuant to the Black-Scholes option pricing model.
Income Taxes
Due to the Company's history of annual income tax losses, it has never incurred significant income tax expenses. The Company has, however, recorded significant deferred income tax assets for net operating loss carry forwards and research tax credits that are available to offset future income taxes. Deferred income taxes are measured by applying currently enacted tax rates to the differences between financial statement and income tax reporting. We routinely assess the realizability of the Company's deferred tax assets and have historically concluded that it is unlikely that deferred tax assets derived from our U.S. operations will be realized under accounting standards and therefore we have maintained a full valuation allowance. MOI is our wholly-owned research and development subsidiary located in Canada. MOI performs research services for us under a research services agreement subject to intercompany transfer pricing regulations that annually results in MOI reporting taxable income in Canada. MOI files separate federal and provincial income tax returns in Canada and has accumulated research credits that may be used to offset future taxable income. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we have determined, based on our assumption of MOI's continued profitability derived from intercompany transfer pricing, that the subsidiary will more likely than not continue to show taxable income in future tax years. We have therefore concluded that a valuation allowance against MOI's deferred tax asset related to the research credits is not appropriate.
Securities Offerings
We offer our securities for sale to public and private investors from time to time. The structure of these offerings can be complex, requiring significant judgment in their accounting treatment, financial reporting and disclosure. On November 19, 2019, for example, we closed on two securities offerings that included a public offering and a private placement. The public portion of the offerings included the sale of common stock, Series A Convertible Preferred Stock and warrants to purchase common stock. The private placement included the sale of Series B Convertible Preferred Stock and warrants to purchase common stock. We primarily followed the guidance of ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging, in reaching conclusions that the Series A Convertible Preferred Stock, the Series B Convertible Preferred Stock and the warrants issued in the offering should be recorded in permanent equity, temporary equity and liabilities, respectively, in our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2019, included herein. We also applied applicable accounting guidance in order to calculate the fair value of the warrants sold in the offerings and determined that the Black-Scholes fair value of the liability classified warrants exceeded the proceeds received in the offering. This resulted in a charge of $13,018 to other income (expense) on the date of issuance. At December 31, 2019, we completed a mark-to-market revaluation of the warrants and recorded a gain of $9,541 within other income (expense) for the
year ended December 31, 2019. The Company re-measured the fair value of the warrants again on January 15, 2020 following the effective time of the 1-for-40 reverse stock split, resulting in the recognition of a loss of $957. As a result of the 1-for-40 reverse stock split, sufficient shares of authorized, but unissued shares of common stock became available for Series A and Series B warrant holders to exercise their warrants resulting in their reclassification from warrant liability to equity in the Company's consolidated balance sheet. See Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion on the November 2019 securities offerings.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Total grant revenue was $799 and $806 for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Grant revenue for each of the years was derived primarily from the Company's DOE sub-award with Michigan State University. During the year ended December 31, 2020, $153 in grant revenue was also recognized from two research support grants awarded by National Research Council Canada to our subsidiary Metabolix Oilseeds, Inc.
We anticipate that MSU grant revenue will fluctuate slightly over the next twelve months as a result of varying annual budget appropriations awarded under the MSU sub-award and our application of company resources to the grant. Our forecast related to grant revenue is subject to change, should we receive new grants or if our ability to earn revenue from our existing grant is negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expense increased by $513, or 11%, to $5,361 during the year ended December 31, 2020, from $4,848 recorded during the year ended December 31, 2019. The 2020 variance is partially the result of a $146 increase in employee compensation and benefits and a $146 increase in Camelina and canola field trial costs for plant trials conducted in the U.S. and Canada to further evaluate our traits under development. Facility expense also increased by $128 during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of higher landlord maintenance costs associated with our Woburn, Massachusetts headquarters. Early in 2020, we returned 7,409 square feet of underutilized space in our Woburn facility to the landlord for the remaining term of the lease. As a result of this lease modification, we wrote off $141 in leasehold improvements and office furniture previously used to support our research and development activities which also contributed to the increase in expense during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Based on our current planning and budgeting, we anticipate that research and development expense will increase over the next twelve months as we continue to expand our plant field trials and continue to prepare our Camelina germplasm for future commercial launch. Our forecasts related to research and development expense are subject to change due to the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, or as new collaborative and other business opportunities arise that alter our plans.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $5,047 and $4,554 for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively. The increase of $493, or 11%, was primarily due to increased employee compensation and benefits, professional fees and higher insurance premiums. Employee compensation and benefits increased by $198, from $1,826 during the year ended December 31, 2019 to $2,024 during the year ended December 31, 2020, and was primarily a result of recording employee bonuses for 2020. Stock compensation expense increased by $58 during the year ended December 31, 2020, as a result of stock option awards issued to employees during the year. Professional fees increased by $239, due to work performed by our outside legal and accounting firms in connection with securities registrations and corporate governance activities. During the year ended December 31, 2020, insurance expense increased by $81 as a result of higher director and officer ("D&O") liability insurance premiums. Higher D&O premiums are being assessed nationwide by insurance underwriters due to consecutive years of increased class action lawsuits and settlement claims.
Based on our current planning and budgeting, we anticipate that general and administrative expense will increase over the next twelve months as we add regulatory support and senior operations and business development resources to our Company in connection with the future launch of our Camelina products. Our forecasts related to general and administrative expense are subject to change due to the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, or as new collaborative and other business opportunities arise that alter our plans.
Other Income (Expense), net
Loss on Issuance of Securities
On November 19, 2019, we closed on concurrent securities offerings that included a total of 2,875,000 warrants that received liability classification and were determined to have a Black-Scholes fair value of $24,518 on their date of issuance. The gross proceeds of the 2019 offerings were first allocated to the warrants. In accordance with applicable accounting guidance, the warrants were recorded at their full fair value and the difference between the fair value and the proceeds of $13,018 was recorded to other income (expense). See Note 9 - Capital Stock and Warrants, in our consolidated financial statements.
Offering Costs
The combined proceeds of the November 2019 offerings were allocated solely to the liability classified warrants. All of the offering costs of $1,254 were therefore assigned to the warrants and expensed immediately to other income (expense).
Change in Fair Value of Warrants
The fair value of the liability classified warrants issued in the November 2019 concurrent offerings were subject to mark-to-market adjustment on subsequent balance sheet dates. We remeasured the fair value of the warrant liability at December 31, 2019, recording a gain from the change in fair value of $9,541. On January 15, 2020, we remeasured the fair value of the warrant liability again in connection with the Company's 1-for-40 reverse stock split, recording a loss from the change in fair value of $957. The reverse stock split increased the number of shares of common stock available for issuance resulting in reclassification of the warrants from a liability to equity.
Loan Forgiveness Income
During April 2020, we received $333 in loan proceeds through the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act ("PPP"), established pursuant to the CARES Act. Under the CARES Act and the PPP, a borrower may apply for and be granted forgiveness for all or a part of its PPP loan. The amount of loan proceeds eligible for forgiveness is based on a formula that takes into account a number of factors, including the amount of loan proceeds used by the borrower during the twenty-four-week period after the loan origination for certain purposes including payroll costs, rent payments on certain leases, and certain qualified utility payments. We utilized the entire PPP Loan amount for qualifying expenses and applied for loan forgiveness, receiving a favorable determination in November 2020 for the full amount of the loan. As a result, we recorded the $333 as loan forgiveness income within other income (expense) in our consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest Income (expense), net
Other income (expense) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 was derived primarily from investment income earned from the Company's cash equivalents and short-term investments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We require cash to fund our working capital needs, to purchase capital assets, to pay our lease obligations and other operating costs. The primary sources of our liquidity have historically included equity financings, government research grants and income earned on cash equivalents and short-term investments.
Since our inception, we have incurred significant expenses related to our research, development and commercialization efforts. With the exception of 2012, we have recorded annual losses since the Company's initial founding, including our fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $375,100. Our total unrestricted cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments as of December 31, 2020, totaled $9,702 as compared to $11,117 at December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2020, we had no outstanding debt.
Our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments at December 31, 2020, were held for working capital purposes. As of December 31, 2020, we had restricted cash of $264, which consisted of $229 held in connection with the lease agreement for our Woburn, Massachusetts facility and $35 held in connection with our corporate credit card program.
Investments are made in accordance with our corporate investment policy, as approved by our Board of Directors. The primary objective of this policy is to preserve principal, and consequently, investments are limited to high quality corporate debt, U.S. Treasury bills and notes, money market funds, bank debt obligations, municipal debt obligations and asset-backed securities. The policy establishes maturity limits, concentration limits, and liquidity requirements. As of December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with this policy.
Subsequent to year-end, on February 3, 2021, we raised $11,996, net of estimated offering costs of $744, through the public sale of 1,040,000 shares of common stock at an issuance price of $12.25. These shares were offered by us pursuant to a registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-237539) ("Shelf Registration"), as initially filed with the SEC on April 1, 2020 and declared effective on April 10, 2020. During August 2020, we completed a public offering of 951,835 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $4.25 per share. Gross proceeds from this offering totaled $4,045 before issuance costs of $425. These shares were also offered pursuant to the Shelf Registration. Concurrent with the August public offering, we completed a private offering of 396,450 shares of common stock at a price $4.25 per share, receiving proceeds of $1,685. During April 2020, we received $333 in loan proceeds through the Federal Paycheck Protection Program ("PPP"), established pursuant to the CARES Act. Under the CARES Act and PPP, we applied for and were granted forgiveness for the full amount of the PPP loan. During 2020, warrants equal to 207,296 shares of the Company's common stock were exercised by warrant holders, generating cash proceeds of $1,658. Subsequent to our December 31, 2020 year-end, an additional 481,973 warrants were exercised providing us with cash proceeds of $3,856.
We currently anticipate net cash usage of $10,000 - $11,000 during 2021 to fund operations, including our expanded research and development activities and our preparations for future commercial launch of our Camelina products. We estimate that our current cash resources, including those received subsequent to year-end, will be sufficient to fund operations and meet our obligations into the first quarter of 2023.
We follow the guidance of ASC Topic 205-40, Presentation of Financial Statements-Going Concern, in order to determine whether there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for one year after the date our
financial statements are issued. Based on our cash forecast, we expect that our present capital resources will be sufficient to fund our planned operations for at least that period of time. This forecast of cash resources is forward-looking information that involves risks and uncertainties, and the actual amount of expenses could vary materially and adversely as a result of a number of factors. Our ability to continue operations after our current cash resources are exhausted will depend upon our ability to obtain additional financing through, among other sources, public or private equity financing, secured or unsecured debt financing, equity or debt bridge financing, warrant holders' ability and willingness to exercise the Company's outstanding warrants, additional government research grants or collaborative arrangements with third parties, as to which no assurances can be given. We do not know whether additional financing will be available on terms favorable or acceptable to us when needed, if at all. If adequate additional funds are not available when required, we may be forced to curtail our research efforts, explore strategic alternatives and/or wind down our operations and pursue options for liquidating our remaining assets, including intellectual property and equipment.
If we issue equity or debt securities to raise additional funds, (i) the Company may incur fees associated with such issuance, (ii) our existing stockholders will experience dilution from the issuance of new equity securities, (iii) the Company may incur ongoing interest expense and be required to grant a security interest in Company assets in connection with any debt issuance, and (iv) the new equity or debt securities may have rights, preferences and privileges senior to those of our existing stockholders. In addition, utilization of our net operating loss and research and development credit carryforwards may be subject to significant annual limitations under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 due to ownership changes resulting from future equity financing transactions. If we raise additional funds through collaboration, licensing or other similar arrangements, it may be necessary to relinquish valuable rights to our potential products or proprietary technologies or grant licenses on terms that are not favorable to the Company.
Net cash used in operating activities was $8,659 during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash used by operating activities during 2019 of $8,654. Net cash used by operations during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily reflects the net loss of $10,206, cash payments made to reduce the Company's lease liabilities of $601 and our payment of 2019 bonus compensation of $344. Non-cash charges offsetting a portion of the net loss include include depreciation expense of $182, a loss recorded from our revaluation of the Company's warrant liability of $957, forgiveness of our PPP loan of $333, losses from the disposal of fixed assets of $206, stock-based compensation expense of $739, 401(k) stock matching contribution expense of $109 and non-cash lease expense of $429 resulting from amortization of our leased right-of-use assets. The net cash usage for operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 of $8,654 was primarily the result of the Company's net loss of $12,956, lease payments and modifications to reduce lease liabilities of $2,244, partially offset by non-cash expenses, including the Company's loss on issuance of securities of $13,018 representing the difference between the fair value of the liability classified warrants issued in the Company's November 2019 securities offering and the proceeds received from the offering. Net cash used for operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 also included an offsetting non-cash gain of $9,541 as a result of remeasuring the fair value of the warrants on December 31, 2019 and other non-cash expenses recorded during 2019, including stock-based compensation, depreciation, 401(k) stock matching contributions and non-cash lease expense resulting from our amortization of our leased right-of-use assets.
Net cash of $645 was used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash used in investing activities during 2019 of $3,015. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company purchased $9,279 in short-term investments, primarily U.S. Treasury notes and federal agency bonds. Also during 2020, $8,700 of short-term investments matured and converted to cash. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we purchased $5,704 in similar short-term investments and investments totaling $2,750 matured and converted to cash.
Net cash of $7,279 was provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $14,079 during the year ended December 31, 2019. As discussed above, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we completed a public offering of 951,835 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $4.25 per share. Proceeds from the offering were $4,045, before issuance costs of $425. Concurrent with the public offering, we completed a private offering of 396,450 shares of common stock at a price $4.25 per share, receiving proceeds of $1,685. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we also received cash proceeds of $1,658 from the exercise of 207,296 warrants issued in the Company's November 2019 securities offering and cash proceeds of $333 from the PPP loan issued through the CARES Act. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we completed a registered direct offering of 60,541 shares of our common stock at an offering price of $48.40 per share, receiving cash proceeds from the transaction of $2,583, net of issuance costs of $349. During November 2019, we also closed on two concurrent securities offerings that included a public offering and a private placement. Proceeds from the two offerings totaled $10,246, net of issuance costs of $1,254. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company paid taxes of $17 and $4, respectively, related to our net settlement of employee restricted stock units ("RSUs"). As RSUs vest, we withhold a number of shares with an aggregate
fair market value equal to the minimum federal and state tax withholding amount from the common stock issuable at the vest date.
Related Party Transactions
The Company did not engage in any transactions during the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 that qualify as related party transactions.
Recent Accounting Standards Changes
For a discussion of recent accounting standards please read Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements included in this report.