ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
Overview
Yacht Finders, Inc. (the “Company”) was incorporated in Delaware on August 15, 2000 as Sneeoosh Corporation. On October 20, 2000 the company filed an amended Certificate of Incorporation to change the name to Snohomish Corporation. On April 15, 2003 the company filed a subsequent amendment to change the name to Yacht Finders, Inc. Yacht Finder’s Inc. business plan was to create an online database for public buyers and yacht brokers to interface immediately with each other while capturing the benefits of targeting a larger market. On November 6, 2007, the Company discontinued its prior business and changed its business plan. The Company’s business plan now consists of exploring potential targets for a business combination through the purchase of assets, share purchase or exchange , merger or similar type of transaction
The Company’s current business plan is to seek, investigate, and, if warranted, acquire one or more properties or businesses, and to pursue other related activities intended to enhance shareholder value. The acquisition of a business opportunity may be made by purchase, merger, exchange of stock, or otherwise, and may encompass assets or a business entity, such as a corporation, joint venture, or partnership.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to December 31, 2019
The following table summarizes the results of our operations during the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and provides information regarding the dollar and percentage increase or (decrease) from the current 12-month period to the prior 12-month period:
We recorded a net loss of $110,120 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 as compared with a net loss of $99,372 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 due primarily to an increase in interest expense of $3,568. The increase in interest expense resulted from additional advances to the Company from Fountainhead Capital Management Limited (a related party) and increased tax and audit fees. The Company accrues its annual management fee of $40,000 to Fountainhead Capital Management Limited, which is included in the Note Payable to Fountainhead Capital Management Limited an annual management fee of $40,000.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had no assets, a working capital deficit of $1,068,695 and an accumulated stockholders’ deficit of $1,118,495. Our operating activities used $57,285 in cash for the fiscal year period ended December 31, 2020, while our operations used $59,490 cash in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019. We earned no revenue during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Management believes that the Company will require a cash infusion of at least $60,000 for the next twelve months. Historically, we have depended on loans from our principal shareholders and their affiliated companies to provide us with working capital as required. There is no guarantee that such funding will be available when required and there can be no assurance that our stockholders, or any of them, will continue making loans or advances to us in the future.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had loans and notes outstanding from a shareholder in the aggregate amount of $748,248 plus accrued interest of $292,605, which represents amounts loaned to the Company to pay the Company’s expenses of operation. On December 31, 2020, the Payee under the Note and the Company agreed that the due date of the Note would be extended to December 31, 2021.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern. The Company has not generated any revenue since inception. The Company generated a net loss of $110,120 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and had a working capital deficit of $1,068,695 as of December 31, 2020. These conditions, among others, raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The Company’s continuation as a going concern is dependent on working capital advances being provided by the Company’s majority shareholder for its ability to meet its obligations, to obtain additional financing as may be required and ultimately to attain profitability. Management believes that the Company’s majority shareholder will provide the additional funding to meet the Company’s obligations as they become due, however, there is no guarantee this will happen. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. There is no assurance that the working capital advances will continue in the future nor that Company will be successful in raising additional funds through other sources.
In December 2019, an outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) originated in Wuhan, China, and has since spread to a number of other countries, including the United States. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic. In addition, as of the time of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, several states in the United States and elsewhere have declared states of emergency, and several countries around the world, including the United States, have taken steps to restrict travel. While the Company presently has no ongoing operations or employees, this situation could limit the market for a merger partner for a strategic business combination. Any of these uncertainties could have a material adverse effect on the business, financial condition or results of operations. In addition, a catastrophic event that results in the destruction or disruption of the Company’s data centers or its critical business or information technology systems would severely affect the ability to conduct normal business operations and, as a result, the operating results would be adversely affected.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity or capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to an investor in our securities.
Seasonality
Our operating results are not affected by seasonality.
Inflation
Our business and operating results are not affected in any material way by inflation.
Critical Accounting Policies
The Securities and Exchange Commission issued Financial Reporting Release No. 60, “Cautionary Advice Regarding Disclosure About Critical Accounting Policies” suggesting that companies provide additional disclosure and commentary on their most critical accounting policies. In Financial Reporting Release No. 60, the Securities and Exchange Commission has defined the most critical accounting policies as the ones that are most important to the portrayal of a company’s financial condition and operating results, and require management to make its most difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. The nature of our business generally does not call for the preparation or use of estimates. Please refer to footnote 2 of the Financial statements with respect to significant accounting policies.