Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
In addition to historical information, the following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. The actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including but not limited to those discussed in Part I, Item 1A - “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which reflect management’s opinions only as of the date hereof. We undertake no obligation to revise or publicly release the results of any revision to these forward-looking statements, except as required by law. Readers should carefully review the Risk Factors and the risk factors set forth in other documents we file from time to time with the SEC.
Overview
J2 Global, Inc., together with its subsidiaries (“J2 Global”, “the Company”, “our”, “us” or “we”), is a leading provider of internet services. Our Digital Media business specializes in the technology, shopping, gaming, and healthcare markets, offering content, tools and services to consumers and businesses. Our Cloud Services business provides cloud-based subscription services to consumers and businesses including cloud fax, cybersecurity, privacy, and marketing technology. We manage our operations through two businesses: Digital Media and Cloud Services.
Our Digital Media business generates revenues from advertising and sponsorships, subscription and usage fees, performance marketing and licensing fees. Our Cloud Services business generates revenues primarily from customer subscription and usage fees.
In addition to growing our business organically, on a regular basis we acquire businesses to grow our customer bases, expand and diversify our service offerings, enhance our technologies, acquire skilled personnel and enter into new markets.
Our consolidated revenues are currently generated from three basic business models, each with different financial profiles and variability. Our Digital Media business is driven primarily by advertising revenues, has relatively higher sales and marketing expense and has seasonal strength in the fourth quarter. Our Cloud Services business is driven primarily by subscription revenues that are relatively higher margin, stable and predictable from quarter to quarter with minor seasonal weakness in the fourth quarter. We continue to pursue additional acquisitions, which may include companies operating under business models that differ from those we operate under today. Such acquisitions could impact our consolidated profit margins and the variability of our revenues.
J2 Global was incorporated in 2014 as a Delaware corporation through the creation of a holding company structure, and our Cloud Services business, operated by our wholly owned subsidiary, J2 Cloud Services, LLC (formerly J2 Cloud Services, Inc.), and its subsidiaries, was founded in 1995.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic, and we anticipate our customers and our operations in all locations will be affected as the virus continues to proliferate and as a result of the governmental responses to the pandemic. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has had a negative effect on the global economy, disrupting the financial markets and creating increasing volatility and overall uncertainty. Given this disruption, volatility and uncertainty, our results may be adversely affected due to various factors affecting our performance. The Company has adjusted certain aspects of our operations to protect our employees and customers while still seeking to meet customers’ needs for our vital cloud internet services and digital media services.
Management is actively monitoring the global situation and will take further action to alter our operations as may be required by federal, foreign, state and local authorities or that we determine are otherwise necessary or appropriate under the circumstances. The full extent, duration and overall impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is currently unknown and depends on future developments that are uncertain and unpredictable. Therefore, we are continuing to assess the impact to our results of operations, financial position and liquidity based on our current assessment of the situation which could change based on the spread of the pandemic and additional government action which could limit economic activity or cause for a slower reopening of the economy.
Digital Media Performance Metrics
We use certain metrics to generally assess the operational and financial performance of our Digital Media business. The number of visits is an important metric because it is an indicator of consumers’ level of engagement with our mobile applications, websites and other services. We believe highly engaged consumers are more likely to participate in advertising programs and other activities that derive our multiple revenue streams.
We define a visit as a group of interactions by users with our mobile and desktop applications and websites. A single visit can contain multiple page views and actions, and a single user can open multiple visits across domains, web browsers, desktop or mobile devices. We measure visits with Google Analytics and through partner platform measures. Page views are measured each time a page on our websites is loaded in a browser.
The following table sets forth certain key operating metrics for our Digital Media business for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (in millions):
Sources: Google Analytics and Partner Platforms
Cloud Services Performance Metrics
We use certain metrics to generally assess the operational and financial performance of our Cloud Services business; these metrics also serve as a baseline for (a) internal trends and (b) benchmarking against competitors. The average monthly revenue per customer can be used as an analytical tool in determining the marginal economics of customer acquisition, which is particularly useful as we continue to focus on growing our higher-margin businesses. We also use this metric, in conjunction with the cancel rate, to help provide a directional indicator of Cloud Services revenue and calculate the lifetime value of customers within each of our business units.
The following table sets forth certain key operating metrics for our Cloud Services business for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (in thousands, except for percentages):
(1)Quarterly ARPU is calculated using our standard convention of applying the average of the quarter’s beginning and ending base to the total revenue for the quarter. We believe ARPU provides investors an understanding of the average monthly revenues we recognize associated with each Cloud Services customer. As ARPU varies based on fixed subscription fee and variable usage components, we believe it can serve as a measure by which investors can evaluate trends in the types of services, levels of services and the usage levels of those services across our Cloud Services customer base.
(2)Cloud Services customers are defined as paying direct inward dialing numbers for fax and voice services, and direct and resellers’ accounts for other services.
(3)Cancel Rate is defined as cancels of small and medium businesses and individual Cloud Services customers with greater than four months of continuous service (continuous service includes Cloud Services customers administratively canceled and reactivated within the same calendar month), and enterprise Cloud Services customers beginning with their first day of service. Calculated monthly and expressed as an average over the three months of the quarter.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and operating results require us to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. See Note 2, “Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the notes to consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K which describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ significantly from those estimates under different assumptions and conditions and may be material.
We believe that our most critical accounting policies are those related to revenue recognition, valuation and impairment of investments, our assessment of ownership interests as variable interest entities and the related determination of consolidation, share-based compensation expense, fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in connection with business combinations, long-lived and intangible asset impairment, contingent consideration, income taxes and contingencies
and allowance for doubtful accounts. We consider these policies critical because they are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results and require management’s most difficult, subjective and complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Audit Committee of the Company’s Board of Directors.
Revenue Recognition
Digital Media
Digital Media revenues are earned primarily from the delivery of advertising services and from subscriptions to services and information.
Revenue is earned from the delivery of advertising services on the Company’s owned and operated websites and on those websites that are part of Digital Media’s advertising network. Depending on the individual contracts with the customer, revenue for these services are recognized over the contract period when any of the following performance obligations are satisfied: (i) when an advertisement is placed for viewing; (ii) when a qualified sales lead is delivered; (iii) when a visitor “clicks through” on an advertisement; or (iv) when commissions are earned upon the sale of an advertised product.
Revenue from subscriptions is earned through the granting of access to, or delivery of, certain data products or services to customers. Subscriptions cover video games and related content, health information, data and other copyrighted material. Revenues under such agreements are recognized over the contract term for use of the service. Revenues are also earned from listing fees, subscriptions to online publications, and from other sources. Subscription revenues are recognized over time.
J2 Global also generates Digital Media revenues through the license of certain assets to clients. Assets are licensed for clients’ use in their own promotional materials or otherwise. Such assets may include logos, editorial reviews, or other copyrighted material. Revenues under such license agreements are recognized over the contract term for use of the asset. Technology assets are also licensed to clients. These assets are recognized over the term of the access period. The Digital Media business also generates revenue from other sources which had included marketing and production services. Such other revenues are generally recognized over the period in which the products or services are delivered.
J2 Global also generates Digital Media revenues from transactions involving the sale of perpetual software licenses, related software support and maintenance, hardware used in conjunction with its software, and other related services. Revenue is recognized for these software transactions with multiple performance obligations after (i) the Company has had an approved contract and is committed to perform the respective obligations and (ii) the Company can identify and quantify each obligation and its respective selling price. Once the respective performance obligations have been identified and quantified, revenue will be recognized when the obligations are met, either over time or at a point in time depending on the nature of the obligation.
Revenues from software license performance obligations are generally recognized upfront at the point in time that the software is made available to the customer to download and use. Revenues for related software support and maintenance performance obligations are related to technical support provided to customers as needed and unspecified software product upgrades, maintenance releases and patches during the term of the support period when they are available. The Company is obligated to make the support services available continuously throughout the contract period. Therefore, revenues for support contracts are generally recognized ratably over the contractual period the support services are provided. Hardware product and related software performance obligations, such as an operating system or firmware, are highly interdependent and interrelated and are accounted for as a bundled performance obligation. The revenues for this bundled performance obligation are generally recognized at the point in time that the hardware and software products are delivered and ownership is transferred to the customer. Other service revenues are generally recognized over time as the services are performed.
The Company records revenue on a gross basis with respect to revenue generated (i) by the Company serving online display and video advertising across its owned and operated web properties, on third-party sites or on unaffiliated advertising networks; (ii) through the Company’s lead-generation business; and (iii) through the Company’s subscriptions. The Company records revenue on a net basis with respect to revenue paid to the Company by certain third-party advertising networks who serve online display and video advertising across the Company’s owned-and-operated web properties and certain third-party sites.
Cloud Services
The Company’s Cloud Services revenues substantially consist of monthly recurring subscription and usage-based fees, the majority of which are paid in advance by credit card. The Company defers the portions of monthly, quarterly, semi-annually and annually recurring subscription and usage-based fees collected in advance of the satisfaction of performance obligations and recognizes them in the period earned.
Along with our numerous proprietary Cloud Services solutions, the Company also generates revenues by reselling various third-party solutions, primarily through our email security and online backup lines of business. These third-party solutions, along with our proprietary products, allow the Company to offer customers a variety of solutions to better meet the customer’s needs. The Company records revenue on a gross basis with respect to reseller revenue because the Company has control of the specified good or service prior to transferring control to the customer.
Valuation and Impairment of Investments
We account for our investments in debt securities in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC Topic No. 320, Investments - Debt Securities (“ASC 320”). Our debt investments are typically comprised of corporate debt securities, which we classify as available-for-sale. Available-for-sale securities are carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses included in other comprehensive income. All debt securities are accounted for on a specific identification basis.
The Company’s available-for-sale debt securities are carried at an estimated fair value with any unrealized gains or losses, net of taxes, included in accumulated other comprehensive loss in stockholders’ equity. Available-for-sale debt securities with an amortized cost basis in excess of estimated fair value are assessed to determine what amount of that difference, if any, is caused by expected credit losses. Expected credit losses on available-for-sale debt securities are recognized in loss on investments, net on our Consolidated Statements of Operations, and any remaining unrealized losses, net of taxes, are included in accumulated comprehensive loss in stockholders’ equity.
We account for our investments in equity securities in accordance with ASC Topic No. 321, Investments - Equity Securities (“ASC 321”) which requires the accounting for equity investments (other than those accounted for using the equity method of accounting) generally be measured at fair value for equity securities with readily determinable fair values. For equity securities without a readily determinable fair value that are not accounted for by the equity method, we measure the equity security using cost, less impairment, if any, and plus or minus observable price changes arising from orderly transactions in the same or similar investment from the same issuer. Any unrealized gains or losses will be reported in current earnings (see Note 5 - Investments of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference).
We assess whether an other-than-temporary impairment loss on an investment has occurred due to declines in fair value or other market conditions (see Note 5 - Investments of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference).
Variable Interest Entities (“VIE”)
A VIE requires consolidation by the entity’s primary beneficiary. We evaluate our investments in entities in which we are involved to determine if the entity is a VIE and if so, whether we hold a variable interest and are the primary beneficiary. We have determined that we hold a variable interest in our investment as a limited partner in the OCV Fund I, LP (“OCV Fund”, “OCV” or the “Fund”). In determining whether we are the primary beneficiary of the VIE, both of the following characteristics must be present:
a) the Company has the power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly impacts the VIEs economic performance (the power criterion); and
b) the Company has the obligation to absorb losses of the VIE, or the right to receive benefits of the VIE, that could potentially be significant to the VIE (the economic criterion).
We have concluded that, as a limited partner, although the obligations to absorb losses or the right to benefit from the gains is not insignificant, we do not have “power” over OCV because we do not have the ability to direct the significant decisions which impact the economics of OCV. We believe that the OCV general partner, as a single decision maker, holds the ability to make the decisions about the activities that most significantly impact the OCV Fund’s economic performance. As a result, we have concluded that we will not consolidate OCV, as we are not the primary beneficiary of the OCV Fund, and will account for this investment under the equity-method of accounting. See Note 5, “Investments”, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference.
OCV qualifies as an investment company under ASC 946 - Financial Services, Investment Companies (“ASC 946”). Under ASC Topic 323, Investments - Equity Method and Joint Ventures, an investor that holds investments that qualify for specialized industry accounting for investment companies in accordance with ASC 946 should record its share of the earnings or losses, realized or unrealized, as reported by its equity method investees in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
We recognize our equity in the net earnings or losses relating to the investment in OCV on a one-quarter lag due to the timing and availability of financial information from OCV. If we become aware of a significant decline in value that is other-than-temporary, the loss will be recorded in the period in which we identify the decline.
Share-Based Compensation Expense
We account for share-based awards to employees and non-employees in accordance with the provisions of FASB ASC Topic No. 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”). Accordingly, we measure share-based compensation expense at the grant date, based on the fair value of the award, and recognize the expense over the employee’s requisite service period using the straight-line method. The measurement of share-based compensation expense is based on several criteria including, but not limited to, the valuation model used and associated input factors, such as expected term of the award, stock price volatility, risk free interest rate, dividend rate and award cancellation rate. These inputs are subjective and are determined using management’s judgment. If differences arise between the assumptions used in determining share-based compensation expense and the actual factors, which become known over time, we may change the input factors used in determining future share-based compensation expense. Any such changes could materially impact our results of operations in the period in which the changes are made and in periods thereafter. The Company estimates the expected term based upon the historical exercise behavior of our employees.
Impairment or Disposal of Long-lived and Intangible Assets
J2 Global accounts for long-lived assets, which include property and equipment, operating lease right-of-use assets and identifiable intangible assets with finite useful lives (subject to amortization), in accordance with the provisions of FASB ASC Topic No. 360, Property, Plant, and Equipment (“ASC 360”), which requires that long-lived assets be reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability is measured by comparing the carrying amount of an asset to the expected undiscounted future net cash flows generated by the asset. If it is determined that the asset may not be recoverable, and if the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated fair value, an impairment charge is recognized to the extent of the difference.
We assess the impairment of identifiable definite-lived intangibles and long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Factors we consider important which could individually or in combination trigger an impairment review include the following:
•Significant underperformance relative to expected historical or projected future operating results;
•Significant changes in the manner of our use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business;
•Significant negative industry or economic trends;
•Significant decline in our stock price for a sustained period; and
•Our market capitalization relative to net book value.
If we determined that the carrying value of definite-lived intangibles and long-lived assets may not be recoverable based upon the existence of one or more of the above indicators of impairment, we would record an impairment equal to the excess of the carrying amount of the asset over its estimated fair value.
We have assessed whether events or changes in circumstances have occurred that potentially indicate the carrying amount of definite-lived intangibles and long-lived assets may not be recoverable. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded impairments of certain operating right-of-use assets and associated property and equipment (see Note 11 - Leases of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference). No impairment was recorded for the years ended December 31, 2019, and 2018.
The Company classifies its long-lived assets to be sold as held for sale in the period (i) it has approved and committed to a plan to sell the asset, (ii) the asset is available for immediate sale in its present condition, (iii) an active program to locate a buyer and other actions required to sell the asset have been initiated, (iv) the sale of the asset is probable, (v) the asset is being actively marketed for sale at a price that is reasonable in relation to its current fair value, and (vi) it is unlikely that significant changes to the plan will be made or that the plan will be withdrawn. The Company initially measures a long-lived asset that is classified as held for sale at the lower of its carrying value or fair value less any costs to sell. Any loss resulting from this measurement is recognized in the period in which the held for sale criteria are met. Conversely, gains are not recognized on the sale of a long-lived asset until the date of sale. Upon designation as an asset held for sale, the Company stops recording depreciation expense on the asset. The Company assesses the fair value of a long-lived asset less any costs to sell at each reporting period and until the asset is no longer classified as held for sale.
Business Combinations and Valuation of Goodwill and Intangible Assets
We apply the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations in accordance with GAAP and uses estimates and judgments to allocate the purchase price paid for acquisitions to the fair value of the assets, including identifiable intangible assets and liabilities acquired. Such estimates may be based on significant unobservable inputs and assumptions such as, but not limited to, revenue growth rates, gross margins, customer attrition rates, royalty rates, discount rates and terminal growth rate assumptions. We use established valuation techniques and may engage reputable valuation specialists to assist with the valuations. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. Fair values are subject to refinement for up to one year after the closing date of an acquisition as information relative to closing date fair values becomes available. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired in a business combination. Intangible assets resulting from the acquisitions of entities accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting are recorded at the estimated fair value of the assets acquired. Identifiable intangible assets are comprised of purchased customer relationships, trademarks and trade names, developed technologies and other intangible assets. Intangible assets subject to amortization are amortized over the period of estimated economic benefit ranging from one to 20 years and are included in general and administrative expenses on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. We evaluate our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment pursuant to FASB ASC Topic No. 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (“ASC 350”), which provides that goodwill and other intangible assets with indefinite lives are not amortized but tested for impairment annually or more frequently if we believe indicators of impairment exist. In connection with the annual impairment test for goodwill, we have the option to perform a qualitative assessment in determining whether it
is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then we perform the impairment test upon goodwill. The impairment test involves comparing the fair values of the applicable reporting units with their aggregate carrying values, including goodwill. We generally determine the fair value of our reporting units using the income approach methodology of valuation. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, an impairment loss is recognized for the difference. In 2020, we changed the annual goodwill impairment assessment date for the Digital Media business from December 31 to October 1, as we determined this date is preferable, and concluded this was not a material change in accounting principle.
Contingent Consideration
Certain of our acquisition agreements include contingent earn-out arrangements, which are generally based on the achievement of future income thresholds or other metrics. The contingent earn-out arrangements are based upon our valuations of the acquired companies and reduce the risk of overpaying for acquisitions if the projected financial results are not achieved.
The fair values of these earn-out arrangements are included as part of the purchase price of the acquired companies on their respective acquisition dates. For each transaction, we estimate the fair value of contingent earn-out payments as part of the initial purchase price and record the estimated fair value of contingent consideration as a liability on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. We consider several factors when determining that contingent earn-out liabilities are part of the purchase price, including the following: (1) the valuation of our acquisitions is not supported solely by the initial consideration paid, and the contingent earn-out formula is a critical and material component of the valuation approach to determining the purchase price; and (2) the former shareholders of acquired companies that remain as key employees receive compensation other than contingent earn-out payments at a reasonable level compared with the compensation of our other key employees. The contingent earn-out payments are not affected by employment termination.
We measure our contingent earn-out liabilities in connection with acquisitions at fair value on a recurring basis using significant unobservable inputs classified within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy (see Note 7 - Fair Value Measurements of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference). We may use various valuation techniques depending on the terms and conditions of the contingent consideration including a Monte-Carlo simulation. This simulation uses probability distribution for each significant input to produce hundreds or thousands of possible outcomes and the results are analyzed to determine probabilities of different outcomes occurring. Significant increases or decreases to these inputs in isolation would result in a significantly higher or lower liability with a higher liability capped by the contractual maximum of the contingent earn-out obligation. Ultimately, the liability will be equivalent to the amount paid, and the difference between the fair value estimate and amount paid will be recorded in earnings. The amount paid that is less than or equal to the liability on the acquisition date is reflected as cash used in financing activities in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. Any amount paid in excess of the liability on the acquisition date is reflected as cash used in operating activities.
We review and re-assess the estimated fair value of contingent consideration on a quarterly basis, and the updated fair value could be materially different from the initial estimates or prior quarterly amounts. Changes in the estimated fair value of our contingent earn-out liabilities and adjustments to the estimated fair value related to changes in all other unobservable inputs are reported in general and administrative expenses on the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Income Taxes
Our income is subject to taxation in both the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in evaluating our tax positions and determining its provision for income taxes. During the ordinary course of business, there are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. We establish reserves for tax-related uncertainties based on estimates of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes will be due. These reserves for tax contingencies are established when we believe that certain positions might be challenged despite our belief that our tax return positions are fully supportable. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the outcome of a tax audit or lapse of a statute of limitations. The provision for income taxes includes the impact of reserve provisions and changes to reserves that are considered appropriate.
We account for income taxes in accordance with FASB ASC Topic No. 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”), which requires that deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized using enacted tax rates for the effect of temporary differences between the book and tax basis of recorded assets and liabilities. GAAP also requires that deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some or all of the net deferred tax assets will not be realized. Our valuation allowance is reviewed quarterly based upon the facts and circumstances known at the time. In assessing this valuation allowance, we review historical and future expected operating results and other factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that deferred tax assets are realizable.
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. (federal and state) and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Tax laws, regulations, and administrative practices in various jurisdictions may be subject to significant change, with or without notice, due to economic, political, and other conditions, and significant judgment is required in evaluating and estimating our provision and accruals for these taxes. There are many transactions that occur during the ordinary course of business for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. Our effective tax rates could be affected by numerous factors, such as intercompany transactions, the relative amount of our foreign earnings, including earnings being lower than anticipated in jurisdictions where we have lower statutory rates and higher than anticipated in jurisdictions where we have higher statutory rates, the applicability of special tax regimes, losses incurred in jurisdictions for which we are not able to realize the related tax benefit, changes in foreign currency exchange rates, entry into new businesses and geographies, changes to our existing businesses and operations, acquisitions (including integrations) and investments and how they are financed, changes in our stock price, changes in our deferred tax assets and liabilities and their valuation, and changes in the relevant tax, accounting, and other laws, regulations, administrative practices, principles, and interpretations. In addition, a number of countries are actively pursuing changes to their tax laws applicable to corporate multinationals, such as the recently enacted the 2017 Tax Act. Finally, foreign governments may enact tax laws in response to the 2017 Tax Act that could result in further changes to global taxation and materially affect our financial position and results of operations.
Income Tax Contingencies
We calculate current and deferred tax provisions based on estimates and assumptions that could differ from the actual results reflected in income tax returns filed during the following year. Adjustments based on filed returns are recorded when identified in the subsequent year.
ASC 740 provides guidance on the minimum threshold that an uncertain income tax position is required to meet before it can be recognized in the financial statements and applies to all tax positions taken by a company. ASC 740 contains a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain income tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the income tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement. If it is not more likely than not that the benefit will be sustained on its technical merits, no benefit will be recorded. Uncertain income tax positions that relate only to timing of when an item is included on a tax return are considered to have met the recognition threshold. We recognize accrued interest and penalties related to uncertain income tax positions in income tax expense on our Consolidated Statements of Operations. On a quarterly basis, we evaluate uncertain income tax positions and establish or release reserves as appropriate under GAAP.
As a multinational corporation, we are subject to taxation in many jurisdictions, and the calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations in various taxing jurisdictions. Our estimate of the potential outcome of any uncertain tax issue is subject to management’s assessment of relevant risks, facts and circumstances existing at that time. Therefore, the actual liability for U.S. or foreign taxes may be
materially different from our estimates, which could result in the need to record additional tax liabilities or potentially to reverse previously recorded tax liabilities. In addition, we may be subject to examination of our tax returns by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) and other domestic and foreign tax authorities.
Non-Income Tax Contingencies
We do not collect and remit sales and use, telecommunication, or similar taxes in certain jurisdictions where we believe that such taxes are not applicable or legally required. Several states and other taxing jurisdictions have presented or threatened us with assessments, alleging that we are required to collect and remit such taxes there.
We are currently under audit or is subject to audit for indirect taxes in various states, municipalities and foreign jurisdictions. We have a $22.5 million reserve established for these matters which is included in other long-term liabilities and accounts payable and accrued expenses on the Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2020. It is reasonably possible that additional liabilities could be incurred resulting in additional expense, which could have a materially impact on our financial results.
Allowances for Doubtful Accounts
We maintain an allowance for credit losses for accounts receivable, which is recorded as an offset to accounts receivable and changes in such are classified as general and administrative expenses in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. We assess collectability by reviewing accounts receivable on a collective basis where similar characteristics exist and on an individual basis when we identify specific customers with known disputes or collectability issues. In determining the amount of the allowance for credit losses, we consider historical collectability based on past due status. We also consider customer-specific information, current market conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts of future economic conditions to inform adjustments to historical loss data. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates the adequacy of these reserves.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, “Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”, to our accompanying consolidated financial statements for a description of recent accounting pronouncements and our expectations of their impact on our consolidated financial position and results of operations.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018
Digital Media
We expect revenue for fiscal year 2021 to be higher compared to the prior-year due to the acquisition of RetailMeNot, subject to the continued risk of the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect the Digital Media business to improve as we integrate our recent acquisitions and over the longer term as advertising transactions continue to shift from offline to online, but these initiatives will be offset by the impact of COVID-19 in the near term. The main focus of our advertising programs is to provide relevant and useful advertising to visitors to our websites and those included within our advertising networks, reflecting our commitment to constantly improve their overall web experience. As a result, we expect to continue to take steps to improve the relevance of the ads displayed on our websites and those included within our advertising networks.
The operating margin we realize on revenues generated from ads placed on our websites is significantly higher than the operating margin we realize from revenues generated from those placed on third-party websites. Growth in advertising revenues from our websites has generally exceeded that from third-party websites. This trend has had a positive impact on our operating margins, and we expect that this will continue for the foreseeable future. However, the trend in advertising spend is shifting to mobile devices and other newer advertising formats which generally experience lower margins than those from desktop computers and tablets. We expect this trend to continue to put pressure on our margins.
We expect acquisitions to remain an important component of our strategy and use of capital in this business; however, we cannot predict whether our current pace of acquisitions will remain the same within this business, especially in light of the current macroeconomic conditions. In a given period, we may close greater or fewer acquisitions than in prior periods or
acquisitions of greater or lesser significance than in prior periods. Moreover, future acquisitions of businesses within this space but with different business models may impact Digital Media’s overall profit margins.
Cloud Services
Given the uncertainty of the current macroeconomic environment and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we expect 2021 revenue to be higher compared to the prior-year. The main focus of our Cloud Services offerings is to reduce or eliminate costs, increase sales and enhance productivity, mobility, business continuity and security of our customers as the technologies and devices they use evolve over time. As a result, we expect to continue to take steps to enhance our existing offerings and offer new services to continue to satisfy the evolving needs of our customers.
We expect acquisitions to remain an important component of our strategy and use of capital in this business; however, we cannot predict whether our current pace of acquisitions will remain the same within this business, especially in light of the current macroeconomic conditions. In a given period, we may close greater or fewer acquisitions than in prior periods or acquisitions of greater or lesser significance than in prior periods. Moreover, future acquisitions of businesses within this space but with different business models may impact Cloud Services’ overall profit margins. Also, as IP licensing often involves litigation, the timing of licensing transactions is unpredictable and can and does vary significantly from period to period. This variability can cause the overall business’s financial results to materially vary from period to period.
J2 Global Consolidated
Based on the trends discussed above with respect to our Cloud Services and Digital Media businesses, we anticipate our consolidated revenue for fiscal year 2021 to be higher compared to the prior-year comparable period.
We expect operating profit as a percentage of revenues to generally decrease in the future primarily due to the fact that revenue with respect to our Digital Media business (i) is increasing as a percentage of our revenue on a consolidated basis and (ii) has historically operated at a lower operating margin.
The following table sets forth, for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, information derived from our Statements of Operations as a percentage of revenues. This information should be read in conjunction with the accompanying financial statements and the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenues
Our revenues consist of revenues from our Digital Media business and from our Cloud Services business. Digital Media revenues primarily consist of advertising revenues, subscriptions earned through the granting of access to, or delivery of, certain data products or services to customers, fees paid for generating business leads, and licensing and sale of editorial content and trademarks. Cloud Services revenues primarily consist of revenues from “fixed” customer subscription revenues and “variable” revenues generated from actual usage of our services. We also generate Cloud Services revenues from IP licensing.
Our revenues have increased over the past three years primarily due to a combination of acquisitions and organic growth; partially offset by declines in certain areas of both the Digital Media and Cloud Services businesses.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues is primarily comprised of costs associated with network operations, content fees, editorial and production costs, customer service, database hosting and online processing fees. The decrease in cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to lower content fees, campaign fulfillment cost, other editorial and production costs; partially offset by an increase in depreciation and amortization The increase in cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to an increase in costs associated with businesses acquired in and subsequent to fiscal 2018 that resulted in additional campaign fulfillment, partner inventory, network operations and customer service costs.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing.
Our sales and marketing costs consist primarily of internet-based advertising, sales and marketing, personnel costs and other business development-related expenses. Our internet-based advertising relationships consist primarily of fixed cost and performance-based (cost-per-impression, cost-per-click and cost-per-acquisition) advertising relationships with an array of online service providers. Advertising cost for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 was $163.7 million (primarily consisting of $91.5 million of third-party advertising costs and $57.7 million of personnel costs), $158.2 million (primarily consisting of $112.4 million of third-party advertising costs and $41.3 million of personnel costs) and $149.7 million (primarily consisting of $100.5 million of third-party advertising costs and $40.8 million of personnel costs), respectively. The increase in sales and marketing expenses from 2019 to 2020 was primarily due to increased personnel costs and advertising associated with the businesses acquired in and subsequent to fiscal 2019. The increase in sales and marketing expenses from 2018 to 2019 was primarily due to increased personnel costs and advertising associated with the businesses acquired in and subsequent to fiscal 2018.
Research, Development and Engineering.
Our research, development and engineering costs consist primarily of personnel-related expenses. The increase in research, development and engineering costs from 2019 to 2020 was primarily due to an increase in costs associated with businesses acquired within the Digital Media business. The increase in research, development and engineering costs from 2018 to 2019 was primarily due to personnel costs associated with acquisitions within the Digital Media business.
General and Administrative.
Our general and administrative costs consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, depreciation and amortization, changes in the fair value associated with contingent consideration, share-based compensation expense, bad debt expense, professional fees, severance and insurance costs. The increase in general and administrative expense from 2019 to 2020 was primarily due to the recognition of lease asset impairments and additional depreciation due to leasehold impairments, legal settlements and increased professional fees; partially offset by decreased amortization of intangible assets. The increase in general and administrative expense from 2018 to 2019 was primarily due to additional amortization of intangible assets, increased depreciation expense and personnel costs relating to acquisitions closed during 2018 and 2019.
Share-Based Compensation
The following table represents share-based compensation expense included in cost of revenues and operating expenses in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018 (in thousands):
Non-Operating Income and Expenses
Interest expense, net. Our interest expense, net is generated primarily from interest expense due to outstanding debt, partially offset by interest income earned on cash, cash equivalents and investments. Interest expense, net was $132.0 million, $69.5 million, and $62.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The increase from 2019 to 2020 was primarily due to increased interest expense associated with the issuance of our 1.75% Convertible Senior Notes in the fourth quarter 2019; and the payment of certain prepayment penalties and write off of issuance costs in connection with the refinancing of our 6.0% Senior Notes and associated issuance of our 4.625% Senior Notes in the fourth quarter 2020. The increase from 2018 to 2019 was primarily due to increased interest expense associated with our line of credit borrowings and issuance of our 1.75% Convertible Senior Notes in the fourth quarter 2019.
Gain on sale of businesses. Our gain on sale of businesses is generated primarily from the sale of certain Voice assets in Australia and New Zealand in the third quarter of 2020. Gain on sale of businesses was $17.1 million, zero, and zero for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Loss on investments, net. Our loss on investments, net is generated from gains or losses from investments in equity and debt securities. Our loss on investments, net was $21.0 million, $4.2 million, and $0.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Our net loss on investments, net increased during fiscal year 2020 versus the prior comparable period due to net losses realized on certain investments as the result of the recapitalization of the investee and overall market volatility. The increase from 2018 to 2019 was attributable to an impairment loss on equity securities.
Other (income) expense, net. Our other (income) expense, net is generated primarily from miscellaneous items and gain or losses on currency exchange. Other (income) expense, net was $(31.6) million, $3.7 million, and $4.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The change from 2019 to 2020 was attributable to currency exchange gains. The change from 2018 to 2019 was attributable to currency exchange losses.
Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate is based on pre-tax income, statutory tax rates, tax regulations (including those related to transfer pricing) and different tax rates in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. The tax bases of our assets and liabilities reflect our best estimate of the tax benefits and costs we expect to realize. When necessary, we establish valuation allowances to reduce our deferred tax assets to an amount that will more likely than not be realized.
As of December 31, 2020, we had federal net operating loss carryforwards (“NOLs”) of $60.2 million after considering substantial restrictions on the utilization of these NOLs due to “ownership changes”, as defined in the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. We estimate that all of the above-mentioned federal NOLs will be available for use before their expiration. $59.7 million of the NOLs expire through the year 2037 and $0.5 million of the NOLs carry forward indefinitely depending on the year the loss was incurred.
As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, the Company has no foreign tax credit carryovers. In addition, as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had available unrecognized state research and development tax credits of $9.1 million and $3.2 million, respectively, which last indefinitely.
Income tax expense (benefit) amounted to $68.4 million, $(19.4) million and $44.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Our effective tax rates for 2020, 2019 and 2018 were 29.7%, (9.7)% and 25.2%, respectively.
The increase in our annual effective income tax rate from 2019 to 2020 was primarily attributable to the following:
1.An increase in tax expense during 2020 due to a $53.7 million tax benefit recognized in 2019 from an intra-entity transfer as part of the reorganization of our international operating structure resulting in the recognition of a deferred tax asset with no comparable event during 2020; and
2.a decrease in the benefit for the portion of our income being taxed in foreign jurisdictions and subject to lower tax rates than in the U.S. (relative to income from U.S. domestic operations); and
3.an increase in tax expense during 2020 due to recording valuation allowances on deferred tax assets related to capital loss carryovers.
The decrease in our annual effective income tax rate from 2018 to 2019 was primarily attributable to the following:
1.a decrease during 2019 from an intra-entity transfer as part of the reorganization of our international operating structure resulting in recognition of a $53.7 million tax benefit and corresponding deferred tax asset; and
2.a decrease in tax expense during 2019 from an overall reduction in our net reserve for uncertain tax positions; partially offset by
3.a decrease in the benefit for the portion of our income being taxed in foreign jurisdictions and subject to lower tax rates than in the U.S. (relative to income from U.S. domestic operations).
In order to provide additional understanding in connection with our foreign taxes, the following represents the statutory and effective tax rate by significant foreign country:
(1) Effective tax rate excludes certain discrete items.
The statutory tax rate is the rate imposed on taxable income for corporations by the local government in that jurisdiction. The effective tax rate measures the taxes paid as a percentage of pretax profit. The effective tax rate can differ from the statutory tax rate when a company can exempt some income from tax, claim tax credits, or due to the effect of book-tax differences that do not reverse and discrete items.
Significant judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes and in evaluating our tax positions on a worldwide basis. We believe our tax positions, including intercompany transfer pricing policies, are consistent with the tax laws in the jurisdictions in which we conduct our business. Certain of these tax positions have in the past been, and are currently being, challenged, and this may have a significant impact on our effective tax rate if our tax reserves are insufficient.
Equity Method Investment
Net loss in earnings of equity method investment. Net loss in earnings of equity method investment is generated from our investment in the OCV Fund for which we receive annual audited financial statements. The investment in the OCV Fund is presented net of tax and on a one-quarter lag due to the timing and availability of financial information from OCV. If the Company becomes aware of a significant decline in value that is other-than-temporary, the loss will be recorded in the period in which the Company identifies the decline.
The net loss in earnings of equity method investment was $11.3 million, $0.2 million and $4.1 million, net of tax benefit for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. The fiscal 2020 loss was primarily a result of the impairment of two of the OCV Fund’s investments as a result of COVID-19 in the amount of $7.0 million, net of tax benefit. In addition, the Company recognized an investment loss in fiscal 2020 in the amount of $4.3 million, net of tax benefit. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018 the Company recognized management fees of $3.0 million, $3.0 million and $4.5 million, net of tax benefit, respectively.
Digital Media and Cloud Services Results
Our businesses are based on the organization structure used by management for making operating and investment decisions and for assessing performance and have been aggregated into two businesses: (i) Digital Media; and (ii) Cloud Services.
We evaluate the performance of our businesses based on revenues, including both external and interbusiness net sales, and operating income. We account for interbusiness sales and transfers based primarily on standard costs with reasonable mark-ups established between the businesses. Identifiable assets by business are those assets used in the respective businesses operations. Corporate assets consist of cash and cash equivalents, deferred income taxes and certain other assets. All significant interbusiness amounts are eliminated to arrive at our consolidated financial results.
Digital Media
The following results are presented for fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018 (in thousands):
Net sales of $811.4 million in 2020 increased $100.8 million, or 14.2%, and net sales of $710.5 million in 2019 increased $101.1 million, or 16.6%, from the prior comparable period primarily due to business acquisitions subsequent to the prior comparable periods.
Gross profit of $733.9 million in 2020 increased $116.4 million and gross profit of $617.5 million in 2019 increased $87.0 million from the prior comparable periods primarily due to an increase in net sales between the periods. Gross profit as a percentage of revenues in 2020 and 2019 was higher due to lower content fees, campaign fulfillment cost, other editorial and production costs. Gross profit as a percentage of revenues in 2019 and 2018 was consistent with the previous comparable period.
Operating expenses of $594.1 million in 2020 increased $53.9 million from the prior comparable period primarily due to additional expense associated with businesses acquired in and subsequent to 2019 comprised primarily of salary and related costs including severance and an increase in marketing costs. Operating expenses of $540.2 million in 2019 increased $57.0 million from the prior comparable period primarily due to additional expense associated with businesses acquired in and subsequent to 2018 comprised primarily of salary and related costs, marketing costs and changes in fair value of contingent consideration and amortization of intangible assets.
As a result of these factors, operating income of $139.8 million in 2020 increased $62.5 million, or 80.9%, from 2019, and operating income of $77.3 million in 2019 increased $30.0 million, or 63.4%, from 2018.
Cloud Services
The following results are presented for fiscal years 2020, 2019 and 2018 (in thousands):
Net sales of $678.5 million in 2020 increased $16.6 million, or 2.5%, and net sales of $661.8 million in 2019 increased $63.9 million, or 10.7%, from the prior comparable period primarily due to business acquisitions.
Gross profit of $524.2 million in 2020 increased $6.6 million from 2019 and gross profit of $517.6 million in 2019 increased $41.7 million from 2018 primarily due to an increase in net sales from acquisitions between the periods. The gross profit as a percentage of revenues for 2020 and 2019 was consistent with the previous comparable period.
Operating expenses of $275.0 million in 2020 increased $5.0 million from 2019 and was consistent with the previous comparable period. Operating expenses of $270.0 million in 2019 increased $30.4 million from 2018 primarily due to (a) additional expense associated with businesses acquired in and subsequent to the prior comparable period; and (b) an increase in marketing costs and amortization of intangible assets.
As a result of these factors, operating earnings of $249.2 million in 2020 increased $1.7 million, or 0.7%, from 2019, and operating earnings of $247.5 million in 2019 increased $11.3 million, or 4.8%, from 2018. Our Cloud Services business consists of several services which have similar economic characteristics, including the nature of the services and their production processes, the type of customers, as well as the methods used to distribute these services.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and Cash Equivalents and Investments
At December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents, and investments of $340.8 million compared to $675.7 million at December 31, 2019. The decrease in cash, cash equivalents, and investments resulted primarily from the repayment of debt, business acquisitions, repurchase of common stock, purchases of property and equipment and investments; partially offset by the proceeds from the issuance of debt, cash provided from operations and proceeds from the sale of businesses. At December 31, 2020, cash, cash equivalents, and investments consisted of cash and cash equivalents of $242.7 million, short-term investments of $0.7 million, and long-term investments of $97.5 million. Our investments consist of equity and debt securities. For financial statement presentation, we classify our debt securities primarily as short- and long-term based upon their maturity dates. Short-term investments mature within one year of the date of the financial statements and long-term investments mature one year or more from the date of the financial statements. As of December 31, 2020 cash, cash equivalents, and investments held within domestic and foreign jurisdictions were $240.5 million and $100.3 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2019 cash, cash equivalents, and investments held within domestic and foreign jurisdictions were $604.7 million and $71.0 million, respectively.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had a net working capital deficit of approximately $259.7 million primarily due to cash outflows of $662.9 million related to business combinations and share repurchases during the second half of 2020. In addition, the 3.25% Convertible Notes in the amount of $396.8 million are recorded as a current liability as of December 31, 2020 due to the Holders right to require the Company to repurchase for cash all or part of their 3.25% Convertible Notes on June 15, 2021. However, due to the fact that the Convertible Notes are trading well above par, management has determined that the likelihood that the Holders will exercise this right is remote.
On October 7, 2020, the Company issued $750 million aggregate principal amount of 4.625% Senior Notes due 2030. A portion of the proceeds were used to fund the redemption of the outstanding aggregate principal amount of the 6.0% Senior Notes previously issued by one of our subsidiaries and to pay the redemption premium due in respect of such redemption and accrued and unpaid interest. The company expects to use the remainder of the net proceeds for general corporate purposes including acquisitions. Subsequent to the year end, the Company is pursuing to reestablish a credit facility at the J2 Global, Inc. level providing borrowings of $100.0 million expandable, subject to certain conditions, to $350.0 million.
The Company’s Board of Directors approved two quarterly cash dividends during the year ended December 31, 2019, totaling $0.900 per share of common stock. Future dividends are subject to Board approval. However, based on the significant number of current investment opportunities within the Company’s portfolio of businesses and the historic returns from prior investments, the Board of Directors suspended dividend payments for the foreseeable future after the June 4, 2019 payment.
On January 7, 2019, J2 Cloud Services, LLC entered into a Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with certain lenders from time to time party thereto (collectively, the “Lenders”) and MUFG Union Bank, N.A., as sole lead arranger and as administrative agent for the Lenders (the “Agent”). On October 7, 2020, the Company terminated the Credit Agreement. On November 15, 2019, the Company issued $550.0 million aggregate principal amount of 1.75% Convertible Notes and received net proceeds of $537.1 million in cash, net of initial purchasers’ discounts, commissions and other debt issuance costs. A portion of the net proceeds were used pay off all amounts then outstanding under the MUFG Credit Facility, with the remainder to be used for general corporate purposes including acquisitions.
On June 10, 2014, J2 Global issued $402.5 million aggregate principal amount of 3.25% convertible senior notes due June 15, 2029 (the “3.25% Convertible Notes”). During the fourth quarter of 2020, the last reported sale price of the Company’s common stock exceeded 130% of the conversion price for at least 20 trading days in the period of 30 consecutive trading days
ending on, and including, the last trading day of the quarter. As a result, the 3.25% Convertible Notes are convertible at the option of the holder during the quarter beginning January 1, 2021 and ending March 31, 2021. Since the Company currently intends to settle the principal amount in cash, the net carrying amount of the 3.25% Convertible Notes is classified within current liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020.
On September 25, 2017, the Board of Directors of the Company authorized the Company’s entry into a commitment to invest $200 million in an investment fund (the “Fund”) over several years at a fairly ratable rate. The manager, OCV Management, LLC (“OCV”), and general partner of the Fund are entities with respect to which Richard S. Ressler, Chairman of the Board of Directors (the “Board”) of the Company, is indirectly the majority equity holder. As a limited partner in the Fund, the Company will pay an annual management fee to the manager equal to 2.0% (reduced by 10% each year beginning with the sixth year) of capital commitments. In addition, subject to the terms and conditions of the Fund’s limited partnership agreement, once the Company has received distributions equal to its invested capital, the Fund’s general partner will be entitled to a carried interest equal to 20%. The Fund has a six year investment period, subject to certain exceptions. The commitment was approved by the Audit Committee of the Board in accordance with the Company’s related-party transaction approval policy.
During 2020, the Company received capital call notices from the management of OCV Management, LLC for $32.9 million, inclusive of certain management fees, of which $31.9 million has been paid for the year ended December 31, 2020. During 2019, the Company received a distribution from OCV of $10.3 million. During 2019, the Company received capital call notices from the management of OCV Management, LLC for $29.6 million inclusive of certain management fees, of which $29.6 million has been paid for the year ended December 31, 2019.
We currently anticipate that our existing cash and cash equivalents and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to meet our anticipated needs for working capital, capital expenditure, investment requirements, stock repurchases and cash dividends for at least the next 12 months.
Cash Flows
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows generated from operations, together with cash and cash equivalents. Net cash provided by operating activities was $480.1 million, $412.5 million and $401.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Our operating cash flows resulted primarily from cash received from our customers offset by cash payments we made to third parties for their services, employee compensation and interest payments associated with our debt. The increase in our net cash provided by operating activities in 2020 compared to 2019 was primarily attributable to a decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets, increased income tax liabilities and uncertain tax positions. The increase in our net cash provided by operating activities in 2019 compared to 2018 was primarily attributable to an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses due to the timing of payments; partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable, prepaid expenses and other current assets, higher tax payments, lower uncertain tax positions and reduced deferred revenue. Our prepaid tax payments were $3.0 million and $3.7 million at December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments were $243.3 million, $575.6 million and $209.5 million at December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Net cash used in investing activities was $586.2 million, $505.3 million and $406.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Net cash used in investing activities in 2020 was primarily attributable to business acquisitions, capital expenditures associated with the purchase of property and equipment and the purchase of equity method investments; partially offset by the proceeds from the sale of businesses. Net cash used in investing activities in 2019 was primarily attributable to business acquisitions, capital expenditures associated with the purchase of property and equipment and purchases of equity method investments; partially offset by the distribution from an equity method investment.
Net cash (used in) provided by financing activities was $(234.6) million, $456.7 million and $(131.4) million for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Net cash used in financing activities in 2020 was primarily attributable to the repayment of debt, repurchase of stock and business acquisitions; partially offset by net proceeds from the issuance of our 4.625% Senior Notes and exercise of stock options. Net cash provided by financing activities in 2019 was primarily attributable to net proceeds from the issuance of 1.75% Convertible Notes, proceeds from the line of credit and exercise of stock options; partially offset by payment of the line of credit, dividends paid, repurchase of stock, business acquisitions and repayment of note payable.
Stock Repurchase Program
In February 2012, the Company’s Board of Directors approved a program authorizing the repurchase of up to five million shares of our common stock through February 20, 2013 which was subsequently extended through February 20, 2021.
In July 2016, the Company acquired and subsequently retired 935,231 shares of J2 Global common stock in connection with the acquisition of Integrated Global Concepts, Inc. As a result of the purchase of J2 Global common stock, the Company’s Board of Directors approved a reduction in the number of shares available for purchase under the 2012 Program by the same amount.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we repurchased 1,140,819 and 197,870 shares under this program, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, all of the available shares were repurchased under the 2012 Program at an aggregate cost of $204.6 million (including an immaterial amount of commission fees).
On August 6, 2020, the Company’s Board of Directors approved a program authorizing the repurchase of up to ten million shares of our common stock through August 6, 2025 (the “2020 Program”) in addition to the five million shares repurchased under the 2012 Program. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company repurchased 2,490,599 shares at an aggregate cost of $177.8 million (including an immaterial amount of commission fees) under the 2020 Program, which were subsequently retired.
As a result of the Company’s share repurchase programs, the number of shares available for purchase is 7,509,401 shares of J2 Global common stock.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2020:
(a)These amounts represent principal on long-term debt.
(b)These amounts represent interest on long-term debt.
(c)These amounts represent undiscounted future minimum rental commitments under noncancellable operating leases.
(d)These amounts represent undiscounted future minimum rental commitments under noncancellable finance leases.
(e)These amounts represent service commitments to various telecommunication providers.
(f)These amounts represent the holdback amounts in connection with certain business acquisitions.
(g)These amounts represent commitments related to the transition tax on unrepatriated foreign earnings reduced by the 2017 overpayment of US Federal Income Tax.
(h)These amounts represent health and dental insurance plans in connection to self-insurance.
(i)These amounts primarily represent certain consulting and Board of Director fee arrangements, software license commitments and others.
As of December 31, 2020, our liability for uncertain tax positions was $57.1 million. The future payments related to uncertain tax positions have not been presented in the table above due to the uncertainty of the amounts and timing of cash settlement with the taxing authorities.
We have not presented contingent consideration associated with acquisitions in the table above due to the uncertainty of the amounts and the timing of cash settlements. We have also not presented our remaining commitment to OCV Management, LLC of approximately $94.5 million due to the uncertainty of timing of funding requests.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are not party to any material off-balance sheet arrangements.