ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Information and Factors That May Affect Future Results
This annual report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements regarding our business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects. The Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) encourages companies to disclose forward-looking information so that investors can better understand a company’s future prospects and make informed investment decisions. This annual report on Form 10-K and other written and oral statements that we make from time to time contain such forward-looking statements that set out anticipated results based on management’s plans and assumptions regarding future events or performance. We have tried, wherever possible, to identify such statements by using words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “expect,” “project,” “intend,” “plan,” “believe,” “will” and similar expressions in connection with any discussion of future operating or financial performance. In particular, these include statements relating to future actions, future performance or results of current and anticipated sales efforts, expenses, the outcome of contingencies, such as legal proceedings, and financial results. Factors that could cause our actual results of operations and financial condition to differ materially are set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this annual report on Form 10-K.
We caution that these factors could cause our actual results of operations and financial condition to differ materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statements we make and that investors should not place undue reliance on any such forward-looking statements. Further, any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date on which such statement is made, and we undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect events or circumstances after the date on which such statement is made or to reflect the occurrence of anticipated or unanticipated events or circumstances. New factors emerge from time to time, and it is not possible for us to predict all of such factors. Further, we cannot assess the impact of each such factor on our results of operations or the extent to which any factor, or combination of factors, may cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Zoned Properties is a strategic real estate development firm whose primary mission is to provide specialized real estate and sustainability services for clients in the regulated cannabis industry, positioning the company for real estate investments and revenue growth. We intend to pioneer sustainable development for emerging industries, including the regulated cannabis industry. We are an accredited member of the Better Business Bureau, the U.S. Green Building Council, and the Forbes Real Estate Council. We focus on investing capital to acquire and develop commercial properties to be leased on a triple-net basis, and engaging clients that face zoning, permitting, development, and operational challenges. We provide development strategies and advisory services that could potentially have a major impact on cash flow and property value. We do not grow, harvest, sell or distribute cannabis or any substances regulated under United States law such as the CSA.
We are in the process of developing and expanding multiple business divisions; including an advisory services division, a licensed commercial real estate brokerage division, a real estate division focused on franchise services, a real estate division focused on real estate data, and a nonprofit charitable organization to focus on community prosperity. Each of these operating divisions are important elements of the overall business development strategy for long-term growth. We believe in the value of building relationships with clients and local communities in order to position the Company for long-term portfolio and revenue growth backed by sophisticated, safe, and sustainable assets and clients.
The core of our business involves identifying and developing commercial properties that intend to operate within highly regulated industries, including the regulated cannabis industry. Within highly regulated industries, local municipalities typically develop strict regulations, including zoning and permitting requirements related to commercial real estate, that dictate the specific locations and parameters under which regulated properties can operate. These regulations often include complex permitting processes and can include non-standard codes governing each location; for example, restricting a regulated property or facility from operating within a certain distance of any parks, schools, churches, or residential districts, or restricting a regulated property from operating outside a defined set of hours of operation. When an organization can collaborate with local representatives, a proactive set of rules and regulations can be established and followed to meet the needs of both the regulated operators and the local community.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, substantially all of our revenues were generated from triple-net leases to tenants that are controlled by one entity (each, a “Significant Tenant” and collectively, the “Significant Tenants”), which is located in the State of Arizona.
The Company currently maintains a portfolio of properties that we own, develop, and lease. We currently lease land and/or building space at all five of the properties in our portfolio. Four of the properties are leased to licensed and regulated cannabis tenants and are located in areas with established zoning and permitting procedures. Two of the leased properties are zoned and permitted as licensed and regulated cannabis dispensaries, and two of the leased properties are zoned and permitted as licensed and regulated cannabis cultivation facilities. Each regulated property may undergo a non-standard development process. Various development requirements in this process may include initial property identification, zoning authorization, and permitting guidance in order to qualify a commercial property for subsequent architectural design, utility installation, construction and development, property management, facilities management systems, and security system installation.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we made improvements to rental properties of $9,565. No improvements were made during the year ended December 31, 2019.
As of December 31, 2020, a summary of rental properties owned by us consisted of the following:
* Annual base rent represents amount of cash payments due from tenants.
Annualized $ per Rented Building Sq. Ft. (Base Rent)
** - rented vacant land only.
The U.S. Supreme Court has ruled that it is the federal government that has the right to regulate and criminalize cannabis, even for medical purposes. Therefore, federal law criminalizing the use of marijuana preempts state laws that legalize its use for medicinal purposes.
The U.S. federal government regulates drugs through the CSA, which places controlled substances, including cannabis, in a schedule. Cannabis is classified as a Schedule I controlled substance. A Schedule I controlled substance is defined as a substance that has no currently accepted medical use in the United States, a lack of safety for use under medical supervision and a high potential for abuse. The DOJ defines Schedule I drugs, substances or chemicals as “drugs with no currently accepted medical use and a high potential for abuse.” However, the FDA has approved Epidiolex, which contains a purified form of the drug CBD, a non-psychoactive ingredient in the cannabis plant, for the treatment of seizures associated with two epilepsy conditions. The FDA has not approved cannabis or cannabis compounds as a safe and effective drug for any other condition. Moreover, pursuant to the Farm Bill, CBD remains a Schedule I controlled substance under the CSA, with a narrow exception for CBD derived from hemp with a THC concentration of less than 0.3%.
The Company maintains its operations so as to remain in compliance with the CSA. Even in those jurisdictions in which the manufacture and use of medical marijuana has been legalized at the state level, the possession, use and cultivation all remain violations of federal law that are punishable by imprisonment and substantial fines, and the prescription of marijuana is a violation of federal law. Moreover, individuals and entities may violate federal law if they intentionally aid and abet another in violating these federal controlled substance laws, or conspire with another to violate them.
The inconsistencies between federal and state regulation of cannabis were addressed in the Cole Memo, which then-Deputy Attorney General James Cole sent to all U.S. District Attorneys in 2013 outlining certain priorities for the DOJ relating to the prosecution of cannabis offenses. The Cole Memo acknowledged that, notwithstanding the designation of cannabis as a Schedule I controlled substance at the federal level, several states had enacted laws authorizing the use of cannabis for medical purposes. The Cole Memo noted that jurisdictions that have enacted laws legalizing cannabis in some form have also implemented strong and effective regulatory and enforcement systems to control the cultivation, processing, distribution, sale and possession of cannabis. As such, conduct in compliance with those laws and regulations is less likely to implicate the Cole Memo’s enforcement priorities. The DOJ did not provide (and has not provided since) specific guidelines for what regulatory and enforcement systems would be deemed sufficient under the Cole Memo. In light of limited investigative and prosecutorial resources, the Cole Memo concluded that the DOJ should be focused on addressing only the most significant threats related to cannabis, such as distribution of cannabis from states where cannabis is legal to those where cannabis is illegal, the diversion of cannabis revenues to illicit drug cartels and sales of cannabis to minors.
On January 4, 2018, former U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions issued the Sessions Memo, which rescinded the Cole Memo. The Sessions Memo stated, in part, that current law reflects “Congress’ determination that cannabis is a dangerous drug and cannabis activity is a serious crime,” and Mr. Sessions directed all U.S. Attorneys to enforce the laws enacted by Congress by following well-established principles when pursuing prosecutions related to cannabis activities. The Company is not aware of any prosecutions of investment companies doing routine business with licensed marijuana related businesses in light of the DOJ position following issuance of the Sessions Memo. However, there can be no assurance that the federal government will not enforce federal laws relating to cannabis in the future. As a result of the Sessions Memo, federal prosecutors are now free to utilize their prosecutorial discretion to decide whether to prosecute cannabis activities, despite the existence of state-level laws that may be inconsistent with federal prohibitions. No direction was given to federal prosecutors in the Sessions Memo as to the priority they should ascribe to such cannabis activities, and thus it is uncertain how active U.S. federal prosecutors will be in relation to such activities.
Federal prosecutors appear to continue to use the Cole Memo’s priorities as an enforcement guide. Merrick Garland, who became Attorney General on March 10, 2021 has indicated that he would deprioritize enforcement of low-level cannabis crimes such as possession, and has shared his view that the government should focus on large-scale criminal enterprises that circumvent state legalization laws instead of going after people who abide by local cannabis policies. The Company believes it is too soon to determine what prosecutorial effects will be created by the rescission of the Cole Memo or any replacement thereof and when or if the Sessions Memo will be rescinded. President Joseph R. Biden, who assumed office in January 2021, has not yet indicated whether and when he will decriminalize or legalize cannabis and has previously stated that he is opposed to legalization. The sheer size of the cannabis industry, in addition to participation by state and local governments and investors, suggests that a large-scale federal enforcement operation would more than likely create unwanted political backlash for the DOJ and the current administration. It is also possible that the change of Congressional leadership in January 2021 could change the priorities of Congress and encourage reconciliation of federal and state laws. Regardless, at this time, cannabis remains a Schedule I controlled substance at the federal level. The U.S. federal government has always reserved the right to enforce federal law in regard to the sale and disbursement of medical or adult use cannabis, even if state law authorizes such sale and disbursement. It is unclear whether the risk of enforcement has been altered.
One legislative safeguard for the medical cannabis industry, appended to the federal budget bill, remains in place following the rescission of the Cole Memo. For fiscal years 2015, 2016, 2017 and 2018, Congress adopted the Rohrabacher-Blumenauer Amendment to prevent the federal government from using congressionally appropriated funds to enforce federal cannabis laws against regulated medical cannabis actors operating in compliance with state and local law. The Rohrabacher-Blumenauer Amendment was included in the fiscal year 2018 budget passed on March 23, 2018. The Rohrabacher-Blumenauer Amendment was included in the consolidated appropriations bill signed into legislation by former President Trump in February 2019. In signing the Rohrabacher-Blumenauer Amendment, former President Trump issued a signing statement noting that the Rohrabacher-Blumenauer Amendment “provides that the Department of Justice may not use any funds to prevent implementation of medical marijuana laws by various States and territories,” and further stating “I will treat this provision consistent with the President’s constitutional responsibility to faithfully execute the laws of the United States.” On June 20, 2019, the House approved a broader amendment that, in addition to protecting state medical cannabis programs, would also protect state adult use programs. On September 26, 2019, the Senate Appropriations Committee declined to take up the broader amendment but did approve the Rohrabacher-Blumenauer Amendment for the fiscal year 2020 spending bill. On September 27, 2019, the Rohrabacher-Blumenauer Amendment was renewed as part of a stopgap spending bill, in effect through November 21, 2019, and was then renewed through a series of stopgap spending bills passed in 2020. On December 27, 2020, the amendment was renewed through the signing of the fiscal year 2021 omnibus spending bill, effective through September 30, 2021. Despite the rescission of the Cole Memo, the DOJ appears to continue to adhere to the enforcement priorities set forth in the Cole Memo.
The Cole Memo and the Rohrabacher-Blumenauer Amendment gave licensed cannabis operators (particularly medical cannabis operators) and investors in states with legal regimes greater certainty regarding the DOJ’s enforcement priorities and the risk of operating cannabis businesses. While the Sessions Memo has introduced some uncertainty regarding federal enforcement, the cannabis industry continues to experience growth in legal medical and adult use markets across the United States. Vice President Kamala Harris is the lead sponsor of the Marijuana Opportunity, Reinvestment, and Expungement (MORE) Act, which seeks to end the federal prohibition of marijuana, among other things, but in March 2020, it was reported that Vice President Harris has adopted the same position as President Biden, who opposes legalization. Currently, there is no guarantee that state laws legalizing and regulating the sale and use of cannabis will remain in place or that local governmental authorities will not limit the applicability of state laws within their respective jurisdictions. Unless and until the U.S. Congress amends the CSA with respect to cannabis (and as to the timing or scope of any such potential amendments there can be no assurance), there is a risk that federal authorities may enforce current U.S. federal law criminalizing cannabis.
Although the U.S. Supreme Court has ruled that it is the federal government that has the right to regulate and criminalize cannabis, and federal law criminalizing the use of marijuana preempts state laws that legalize its use, cannabis is largely regulated at the state level.
State laws that permit and regulate the production, distribution and use of cannabis for adult use or medical purposes are in direct conflict with the CSA, which makes cannabis use and possession federally illegal. Although certain states and territories of the U.S. authorize medical and/or adult use cannabis production and distribution by licensed or registered entities, under U.S. federal law, the possession, use, cultivation and transfer of cannabis and any related drug paraphernalia is illegal and any such acts are criminal acts under federal law under any and all circumstances under the CSA. Although the Company’s activities are believed to be compliant with applicable state and local laws, strict compliance with state and local laws with respect to cannabis may neither absolve the Company of liability under U.S. federal law, nor may it provide a defense to any federal proceeding which may be brought against the Company.
As of December 31, 2020, 35 states, plus the District of Columbia (and the territories of Guam, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands and the Northern Mariana Islands), have legalized the cultivation and sale of cannabis for medical purposes. In 15 of those states, the sale and possession of cannabis is legal for both medical and adult use, and the District of Columbia has legalized adult use but not commercial sale. In November 2020, voters in Arizona, Montana, New Jersey and South Dakota voted by referendum to legalize cannabis for adult use, and voters in Mississippi and South Dakota voted to legalized cannabis for medical use, and in February 2021, the Virginia legislature approved a bill that would legalize cannabis for adult use beginning in 2024. The Virginia bill is awaiting signature by the governor, and if signed, Virginia will be the first southern state to legalize cannabis for adult use. Also in February 2021, New Jersey Governor Phil Murphy signed three bills into law that legalize cannabis for adult use.
The Company will focus heavily on the growth of a diversified revenue stream in 2021. We intend to accomplish this by prospecting new advisory services across the country for private, public, and municipal clients. We believe that strategic real estate and sustainability services are likely to emerge as the growth engine for Zoned Properties. We are moving to take advantage of new opportunities.
Pursuant to the terms of the several lease amendments our Significant Tenants, among other things, base rent base rent was abated from June 1, 2020 to July 31, 2020 on all of our Significant Tenant leases which decreased our cash flow from operation during the year ended December 31, 2020 by $179,000. In addition, the parties agreed that from the period from May 31, 2020 to June 30, 2022, our Significant Tenants will invest a combined total of at least $8,000,000 improvements in and to the properties in Chino Valley and Tempe prior to June 30, 2022. Any increase in the rentable area of the leased premises will result in an increase in all amounts calculated based on the same, including, without limitation, base rent.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide. We are monitoring this closely, and although operations have not been materially affected by the COVID-19 outbreak to date, the ultimate duration and severity of the outbreak and its impact on the economic environment and our business is uncertain. Currently, all of the properties in our portfolio are open to our Significant Tenants and their customers and will remain open pursuant to state and local government requirements. We did not experience in 2020, and we do not foresee in 2021, any material changes to our operations from COVID-19. Our tenants are continuing to generate revenue at these properties and they have continued to make rental payments in full and on time and we believe the tenants’ liquidity position is sufficient to cover its expected rental obligations. Accordingly, while we do not anticipate an impact on our operations, we cannot estimate the duration of the pandemic and potential impact on our business if the properties must close or if the tenants are otherwise unable or unwilling to make rental payments. In addition, a severe or prolonged economic downturn could result in a variety of risks to our business, including weakened demand for our properties and a decreased ability to raise additional capital when needed on acceptable terms, if at all.
Results of Operations
The following comparative analysis of results of operations was based primarily on comparative consolidated financial statements, footnotes and related information for the periods identified below and should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and the notes to those statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, which are included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. The results discussed below are for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Comparison of Results of Operations for the Years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, revenues consisted of the following:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, total revenues amounted to $1,215,442, including Significant Tenants revenues of $1,176,666, as compared to $1,260,421, including Significant Tenant revenues of $1,115,861, for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $44,979, or 3.6%.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the decrease in revenues was attributable to a decrease in advisory revenues of $54,464, or 37.7%, and an increase in rent revenues of $9,485, or 0.9%. Substantially all of the Company’s real estate properties are leased under triple-net leases to the Significant Tenants.
Operating expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2020, operating expenses amounted to $1,177,709 as compared to $1,259,706 for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $81,997, or 6.5%. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, operating expenses consisted of the following:
● For the year ended December 31, 2020, compensation and benefit expense decreased by $40,956, or 10.7%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 and was primarily attributable to a decrease in stock-based compensation related to the accretion of stock option expense and the value of shares issued for services, and a decrease in salary paid due to the reduction of one employee.
● For the year ended December 31, 2020, professional fees decreased by $38,256, or 16.3%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease in professional fees was primarily attributable to a decrease in public relations fees of $13,908, a decrease in legal fees of $7,853, a decrease in accounting fees of $5,515, and a decrease in other professional fees of $10,980 related to the decrease in advisory fees.
● General and administrative expenses consist of expenses such as rent expense, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, travel expenses, office expenses, telephone and internet expenses and other general operating expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2020, general and administrative expenses decreased by $5,493, or 2.8%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in travel expense of $4,736, a decrease in due and subscription fees of $7,030, a decrease in filing fees of $8,262 and a decrease in other general and administrative expenses of $10,888, offset by an increase in advertising and promotion expense of $3,084 related to attending conferences, an increase in technology fees of $7,076, an increase in rent expense of $4,520. and an increase in insurance expense of $2,039. Additionally, in the 2019 period, we received a tax refund of $8,704 which we did not receive in the 2020 period.
● For the year ended December 31, 2020, depreciation and amortization expense increased by $893, or 0.3%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
● For the year ended December 31, 2020, real estate taxes increased by $1,815, or 2.2%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income from operations
As a result of the factors described above, for the year ended December 31, 2020, income from operations amounted to $37,733 as compared to income from operations amounted to $715 for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $37,018, or 5,177.3%.
Other (expenses) income
Other (expenses) income primarily includes interest expense incurred on debt with third parties and a related party and also includes other income (expenses). For the year ended December 31, 2020, total other expenses, net amounted to $116,071 as compared to total other expenses, net of $12,996, respectively, representing an increase of $103,075, or 793.1%. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized other income of $108,204 related to a cash rebate received from the utility company as compared to nil during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net loss
As a result of the foregoing, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, net loss amounted to $78,338, or $(0.01) per common share (basic and diluted), and $12,281, or $(0.00) per common share (basic and diluted), respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is the ability of an enterprise to generate adequate amounts of cash to meet its needs for cash requirements. We had cash of $699,335 and $639,781 of cash as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Our primary uses of cash have been for compensation and benefits, fees paid to third parties for professional services, real estate taxes, general and administrative expenses, and the development of rental properties. All funds received have been expended in the furtherance of growing the business. We receive funds from the collection of rental income and advisory fees. The following trends are reasonably likely to result in changes in our liquidity over the near to long term:
● An increase in working capital requirements to finance our current business,
● Addition of administrative and sales personnel as the business grows, and
● The cost of being a public company.
We may need to raise additional funds, particularly if we are unable to generate positive cash flow as a result of our operations. We estimate that based on current plans and assumptions, that our available cash will be sufficient to satisfy our cash requirements under our present operating expectations for the next 12 months from the date of this annual report on Form 10-K. Other than revenue received from the lease of our rental properties and from advisory fees, we presently have no other significant alternative source of working capital.
We have used these funds to fund our operating expenses, pay our obligations, develop rental properties, and grow our company. We need to raise significant additional capital or debt financing to acquire new properties, to develop existing properties, and to assure we have sufficient working capital for our ongoing operations and debt obligations.
On March 19, 2020, we made an initial investment of $100,000 into KCB Jade Holdings, LLC (“KCB”). In exchange for the investment, KCB issued to us a convertible debenture (the “Debenture”) dated March 19, 2020 (the “Issuance Date”) in the original principal amount of $100,000. The Debenture bears interest at the rate of 6.5% per annum and matures on March 19, 2025 (the “Maturity Date”). Interest on the outstanding principal sum of the Debenture commences accruing on the Issuance Date and is computed on the basis of a 365-day year and the actual number of days elapsed and shall be payable annually due by the first day of each calendar anniversary following the Issuance Date. KCB may prepay the Debenture at any point after 18 months following the Issuance Date, in whole or in part. However, if KCB elects to prepay the Debenture prior to the Maturity Date or prior to any conversion as provided in the Debenture in whole or in part, we will be entitled to receive a number of KCB units, in addition to such prepayment amount, constituting 10% of the total outstanding units and 10% of the total percentage interest following such issuance and at the time of such issuance. On or after six months from the Issuance Date, we may convert all or a portion of the principal balance and all accrued and unpaid interest due into a number of units equal to the proportion of the outstanding amount being converted multiplied by 33% of the total number of units issued and outstanding at the time of conversion, constituting 33% of the total percentage interest (the “Conversion Percentage”). If KCB defaults on payment of the Debenture, we may, at its option, extend all conversion rights, through and including the date KCB tenders or attempts to tender payment in full of all amounts due under the Debenture. Conversion rights terminate upon acceptance by the Company of payment in full of principal, accrued interest and any other amounts due under the Debenture. If (i) KCB does not elect to exercise its rights of prepayment prior to the Maturity Date, (ii) we do not elect to exercise its rights of conversion, and (iii) KCB pays to the Company all outstanding principal and interest accrued and due under the terms of the Debenture on the Maturity Date, we will still be entitled to receive a number of units, in addition to such payment amount, constituting 8% of the total outstanding units and 8% of the total percentage interest following such issuance and at the time of such issuance.
On February 19, 2021, we made an additional investment of $100,000 into KCB (the “Additional Investment”). In exchange, the KCB issued to the Company an amended and restated convertible debenture (the “A&R Debenture”) on the Amendment Date. The A&R Debenture amends and restates in its entirety the Original Debenture. Pursuant to the A&R Debenture, the Company and KCB agreed to certain new terms that did not exist in the Original Debenture, which are described below.
● Interest Accrual Commencement: Pursuant to the A&R Debenture, interest on the Initial Investment begins accruing as of March 19, 2020, while interest on the Additional Investment begins accruing on February 19, 2021.
● Franchise Fees. In the A&R Debenture, the parties acknowledge that each time that KCB sells one of its franchise locations, KCB earns a fee (an “Initial Fee”), and that KCB also earns a fee when one of its franchise locations renews its franchise with KCB (a “Renewal Fee”). Pursuant to the A&R Debenture, the Company and KCB agreed that, as additional consideration for the Additional Investment, KCB will pay to the Company, in perpetuity, 5% of any Initial Fee received by KCB after the Amendment Date, as well as 5% of any Renewal Fee received by KCB related to any franchise locations sold after the Amendment Date, in each case to be paid within five (5) days of receipt of KCB thereof.
In addition, following the Amendment Date, KCB agreed not to decrease the amount it charges its franchise locations for an Initial Fee or any Renewal Fee as in effect on the Amendment Date without the prior written consent of the Company, or to take any other actions that would reduce the value of KCB’s obligation to the Company with respect to these franchise fee payments. KCB’s obligation to pay the Company the franchise fees listed above will survive any termination, repayment or conversion of the A&R Debenture. Failure by KCB to pay the Company the franchise fees in the manner described above will result in an event of default, and, among other things, any due and unpaid franchise fees will accrue interest at 12% per year from the date the obligation was due.
Apart from the terms described above, the terms of the A&R Debenture are substantially identical to the terms of the Original Debenture.
Our future operations are dependent on our ability to manage our current cash balance, on the collection of rental and advisory revenues and the attainment of new advisory clients. Our real estate properties are leased to Significant Tenants under triple-net leases for which terms vary. We monitor the credit of these tenants to stay abreast of any material changes in credit quality. We monitor tenant credit by (1) reviewing financial statements and related metrics and information that are publicly available or that are provided to us upon request, and (2) monitoring the timeliness of rent collections. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had an asset concentration related to our Significant Tenant leases. As of December 31, 2020 and 2019, these Significant Tenants represented approximately 83.2% and 90.7% of total assets, respectively. If our Significant Tenants are prohibited from operating due to federal or state regulations or due to COVID-19, or cannot pay their rent, we may not have enough working capital to support our operations and we would have to seek out new tenants at rental rates per square less than our current rate per square foot.
We included audited financial statements of our Significant Tenants as Exhibits 99.1 and 99.2 to this Annual Report on Form 10-K since such audited financial statements represent material information and are necessary for the protection of investors.
We may secure additional financing to acquire and develop additional and existing properties. Financing transactions may include the issuance of equity or debt securities, obtaining credit facilities, or other financing mechanisms. Even if we are able to raise the funds required, it is possible that we could incur unexpected costs and expenses or experience unexpected cash requirements that would force us to seek alternative financing. Furthermore, if we issue additional equity or debt securities, stockholders may experience additional dilution or the new equity securities may have rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of existing holders of our common stock. The inability to obtain additional capital may restrict our ability to grow our business operations.
Cash Flow
For the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net cash flow provided by operating activities was $170,040 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared net cash flow provided by operating activities of $284,914 for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing a decrease of $114,874.
● Net cash flow provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily reflected net loss of $78,338 adjusted for the add-back of non-cash items consisting of depreciation and amortization of $362,833, stock-based compensation expense of $24,200 and accretion of stock-based stock option expense of $24,231, offset by changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily consisting of an increase in deferred rent receivable of $173,757 attributable to the abatement of May and June 2020 rent as part of lease amendments effective on May 31, 2020.
● Net cash flow provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily reflected net loss of $12,281 adjusted for the add-back of non-cash items consisting of depreciation and amortization of $361,940, stock-based compensation expense of $31,100 and accretion of stock-based stock option expense of $23,612, offset by changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily consisting of a decrease in accounts payable of $(117,984), and net changes in other operating assets and liabilities of $(1,473).
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash flow used in investing activities amounted to $110,486. This use of cash was attributable to cash used for an investment in a convertible note receivable of $100,000 as discussed above and cash used in the improvement of rental properties of $9,563 and for the purchase of property and equipment of $923.We did not have any investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Contractual Obligations
We have certain fixed contractual obligations and commitments that include future estimated payments. Changes in our business needs, cancellation provisions, changing interest rates, and other factors may result in actual payments differing from the estimates. We cannot provide certainty regarding the timing and amounts of payments. We have presented below a summary of the most significant assumptions used in our determination of amounts presented in the tables, in order to assist in the review of this information within the context of our consolidated financial position, results of operations, and cash flows.
The following tables summarize our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands), and the effect these obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any other financial guarantees or other commitments to guarantee the payment obligations of any third parties. We have not entered into any derivative contracts that are indexed to our shares and classified as shareholders’ equity or that are not reflected in our consolidated financial statements. Furthermore, we do not have any retained or contingent interest in assets transferred to an unconsolidated entity that serves as credit, liquidity or market risk support to such entity. We do not have any variable interest in any unconsolidated entity that provides financing, liquidity, market risk or credit support to us or engages in leasing, hedging or research and development services with us.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our audited and unaudited consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We continually evaluate our estimates, including those related to income taxes, and the valuation of equity transactions. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Any future changes to these estimates and assumptions could cause a material change to our reported amounts of revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the unaudited consolidated financial statements.
Rental Properties
Rental properties are carried at cost less accumulated depreciation and amortization. Betterments, major renovations and certain costs directly related to the improvement of rental properties are capitalized. Maintenance and repair expenses are charged to expense as incurred. Depreciation is recognized on a straight-line basis over estimated useful lives of the assets, which range from 5 to 39 years. Tenant improvements are amortized on a straight-line basis over the lives of the related leases, which approximate the useful lives of the assets.
Upon the acquisition of real estate, we assess the fair value of acquired assets (including land, buildings and improvements, identified intangibles, such as acquired above-market leases and acquired in-place leases) and acquired liabilities (such as acquired below-market leases) and allocate the purchase price based on these assessments. The Company assesses fair value based on estimated cash flow projections that utilize appropriate discount and capitalization rates and available market information. Estimates of future cash flows are based on a number of factors including historical operating results, known trends, and market/economic conditions.
Our properties are individually reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. An impairment exists when the carrying amount of an asset exceeds the aggregate projected future cash flows over the anticipated holding period on an undiscounted basis. An impairment loss is measured based on the excess of the property’s carrying amount over its estimated fair value. Impairment analyses are based on our current plans, intended holding periods and available market information at the time the analyses are prepared. If our estimates of the projected future cash flows, anticipated holding periods, or market conditions change, our evaluation of impairment losses may be different and such differences could be material to our consolidated financial statements. The evaluation of anticipated cash flows is subjective and is based, in part, on assumptions regarding future occupancy, rental rates and capital requirements that could differ materially from actual results.
We have capitalized land, which is not subject to depreciation.
Revenue recognition
Effective on January 1, 2018, we adopted the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09 and Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). ASU 2014-09, as amended by subsequent ASUs on the topic, establishes a single comprehensive model for entities to use in accounting for revenue arising from contracts with customers and supersedes most of the existing revenue recognition guidance. This standard requires an entity to recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services and also requires certain additional disclosures. We adopted this standard using the modified retrospective approach, which requires applying the new standard to all existing contracts not yet completed as of the effective date and recording a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the beginning of the fiscal year of adoption. The adoption of ASU 2014-09 did not have any impact on the process for, timing of, and presentation and disclosure of revenue recognition from contracts with tenants.
Rental income includes base rents that each tenant pays in accordance with the terms of its respective lease and is reported on a straight-line basis over the non-cancellable term of the lease, which includes the effects of rent abatements under the leases. We commence rental revenue recognition when the tenant takes possession of the leased space or controls the physical use of the leased space and the leased space is substantially ready for its intended use.
Revenues from advisory services is recognized when the Company performs services pursuant to its agreements with customers and collectability is reasonably assured.
Stock-based compensation
Stock-based compensation is accounted for based on the requirements of ASC 718 - “Compensation - Stock Compensation”, which requires recognition in the financial statements of the cost of employee, director, and non-employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments over the period the employee, director, or non-employee is required to perform the services in exchange for the award (presumptively, the vesting period). The ASC also requires measurement of the cost of employee, director, and non-employee services received in exchange for an award based on the grant-date fair value of the award. The Company has elected to recognize forfeitures as they occur as permitted under ASU 2016-09 Improvements to Employee Share-Based Payment.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Effective January 1, 2019, we adopted ASU 2016-02, “Leases (Topic 842)” using a modified retrospective method. On adoption we also applied the package of practical expedients to leases, where we are the lessee or lessor, that commenced before the effective date whereby we elected to not reassess the following: (i) whether any expired or existing contracts contain leases; (ii) the lease classification for any expired or existing leases; and (iii) initial direct costs for any existing leases.
ASU 2016-02, “Leases (Topic 842)” sets out the principles for the recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure of leases for both parties to a contract (i.e., lessees and lessors). The new standard requires lessees to apply a dual approach, classifying leases as either finance or operating leases based on the principle of whether or not the lease is effectively a financed purchase by the lessee. This classification will determine whether lease expense is recognized based on an effective interest method or on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. A lessee is also required to recognize a right-of-use asset and a lease liability for all leases with a term of greater than 12 months regardless of their classification. Leases with a term of 12 months or less will be accounted for similar to existing guidance for operating leases today. The new standard requires lessors to account for leases using an approach that is substantially equivalent to existing guidance for sales-type leases, direct financing leases and operating leases.
For contracts entered into on or after the effective date, where we are the lessee, at the inception of a contract the Company assess whether the contract is, or contains, a lease. Our assessment is based on: (1) whether the contract involves the use of a distinct identified asset, (2) whether we obtain the right to substantially all the economic benefit from the use of the asset throughout the period, and (3) whether we have the right to direct the use of the asset. We allocate the consideration in the contract to each lease component based on its relative stand-alone price to determine the lease payments. Leases entered into prior to January 1, 2019, are accounted for under ASC 840 and were not reassessed.
For leases entered into on or after the effective date, where we are the lessor, at the inception of the contract we assess whether the contract is a sales-type, direct financing or operating lease by reviewing the terms of the lease and determining if the lessee obtains control of the underlying asset implicitly or explicitly.
If a change to a pre-existing lease occurs, we evaluate if the modification results in a separate new lease or a modified lease. A new lease results when a modification provides additional right of use. The new lease or modified lease is then reassessed to determine its classification based on the modified terms.
The adoption of ASU 2016-02 did not have a material impact on the operating leases where we are the lessor. We will continue to record revenues from rental properties for our operating leases on a straight-line basis. For leases where we are a lessee, primarily for our administrative office lease, we analyzed if it would be required to record a lease liability and a right of use asset on our consolidated balance sheets at fair value upon adoption of ASU 2016-02. Since the terms of the Company’s operating lease for its office space is 12 months or less, pursuant to ASC 842, we determined that the lease meets the definition of a short-term lease and we did not recognize the right-of use asset and lease liability arising from this lease.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective accounting pronouncements, if adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying consolidated financial statements.