Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations describes the principal factors affecting the results of our operations, financial condition, and changes in financial condition. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the accompanying audited financial statements, and notes thereto, included elsewhere in this report. The information contained in this discussion is subject to a number of risks and uncertainties. We urge you to review carefully the sections of this report entitled “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” for a more complete discussion of the risks and uncertainties associated with an investment in our securities.
Dollar amounts and numbers of shares that follow in this Item 7 are presented in thousands, except per share amounts.
OVERVIEW
Ecoark Holdings is a diversified holding company, incorporated in the state of Nevada on November 19, 2007. Through Ecoark Holdings wholly owned subsidiaries, the Company has operations in three areas: (i) oil and gas, including exploration, production and drilling operations on over 20,000 cumulative acres of active mineral leases in Texas, Louisiana, and Mississippi and transportation services, (ii) post-harvest shelf-life and freshness food management technology, and (iii) financial services including investing in a select number of early stage startups. The Company’s subsidiaries include Banner Midstream, White River, Shamrock, Pinnacle Frac, Capstone, Zest Labs and Trend Holdings.
Through Pinnacle Frac the Company provides transportation of frac sand and logistics services to major hydraulic fracturing and drilling operations. Capstone procures and finances equipment to oilfield transportation service contractors. These two operating subsidiaries of Banner Midstream are revenue producing entities.
Through White River and Shamrock, we are engaged in oil and gas exploration, production, and drilling operations on over 20,000 cumulative acres of active mineral leases in Texas, Louisiana, and Mississippi.
While the Company’s consolidated financial information for the fiscal ended March 31, 2021 reflects the operating results of Banner Midstream which currently comprises the Company’s exploration and production and transportation business, Banner Midstream’s operating results are not included in the Company’s consolidated financial information for the fiscal ended March 31, 2020. The operating results of Trend Holdings are included in the Company’s consolidated financial information beginning May 31, 2019.
Fiscal Year 2021 Highlights
During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, the Company focused its efforts to a considerable extent on expanding its exploration and production footprint and capabilities by acquiring real property and working interests in oil and gas mineral leases.
On June 11, 2020, the Company acquired certain energy assets from SR Acquisition I, LLC for $1 as part of the ongoing bankruptcy reorganization of Sanchez Energy Corporation. The transaction includes the transfer of 262 total wells in Mississippi and Louisiana, approximately 9,000 acres of active mineral leases, and drilling production materials and equipment. The 262 total wells include 57 active producing wells, 19 active disposal wells, 136 shut-in with future utility wells, and 50 shut-in pending plugging wells. Included in the assignment are 4 wells in the Tuscaloosa Marine Shale formation.
On June 18, 2020, the Company acquired certain energy assets from SN TMS, LLC for $1 as part of the ongoing bankruptcy reorganization of Sanchez Energy Corporation. The transaction includes the transfer of wells, active mineral leases, and drilling production materials and equipment.
On August 14, 2020, the Company entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (the “Asset Purchase Agreement”) by and among the Company, White River E&P LLC, a Texas Limited Liability Company and a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company Rabb Resources, LTD. and Claude Rabb, the sole owner of Rabb Resources, LTD. Pursuant to the Asset Purchase Agreement, the Company completed the acquisition of certain assets of Rabb Resources, LTD. The acquired assets consisted of certain real property and working interests in oil and gas mineral leases. The Company in June 2020 previously provided for bridge financing to Rabb Resources, LTD under the $225 Senior Secured Convertible Promissory Note. As consideration for entering into the Asset Purchase Agreement, the Company agreed to pay Rabb Resources, LTD. A total of $3,500 consisting of (i) $1,500 in cash, net of $304 in outstanding amounts related to the note receivable and accrued interest receivable, and (ii) $2,000 payable in common stock of the Company, which based on the closing price of the common stock as of the date of the Asset Purchase Agreement equaled 103 shares. The Company accounted for this acquisition as an asset acquisition under ASC 805 and that the Company has early adopted the amendments of Regulation S-X dated May 21, 2020 and has concluded that this acquisition was not significant. Accordingly, as a result of the amendment, the presentation of the Rabb Resources, LTD historical financial statements under Rule 3-05 and related pro forma information under Article 11 of Regulation S-X, respectively, were not required to be presented.
On September 4, 2020, White River SPV 3, LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Banner Midstream entered into an Agreement and Assignment of Oil, Gas and Mineral Lease with a privately held limited liability company (the “Assignor”). Under the Lease Assignment, the Assignor assigned a 100% working interest (75% net revenue interest) in a certain oil and gas lease covering in excess of 1,600 acres (the “Lease”), and White River paid $1,500 in cash to the Assignor. The Company accounted for this acquisition as an asset acquisition under ASC 805 and that the Company has early adopted the amendments of Regulation S-X dated May 21, 2020 and has concluded that this acquisition was not significant. Accordingly, as a result of the amendment, the presentation of the historical financial statements under Rule 3-05 and related pro forma information under Article 11 of Regulation S-X, respectively, were not required to be presented.
On October 9, 2020, the Company and White River SPV, entered into a Participation Agreement (the “Participation Agreement”) by and among the Company, White River SPV, BlackBrush Oil & Gas, L.P. (“BlackBrush”) and GeoTerre, LLC, an unrelated privately-held limited liability company (the “Assignor”), to conduct drilling of wells in the Austin Chalk formation.
Pursuant to the Participation Agreement, the Company and White River SPV have agreed, among other things, to pre-fund a majority of the cost, approximately $5,800, associated with the drilling and completion of an initial deep horizontal well in the Austin Chalk formation of which $3,387 has been expensed as drilling costs. The Participation Agreement requires the estimated amount of the drilling costs that were paid into a designated escrow account by the commencement of drilling in January 2021. BlackBrush has agreed to assign to the other parties to the Participation Agreement, subject to certain exceptions and limitations specified therein, specified portions of its leasehold working interest in certain Austin Chalk formation units. The Participation Agreement provides for an initial allocation of the working interests and net revenue interests among the assignor, BlackBrush and the Company and then a re-allocation upon payout or payment of drilling and completion costs for each well drilled. Prior to payout, the Company will own 90% of the working interest and 67.5% of the net revenue interest in each well. Following payout, the Company will own 70% of working interest and 52.5% net revenue interest in each well.
The Parties to the Participation Agreement, except for the Company, had previously entered into a Joint Operating Agreement, dated September 4, 2020 (the “Operating Agreement”) establishing an area of mutual interest, including the Austin Chalk formation, and governing the parties’ rights and obligations with respect to drilling, completion and operation of wells therein. The Participation Agreement and the Operating Agreement require, among other things, that White River SPV and the Company drill and complete at least one horizontal Austin Chalk well with a certain minimum lateral each calendar year and/or maintain leasehold by paying its proportionate share of any rental payments.
On September 30, 2020, the Company and White River Energy, LLC (“White River Energy”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company entered into three asset purchase agreements (the “Asset Purchase Agreements”) with privately-held limited liability companies to acquire working interests in the Harry O’Neal oil and gas mineral lease (the “O’Neal OGML”), the related well bore, crude oil inventory and equipment. Immediately prior to the acquisition, White River Energy owned an approximately 61% working interest in the O’Neal OGML oil well and a 100% working interest in any future wells.
The purchase prices of these leases were $126, $312 and $312, respectively, totaling $750. The consideration paid to the Sellers was in the form of 68 shares of common stock. The Company accounted for this acquisition as an asset acquisition under ASC 805 and that the Company has early adopted the amendments of Regulation S-X dated May 21, 2020 and has concluded that this acquisition was not significant. Accordingly, as a result of the amendment, the presentation of the historical financial statements under Rule 3-05 and related pro forma information under Article 11 of Regulation S-X, respectively, were not required to be presented.
In February and March 2021, the Company acquired additional leases for $916 under the Blackbrush/Deshotel lease related to the Participation Agreement.
Reverse Stock Split
Effective with the opening of trading on December 17, 2020, the Company implemented a one-for-five reverse split of its issued and outstanding common stock and a simultaneous proportionate reduction of its authorized common stock. The reverse stock split was effected without obtaining stockholder approval as permitted by Nevada law, and the authorized common stock was proportionately reduced to 40,000 shares. All share and per share figures are reflected on a post-split basis herein.
Ratification of Authorized Capital Increase
At the special meeting held on December 29, 2020, the stockholders of the Company ratified the previously approved increase of the number of shares of common stock the Company is authorized to issue from 30,000 shares to 40,000 shares.
Authorized Capital Reduction
Effective December 29, 2020, the Company amended its articles of incorporation to reduce its authorized common stock from 40,000 to 30,000.
Registered Direct Offering of Common Stock and Warrants
On December 31, 2020, the Company completed a registered direct offering, whereby the Company issued 889 shares of common stock and 889 accompanying warrants to purchase common stock to one institutional investor under the effective Form S-3 at $9.00 per share and accompanying warrant for a total of $8,000 in gross proceeds, before placement agent fees and other offering expenses. The warrants are exercisable for a two-year term at a strike price of $10.00 per share. The Company granted 62 warrants to the placement agent as compensation in addition to the $560 cash commission received by the placement agent. The placement agent warrants are exercisable at $11.25 per share and expire on January 2, 2023.
Our principal executive offices are located at 303 Pearl Parkway, Suite 200, San Antonio, TX 78215, and our telephone number is (800) 762-7293. Our website address is http://ecoarkusa.com/. Our website and the information contained on, or that can be accessed through, our website is not deemed to be incorporated by reference in and are not considered part of this report.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a profound effect on the U.S. and global economy and may continue to affect the economy and the industries in which we operate, depending on the vaccine rollouts and the emergence of virus mutations.
COVID-19 did not have a material effect on the Consolidated Statements of Operations or the Consolidated Balance Sheets included in this Form 10-K. However, it did have a material impact on our management’s ability to operate effectively. The impact included the difficulties of working remotely from home including slow Internet connection, the inability of our accounting and financial officers to collaborate as effectively as they would otherwise have in an office environment and issues arising from mandatory state quarantines.
While it is not possible at this time to estimate with sufficient certainty the continued impact that COVID-19 could have on the Company’s business, future outbreaks and the measures taken by federal, state, local and foreign governments could disrupt the operation of the Company’s business. The COVID-19 outbreak and mitigation measures have also had and may continue to have an adverse impact on global and domestic economic conditions, including reducing the demand for oil, which could have an adverse effect on the Company’s business and financial condition, including on its potential to conduct financings on terms acceptable to the Company, if at all. In addition, the Company has taken temporary precautionary measures intended to help minimize the risk of the virus to its employees, including temporarily requiring employees to work remotely, and discouraging employee attendance at in-person work-related meetings, which could negatively affect the Company’s business. The extent to which the COVID-19 outbreak impacts the Company’s results will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning the severity of the virus and the actions to contain its impact.
The CARES Act includes, among other things, provisions relating to payroll tax credits and deferrals, net operating loss carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credits and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property. The CARES Act also established a Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”), whereby certain small business are eligible for a loan to fund payroll expenses, rent and related costs. We had received funding under the PPP, and a majority of that as indicated in our Consolidated Statement of Operations has been forgiven.
Critical Accounting Policies, Estimates and Assumptions
The critical accounting policies listed below are those the Company deems most important to their operations.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. These estimates include, but are not limited to, management’s estimate of provisions required for uncollectible accounts receivable, fair value of assets held for sale and assets and liabilities acquired, impaired value of equipment and intangible assets, including goodwill, asset retirement obligations, estimates of discount rates in lease, liabilities to accrue, fair value of derivative liabilities associated with warrants, cost incurred in the satisfaction of performance obligations, permanent and temporary differences related to income taxes and determination of the fair value of stock awards.
Actual results could differ from those estimates.
The estimates of proved, probable and possible oil and gas reserves are used as significant inputs in determining the depletion of oil and gas properties and the impairment of proved and unproved oil and gas properties. There are numerous uncertainties inherent in the estimation of quantities of proven, probable and possible reserves and in the projection of future rates of production and the timing of development expenditures. Similarly, evaluations for impairment of proved and unproved oil and gas properties are subject to numerous uncertainties including, among others, estimates of future recoverable reserves and commodity price outlooks. Actual results could differ from the estimates and assumptions utilized.
Oil and Gas Properties
The Company uses the full cost method of accounting for its investment in oil and natural gas properties. Under the full cost method of accounting, all costs associated with acquisition, exploration and development of oil and gas reserves, including directly related overhead costs are capitalized. General and administrative costs related to production and general overhead are expensed as incurred.
All capitalized costs of oil and gas properties, including the estimated future costs to develop proved reserves, are amortized on the unit of production method using estimates of proved reserves. Disposition of oil and gas properties are accounted for as a reduction of capitalized costs, with no gain or loss recognized unless such adjustment would significantly alter the relationship between capitalized costs and proved reserves of oil and gas, in which case the gain or loss is recognized in operations. Unproved properties and development projects are not amortized until proved reserves associated with the projects can be determined or until impairment occurs. If the results of an assessment indicate that the properties are impaired, the amount of the loss from operations before income taxes and the adjusted carrying amount of the unproved properties is amortized on the unit-of-production method.
Limitation on Capitalized Costs
Under the full-cost method of accounting, we are required, at the end of each reporting period, to perform a test to determine the limit on the book value of our oil and gas properties (the “Ceiling” test). If the capitalized costs of our oil and natural gas properties, net of accumulated amortization and related deferred income taxes, exceed the Ceiling, the excess or impairment is charged to expense. The expense may not be reversed in future periods, even though higher oil and gas prices may subsequently increase the Ceiling. The Ceiling is defined as the sum of: (a) the present value, discounted at 10% and assuming continuation of existing economic conditions, of (1) estimated future gross revenues from proved reserves, which is computed using oil and gas prices determined as the unweighted arithmetic average of the first-day-of-the-month price for each month within the 12-month hedging arrangements pursuant to SAB 103, less (2) estimated future expenditures (based on current costs) to be incurred in developing and producing the proved reserves; plus, (b) the cost of properties being amortized; plus, (c) the lower of cost or estimated fair value of unproven properties included in the costs being amortized; net of (d) the related tax effects related to the difference between the book and tax basis of our oil and natural gas properties.
Oil and Gas Reserves
Reserve engineering is a subjective process that is dependent upon the quality of available data and interpretation thereof, including evaluations and extrapolations of well flow rates and reservoir pressure. Estimates by different engineers often vary sometimes significantly. In addition, physical factors such as results of drilling, testing and production subsequent to the date of an estimate, as well as economic factors such as changes in product prices, may justify revision of such estimates. Because proved reserves are required to be estimated using recent prices of the evaluation, estimated reserve quantities can be significantly impacted by changes in product prices.
Inventories
Crude oil, products and merchandise inventories are carried at the lower of cost (last-in-first-out (LIFO)) or net realizable value. Inventory costs include expenditures and other charges directly and indirectly incurred in bringing the inventory to its existing condition and location.
Accounting for Asset Retirement Obligation
Asset retirement obligations (“ARO”) primarily represent the estimated present value of the amount the Company will incur to plug, abandon and remediate its producing properties at the projected end of their productive lives, in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws. The Company determined its ARO by calculating the present value of the estimated cash flows related to the obligation. The retirement obligation is recorded as a liability at its estimated present value as of the obligation’s inception, with an offsetting increase to proved properties or to exploration costs.
Revenue Recognition
The Company accounts for revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers.
The Company accounts for a contract when it has been approved and committed to, each party’s rights regarding the goods or services to be transferred have been identified, the payment terms have been identified, the contract has commercial substance, and collectability is probable. Revenue is generally recognized net of allowances for returns and any taxes collected from customers and subsequently remitted to governmental authorities.
Revenue recognition for multiple-element arrangements requires judgment to determine if multiple elements exist, whether elements can be accounted for as separate units of accounting, and if so, the fair value for each of the elements.
Revenue from software license agreements of Zest Labs is recognized over time or at a point in time depending on the evaluation of when the customer obtains control of the promised goods or services over the term of the agreement. For agreements where the software requires continuous updates to provide the intended functionality, revenue is recognized over the term of the agreement. For software as a service (“SaaS”) contracts that include multiple performance obligations, including hardware, perpetual software licenses, subscriptions, term licenses, maintenance and other services, the Company allocates revenue to each performance obligation based on estimates of the price that would be charged to the customer for each promised product or service if it were sold on a standalone basis. For contracts for new products and services where standalone pricing has not been established, the Company allocates revenue to each performance obligation based on estimates using the adjusted market assessment approach, the expected cost plus a margin approach or the residual approach as appropriate under the circumstances. Contracts are typically on thirty-day payment terms from when the Company satisfies the performance obligation in the contract. The Company did not have material revenue from software license agreements in the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Revenue under master service agreements is recorded upon the performance obligation being satisfied. Typically, the satisfaction of the performance obligation occurs upon the frac sand load being delivered to the customer site and this load being successfully invoiced and accepted by the Company’s factoring agent.
The Company recognizes revenue under ASC 606 when: (i) the Company receives notification of the successful sale of a load of crude oil to a buyer; (ii) the buyer will provide a price based on the average monthly price of crude oil in the most recent month; and (iii) cash is received the following month from the crude oil buyer.
The Company accounts for contract costs in accordance with ASC Topic 340-40, Contracts with Customers. The Company recognizes the cost of sales of a contract as expense when incurred or at the time a performance obligation is satisfied. The Company recognizes an asset from the costs to fulfil a contract only if the costs relate directly to a contract, the costs generate or enhance resources that will be used in satisfying a performance obligation in the future and the costs are expected to be recovered. The incremental costs of obtaining a contract are capitalized unless the costs would have been incurred regardless of whether the contract was obtained.
Cost of sales for Pinnacle Frac includes all direct expenses incurred to produce the revenue for the period. This includes, but is not limited to, direct employee labor, direct contract labor and fuel.
Fair Value Measurements
ASC 820 Fair Value Measurements defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value in accordance with GAAP, and expands disclosure about fair value measurements. ASC 820 classifies these inputs into the following hierarchy:
Level 1 inputs: Quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets.
Level 2 inputs: Quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active; and model-derived valuations whose inputs are observable or whose significant value drivers are observable.
Level 3 inputs: Instruments with primarily unobservable value drivers.
Segment Information
The Company follows the provisions of ASC 280-10 Segment Reporting. This standard requires that companies disclose operating segments based on the manner in which management disaggregates the Company in making internal operating decisions. The Company and its chief operating decision makers determined that the Company’s operations effective with the May 31, 2019, acquisition of Trend Holdings and the March 27, 2020 acquisition of Banner Midstream now consist of three segments, Trend Holdings (Finance), Banner Midstream (Commodities) and Zest Labs (Technology).
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company does not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. Management evaluates all of the Company’s financial instruments, including warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. The Company generally uses a Black-Scholes model, as applicable, to value the derivative instruments at inception and subsequent valuation dates when needed. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is remeasured at the end of each reporting period. The Black-Scholes model is used to estimate the fair value of the derivative liabilities.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40), Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contract’s in an Entity’s Own Equity. The ASU simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. Consequently, more convertible debt instruments will be reported as a single liability instrument with no separate accounting for embedded conversion features. The ASU removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, which will permit more equity contracts to qualify for it. The ASU simplifies the diluted net income per share calculation in certain areas. The ASU is effective for annual and interim periods beginning after December 31, 2021, and early adoption is permitted for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, and interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company is currently evaluating the impact that this new guidance will have on its consolidated financial statements.
In May 2021, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued ASU 2021-04 “Earnings Per Share (Topic 260), Debt-Modifications and Extinguishments (Subtopic 470-50), Compensation- Stock Compensation (Topic 718), and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815- 40) Issuer’s Accounting for Certain Modifications or Exchanges of Freestanding Equity-Classified Written Call Options” which clarifies and reduces diversity in an issuer’s accounting for modifications or exchanges of freestanding equity-classified written call options (for example, warrants) that remain equity classified after modification or exchange. An entity should measure the effect of a modification or an exchange of a freestanding equity-classified written call option that remains equity classified after modification or exchange as follows: i) for a modification or an exchange that is a part of or directly related to a modification or an exchange of an existing debt instrument or line-of-credit or revolving-debt arrangements (hereinafter, referred to as a “debt” or “debt instrument”), as the difference between the fair value of the modified or exchanged written call option and the fair value of that written call option immediately before it is modified or exchanged; ii) for all other modifications or exchanges, as the excess, if any, of the fair value of the modified or exchanged written call option over the fair value of that written call option immediately before it is modified or exchanged. The amendments in this Update are effective for all entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years. An entity should apply the amendments prospectively to modifications or exchanges occurring on or after the effective date of the amendments. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of this standard on its consolidated financial statements.
The Company does not discuss recent pronouncements that are not anticipated to have an impact on or are unrelated to its financial condition, results of operations, cash flows or disclosures.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended March 31, 2020
As the Company acquired Trend Holdings and Banner Midstream during the year ended March 31, 2020 the latter of which was acquired on March 27, 2020, many of the variances between operating revenues and operating expenditures are the result of these acquisitions and the periods are not comparable.
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended March 31, 2021 were $15,563 as compared to $581 for the year ended March 31, 2020, an increase of $14,982. The increase was primarily due to the addition of the oil and gas operations as the result of the Banner Midstream acquisition on March 27, 2020. Revenues were comprised of $478 and $175 in the financial segment; $0 and $173 in the technology segment; and $15,085 and $233 in the commodity segment for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Profit
Cost of revenues for the year ended March 31, 2021 was $14,727 as compared to $259 for the year ended March 31, 2020, an increase of $14,468. The increase was primarily due to the addition of the oil and gas operations as the result of the Banner Midstream acquisition on March 27, 2020. Cost of Revenues was comprised of $0 and $0 in the financial segment; $0 and $165 in the technology segment; and $14,727 and $94 in the commodity segment for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Gross margins decreased from 45% for the year ended March 31, 2020 to 5% for the year ended March 31, 2021 due to costs involved with executing the projects and changes in inventory of crude oil.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended March 31, 2021 were $19,437 as compared to $10,129 for the year ended March 31, 2020, an increase of $9,308. Operating expenses were comprised of $476 and $729 in the financial segment; $3,415 and $9,330 in the technology segment; and $15,546 and $70 in the commodity segment for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The $9,308 increase was due principally to the expenses, including wages and consulting fees, related to the addition of the oil and gas operations as the result of the Banner Midstream acquisition on March 27, 2020 and the depreciation, depletion, amortization and accretion for Banner Midstream in 2021 and 2020, partially offset by the reduction in the Zest Labs selling expenses.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended March 31, 2021 were $8,405 compared with $1,370 for the year ended March 31, 2020. Cost reduction initiatives were focused on salary related and professional fees for the technology segment offset by the costs incurred for Banner Midstream as this was acquired in March 2020.
Depreciation, Amortization, Depletion and Accretion
Depreciation, amortization, depletion and accretion expenses for the year ended March 31, 2021 were $1,902 compared to $286 for the year ended March 31, 2020. Depreciation, amortization, depletion and accretion expenses were comprised of $0 and $0 in the financial segment; $250 and $282 in the technology segment; and $1,652 and $4 in the commodity segment for the years ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The $1,616 increase resulted primarily from the acquisition of Banner Midstream and the depletion and accretion is the result of the oil and gas properties maintained by Banner Midstream. The technology and financing segment do not have depletion or accretion.
Research and Development
Research and development expense decreased 64% to $883 in the year ended March 31, 2021 compared with $2,472 in the year ended March 31, 2020. The $1,589 reduction in costs related primarily to the maturing of development of the Zest Labs freshness solutions.
Other Income (Expense)
Change in fair value of derivative liabilities for the year ended March 31, 2021 was a non-cash loss of ($18,518) as compared to a non-cash loss of ($369) for the year ended March 31, 2020. The $18,149 decrease was a result of the fluctuation in the stock price in the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the year ended March 31, 2020. In addition, there was a non-cash gain in the year ended March 31, 2021 from the extinguishment of the derivative liabilities that when converted to shares of common stock of $21,084 compared to ($2,099) in the prior year. In the year ended March 31, 2021, there was a non-cash loss on the conversion of debt and other liabilities to shares of common stock of $3,969, a gain on forgiveness of debt of PPP loans of $1,850 and a loss on the sale of fixed assets and abandonment of oil and gas properties of $105 and $109, respectively.
Interest expense, net of interest income, for the year ended March 31, 2021 was $2,520 as compared to $422 for the year ended March 31, 2020. The increase was the result of the interest incurred on the debt assumed in the Banner Midstream acquisition as well as the value related to the granting of warrants for interest of $2,042 and the amortization of debt discount of $149.
Net Loss
Net loss from continuing operations for the year ended March 31, 2021 was $20,888 as compared to $12,137 for the year ended March 31, 2020. The $8,751 increase in net loss was primarily due to the non-cash changes in the fair value of the derivative liability and the non-cash losses incurred on the conversion of debt to equity, offset by the non-cash gain on the exchange of warrants for common stock and forgiveness of debt of the PPP loans described herein. The net income (loss) was comprised of ($15) and ($554) in the financial segment; ($3,502) and ($11,637) in the technology segment; and net loss of ($17,371) and $52 in the commodity segment for the year ended March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity is the ability of a company to generate funds to support its current and future operations, satisfy its obligations, and otherwise operate on an ongoing basis. Significant factors in the management of liquidity are funds generated by operations, levels of accounts receivable and accounts payable and capital expenditures.
Net cash used in operating activities was ($12,639) for the year ended March 31, 2021, as compared to net cash used in operating activities of ($5,490) for the year ended March 31, 2020. Cash used in operating activities is related to the Company’s net loss partially offset by non-cash expenses, including share-based compensation and the change in the fair value of the derivative liability and net losses incurred in the conversion of debt and liabilities to shares of common stock as well as losses on the sale of fixed assets and abandonment of oil and gas properties.
Net cash used in investing activities was ($6,358) for the year ended March 31, 2021, as compared to ($775) net cash used in investing activities for the year ended March 31, 2020. Net cash used in investing activities in 2021 related to the advancement of a note receivable of $275, and the net purchases of fixed assets and oil and gas properties including drilling costs of $2,697.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended March 31, 2021 was $19,907 that included $24,287 (net of fees) raised via issuance of common stock in a direct registered offering, stock for the exercise of warrants and stock options, offset by proceeds and repayments of long-term debt and notes payable including related parties of $4,380. This compared with the year ended March 31, 2020 amounts of $6,427 provided by financing that included $1,137 provided through the credit facility, $2,000 from the exercise of warrants, $2,980 from proceeds received from the sale of preferred stock and $403 from proceeds from advances from related parties.
To date we have financed our operations through sales of common stock and the issuance of debt.
In addition to these transactions, the Company in the period from April 1, 2020 through March 31, 2021, entered into the following transactions:
(a) On April 16, 2020, the Company received $386 in Payroll Protection Program funding related to Ecoark Holdings, and the Company also received on April 13, 2020, $1,482 in Payroll Protection Program funds for Pinnacle Frac LLC, a subsidiary of Banner Midstream. All but $29 has been forgiven as of December 31, 2020.
(b) On May 1, 2020, an institutional investor elected to convert its remaining shares of Series B Preferred shares into 32 common shares.
(c) On April 1 and May 5, 2020, two institutional investors elected to convert their 1 Series C Preferred share into 276 common shares.
(d) On May 10, 2020, the Company received approximately $6,294 from accredited institutional investors holding 276 warrants issued on November 13, 2019 with an exercise price of $3.65 and holding 1,176 warrants with an exercise price of $4.50. The Company agreed to issue to these investors an additional number of warrants as a condition of their agreement to exercise the November 2019 warrants.
(e) On December 31, 2020, the Company completed a registered direct offering, whereby the Company issued 889 shares of common stock and 889 accompanying warrants to purchase common stock to one institutional investor under the effective Form S-3 at $9.00 per share and accompanying warrant for a total of $8,000 in gross proceeds, before placement agent fees and other offering expenses. The warrants are exercisable for a two-year term at a strike price of $10.00 per share. The Company granted 62 warrants to the placement agent as compensation in addition to the $560 cash commission received by the placement agent The placement agent warrants are exercisable at $11.25 per share and expire on January 2, 2023.
At March 31, 2021 we had cash (including restricted cash) of $1,316, and $1,194 as of June 22, 2021. We had a working capital deficit of $11,845 and $16,689 as of March 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in the working capital deficit is the result of the non-cash change in the fair value of the derivative liabilities offset by the repayment and conversion of debt and liabilities to shares of common stock. These liabilities were assumed in the Banner Midstream acquisition in March 2020. The Company believes it has adequate capital resources to meet its cash requirements during the next 12 months.
The Company raised approximately $16,119 in warrant exercises in the year ended March 31, 2021 as well as $8,001 in a registered direct offering. We expect that the revenue generating operations of Banner Midstream will continue to improve the liquidity of the Company moving forward. However, going forward, the effect of the pandemic on the capital markets may limit our ability to raise additional capital on the terms acceptable to us at the time we need it, if at all. As disclosed in the consolidated financial statements, COVID-19 has had an impact on our management’s ability to operate effectively. The challenges related to remote work and travel restrictions that we as a smaller company have faced in striving to meet our disclosure obligations in a timely manner while taking the steps to protect the health and safety of our employees have impacted, and may continue to further impact, our ability to raise additional capital.
The Company pre-funded a majority of the cost, approximately $5,800, associated with the drilling and completion of an initial deep horizontal well in the Austin Chalk formation of which $3,387 was expensed as drilling costs as part of their Participation Agreement with Blackbrush Oil & Gas, L.P. The Company paid the amount of the drilling costs into a designated escrow account which occurred in January 2021.
On April 9, 2021, a Little Rock, Arkansas jury awarded Ecoark and Zest a total of $115 million in damages. See “Part I. Item 3. Legal Proceedings” for further information. However, due to expected appeals, the Company does not expect to receive the proceeds until approximately 2025.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of March 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.