ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such difference include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the sections titled “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
References in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to “ZoomInfo Technologies Inc.” refer to ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. and not to any of its subsidiaries unless the context indicates otherwise. References in this Form 10-K to “ZoomInfo,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” and “our” refer (1) prior to the consummation of the Reorganization Transactions, to ZoomInfo OpCo and its consolidated subsidiaries, and (2) after the consummation of the Reorganization Transactions, to ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries unless the context indicates otherwise. Numerical figures included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been subject to rounding adjustments. Accordingly, numerical figures shown as totals in various tables may not be arithmetic aggregations of the figures that precede them.
Overview
ZoomInfo is a leading go-to-market intelligence platform for sales and marketing professionals. Our cloud-based platform provides highly accurate and comprehensive information and insights on the organizations and professionals they target, enabling sellers and marketers to shorten sales cycles and increase win rates by delivering the right message, to the right person, at the right time.
We are able to deliver high-quality intelligence at scale by leveraging an AI- and ML-powered engine that gathers data from millions of sources and standardizes, matches to entities, verifies, cleans, and applies the processed data to companies and people at scale to generate insights. This data engine, augmented by other data sources and our team of research analysts and data scientists, enrich our platform by creating a combination of robust systems and processes that are integrated into the workflows and CRM and sales and marketing automation systems of our customers.
ZoomInfo, formerly known as DiscoverOrg, was co-founded in 2007 by our CEO, Henry Schuck. Henry founded the Company to unlock actionable business information and insights to make organizations more successful. Over time, we developed new and innovative methods for gathering and cleansing data and insights using automated processes to scale our capabilities. In February 2019, we acquired Pre-Acquisition ZI and subsequently the combined business has been re-branded as ZoomInfo. Pre-Acquisition ZI developed technologies to gather, parse, and match data at massive scale. We combined Pre-Acquisition ZI’s technology with our technology to deliver more value to customers with our combined platform that provides broader coverage and higher-quality insights.
We offer access to our platform on a subscription basis and we generate substantially all of our revenue from sales of subscriptions. Our subscription fees include the use of our platform and access to customer support. Subscriptions generally range from one to three years in length with over 25% of our ACV being under multi-year agreements. We typically bill our customers at the beginning of each annual, semi-annual, or quarterly period and recognize revenue ratably over the term of the subscription period.
We sell our ZoomInfo platform to both new and existing customers. Some existing customers continue to renew their subscriptions to pre-acquisition versions of the Pre-Acquisition ZI and DiscoverOrg solutions. We price our subscriptions based on the functionality, users, and records under management that are included in each product edition. Our paid product editions are Elite, Advanced, and Professional, and we have a free Community Edition.
Our software, insights, and data enable over 20,000 companies to sell and market more effectively and efficiently. Our customers operate in almost every industry vertical, including software, business services, manufacturing, telecommunications, financial services, retail, media and internet, transportation, education, hospitality, and real estate, and range from the largest global enterprises, to mid-market companies, down to small businesses. Many of our customers are software and business services companies. In 2020, approximately 45% and 23% of our customers, as measured by ACV, operated in the software and business services industries, respectively. In 2020, less than 4% of our customers, as measured by ACV, operated in the retail, travel, hospitality, consumer goods and services, or oil and gas industries. Our net annual retention rate was 108%, 109%, and 102% in 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, no single customer contributed more than 1% of revenue. We generate less than 10% of revenue from customers outside the United States. As of December 31, 2020, over 850 customers contracted for more than $100,000 in ACV for ZoomInfo services.
To address our market opportunity, we have built and continue to tune our efficient go-to-market engine. We have integrated our insights and data into an automated engine with defined processes and specialized roles in order to market and sell our services. We are constantly improving the effectiveness of our engine in order to identify and close more business.
We have experienced rapid organic growth, supplemented by additional growth from acquisitions. We generated revenue of $476.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $293.3 million, and income from operations of $37.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to income from operations of $36.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. In addition to our consolidated U.S GAAP financial measures, we review various non-GAAP financial measures, including Adjusted Operating Income, Adjusted Operating Income Margin and Adjusted Net Income. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures.” Our Adjusted Operating Income was $226.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $167.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our Adjusted Operating Income Margin was 47% for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to 51% in 2019. Adjusted Operating Income and Adjusted Operating Margin do not include results of operations from acquired entities before their acquisitions.
Recent Developments
Reorganization Transactions
ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. was incorporated in November 2019 with no operating assets or operations for the purposes of facilitating the IPO and other related transactions in order to carry on the business of the operating entity ZoomInfo Holdings LLC (“ZoomInfo OpCo”) (formerly known as DiscoverOrg Holdings, LLC) following the consummation of the transactions described under “Reorganization Transactions” in Note 1 to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (the “Reorganization Transactions”).
Following the consummation of the Reorganization Transactions on June 3, 2020, ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. became a holding company, with its sole material asset being a controlling equity interest in ZoomInfo Intermediate Holdings LLC (“ZoomInfo HoldCo”), which is a holding company with its sole material asset being a controlling equity interest in ZoomInfo OpCo. ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. operates and controls all of our business and affairs, and consolidates the financial results of ZoomInfo OpCo through ZoomInfo HoldCo. Accordingly, ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. reports a non-controlling interest related to the OpCo Units or HoldCo Units held by our Continuing Members in our consolidated financial statements.
Initial Public Offering
On June 8, 2020, ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. completed the IPO, in which it sold 51,175,000 shares of Class A common stock (including shares issued pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares) at a public offering price of $21.00 per share for net proceeds of $1,019.6 million, after deducting underwriters’ discounts (but excluding other offering expenses and reimbursements). ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. used all of the proceeds from the IPO to (i) purchase 48,528,783 newly issued HoldCo Units from ZoomInfo HoldCo for approximately $966.9 million (which ZoomInfo HoldCo in turn used to purchase the same number of newly issued OpCo Units from ZoomInfo OpCo); (ii) purchase 2,370,948 OpCo Units from certain Pre-IPO OpCo Unitholders for approximately $47.2 million; and (iii) fund $5.5 million of merger consideration payable to certain Pre-IPO Blocker Holders in connection with the Blocker Mergers. To date, ZoomInfo OpCo has used the proceeds it received through ZoomInfo HoldCo from the IPO to (i) redeem and cancel all outstanding Series A Preferred Units of ZoomInfo OpCo for approximately $274.2 million, including accumulated but unpaid distributions and related prepayment premiums; (ii) repay in full all outstanding indebtedness under our second lien credit agreement, for approximately $380.6 million, including related prepayment premiums and accrued interest; (iii) repay $35.0 million of outstanding borrowings under the Company’s first lien revolving credit facility; (iv) pay certain expenses related to the IPO; and (v) prepay $100.0 million aggregate principal amount of the first lien term loans outstanding under our first lien credit agreement, including accrued interest thereon, using approximately $101.2 million of the proceeds; with the remaining proceeds intended to be used for general corporate purposes.
OpCo Units, HoldCo Units, and Common Stock
In connection with the Reorganization Transactions, the limited liability company agreement of ZoomInfo OpCo was amended and restated to, among other things, reclassify its outstanding preferred and common units into a new class of units that we refer to as “OpCo Units.” A portion of the Class P Units that are held by the Continuing Class P Unitholders remain as Class P Units.
Pursuant to the amended and restated limited liability company agreement of ZoomInfo OpCo, the Pre-IPO OpCo Unitholders (or certain permitted transferees) have the right (subject to the terms of such limited liability company agreement) to exchange their OpCo Units (together with a corresponding number of shares of Class B common stock) for shares of our Class A common stock on a one-for-one basis, subject to customary conversion rate adjustments for stock splits, stock dividends, and reclassifications. Pursuant to the amended and restated limited liability company of ZoomInfo HoldCo, the Pre-IPO HoldCo Unitholders (or certain permitted transferees) have the right (subject to the terms of such limited liability company agreement) to exchange their HoldCo Units (together with a corresponding number of shares of Class B common stock) for shares of our Class A common stock on a one-for-one basis, subject to customary conversion rate adjustments for stock splits, stock dividends, and reclassifications.
Pursuant to ZoomInfo Technologies Inc.’s amended and restated certificate of incorporation, at the option of the holder, a share of Class C common stock may be converted into one share of Class A common stock. In addition, each share of Class C common stock will convert automatically into one share of Class A common stock upon any transfer, whether or not for value, except for certain affiliate transfers described in our amended and restated certificate of incorporation among the Sponsors, the Founders, and their respective affiliates as of the date of the consummation of the IPO. Each share of Class C common stock will also automatically convert into one share of Class A common stock if, on the record date for any meeting of the stockholders, the aggregate number of outstanding shares of our Class B common stock and Class C common stock is less than 5% of our outstanding shares of common stock. Once converted into Class A common stock, Class C common stock will not be reissued.
The Pre-IPO OpCo Unitholders and the Pre-IPO HoldCo Unitholders that held voting units before the IPO and that continue to hold OpCo Units or HoldCo Units, as applicable, hold all of the issued and outstanding shares of our Class B common stock. The shares of Class B common stock have no economic rights but each share entitles the holder to ten votes (for so long as the aggregate number of outstanding shares of our Class B common stock and Class C common stock represents at least 5% of the aggregate number of our outstanding shares of common stock, and thereafter, one vote per share) on all matters on which stockholders of ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. are entitled to vote generally. The Pre-IPO Blocker Holders hold all of the issued and outstanding shares of our Class C common stock. The shares of Class C common stock have the same economic rights as shares of Class A common stock, but each share entitles the holder to ten votes (for so long as the aggregate number of outstanding shares of our Class B common stock and Class C common stock represents at least 5% of the aggregate number of our outstanding shares of common stock, and thereafter, one vote per share upon the automatic conversion of our Class C common stock into shares of Class A common stock) on all matters on which stockholders of ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. are entitled to vote generally. Holders of outstanding shares of our Class A common stock, Class B common stock, and Class C common stock vote as a single class on all matters on which stockholders are entitled to vote generally, except as otherwise required by law.
COVID-19
In December 2019, a novel strain of Coronavirus disease (“COVID-19”) was reported, and in March 2020, the WHO characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in travel restrictions, prohibitions of non-essential activities, disruption and shutdown of certain businesses, and greater uncertainty in global financial markets. Such conditions are creating disruption in global supply chains, increasing rates of unemployment, and adversely impacting many industries. The outbreak could have a continued adverse impact on economic and market conditions and has triggered a period of global economic slowdown.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced headwinds and tailwinds that impacted our business. In early 2020, we experienced headwinds in some sales cycles as business leaders adapted to the impacts of the pandemic. Our sales teams adjusted to the new environment and drove improved sales and retention activity relative to prior year results. Customers in heavily impacted industries represented less than 4% of ACV, and in early 2020, we saw heightened cancellations and reductions in spend from this subset of customers relative to pre-COVID time frames. We also experienced longer sales cycles and more intense scrutiny, particularly for larger purchases and upgrades as customers and prospects re-assessed their growth trajectory in light of the changing economic environment. These headwinds dissipated during the course of the year and were partially offset by tailwinds we experienced relating to reduced spending on travel, facilities, and marketing events. By the end of 2020, demand for our platform normalized and returned to levels materially consistent with historical trends. We acknowledge the extent and continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial condition will depend on certain developments, including: the duration and spread of the outbreak; government responses to the pandemic including vaccine availability and deployment; its impact on the health and welfare of our employees and their families; its impact on our customers and our sales cycles; its impact on customer, industry, or employee events; delays in hiring and onboarding new employees; and effects on our partners and vendors, some of which are uncertain, difficult to predict, not within our control. Furthermore, because of our largely subscription-based business model, the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic may not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial condition until future periods.
To address the safety and health of our employees during the COVID-19 pandemic, in the first quarter of 2020 we temporarily closed all of our offices and enabled our entire workforce to work remotely. These changes remained largely in effect throughout 2020 and could extend into future quarters. The impact, if any, of these and any additional operational changes we may implement is uncertain, but changes we have implemented to date have not affected, and are not expected to materially, affect our ability to maintain operations, including financial reporting systems, internal control over financial reporting, and disclosure controls and procedures. See “Human Capital” in Part I, Item 1 and “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Secondary Offerings
On August 24, 2020, certain selling stockholders, including entities affiliated with the Sponsors, completed a secondary offering of 17,179,135 shares of Class A common stock at a price to the public of $37.00 per share. The selling stockholders received all of the net proceeds of approximately $615.0 million after deducting the underwriting discount.
On December 4, 2020, certain selling stockholders, including entities affiliated with the Sponsors, completed a secondary offering of 14,375,000 shares of Class A common stock at a price to the public of $45.00 per share. The selling stockholders received all of the net proceeds of approximately $631.0 million after deducting the underwriting discount.
Acquisitions
In October 2020, the Company acquired substantially all the assets, and certain specified liabilities, of Clickagy, LLC, a leading provider of artificial intelligence-powered buyer intent data. In November 2020, the Company acquired EverString Technology, LLC, a leading artificial intelligence-powered, business-to-business (B2B) data solutions provider. In connection with these acquisitions, the Company has agreed to pay an aggregate cash consideration, inclusive of vesting cash retention payments, of approximately $71.7 million, subject to working capital and other customary adjustments, and issued 67,075 shares of unregistered Class A common stock of the Company. We funded cash payments made at closing with cash on hand. Neither acquisition had a material impact on the Company’s results of operations for the three months or year ended December 31, 2020 or the Company’s financial position as of December 31, 2020. The initial accounting of the business combinations is incomplete as of the issuance date of these financial statements. The fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed may be subject to change as additional information is received, including the finalization of tax assets and liabilities.
Senior Unsecured Notes Offering
In February 2021, ZoomInfo Technologies LLC and ZoomInfo Finance Corp., indirect subsidiaries of ZoomInfo Technologies Inc., completed an offering of $350.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 3.875% senior notes due 2029. We used all of the net proceeds, along with cash on hand, to prepay $356.4 million aggregate principal amount of our first lien term loans outstanding under the first lien credit agreement (the “Debt Prepayment”). Following the Debt Prepayment, as of February 2, 2021, $400.0 million aggregate principal amount of first lien term loans were outstanding under our first lien credit agreement.
First Lien Credit Agreement Amendment
In February 2021, ZoomInfo LLC entered into an amendment to our first lien credit agreement, pursuant to which, among other things, there will be (i) an increase in the aggregate commitments to $250.0 million under our first lien revolving credit facility, (ii) the addition of the ZoomInfo Technologies LLC as a co-borrower, (iii) the repricing of our first lien term loan facility maturing in February 2026 and first lien revolving credit facility and (iv) an extension of the maturity date of our first lien revolving credit facility to November 2025.
Factors Affecting the Comparability of Our Results of Operations
As a result of a number of factors, our historical results of operations are not comparable from period to period and may not be comparable to our financial results of operations in future periods. Set forth below is a brief discussion of the key factors impacting the comparability of our results of operations.
Impact of the Reorganization Transactions
ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. is a corporation for U.S. federal and state income tax purposes. Our accounting predecessor, ZoomInfo OpCo, was and is treated as a flow-through entity for U.S. federal income tax purposes, and as such, only certain subsidiaries that were organized as corporations for U.S. federal income tax purposes have been subject to U.S. federal income tax at the entity level historically. Accordingly, unless otherwise specified, the historical results of operations and other financial information set forth in this Annual Report on Form 10-K only include a provision for U.S. federal income tax for income allocated to those subsidiaries that were organized as corporations for U.S. federal income tax purposes. Following the completion of the Reorganization Transactions, ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. pays U.S. federal and state income taxes as a corporation on its share of our taxable income.
ZoomInfo OpCo is the predecessor of ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. for financial reporting purposes. As a result, the consolidated financial statements of ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. recognize the assets and liabilities received in the reorganization at their historical carrying amounts, as reflected in the historical consolidated financial statements of ZoomInfo OpCo, the accounting predecessor.
In addition, in connection with the Reorganization Transactions and the IPO, we entered into the tax receivable agreements described in Note 18 to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Initial Public Offering
In June 2020, the company completed its IPO which significantly impacted our cash, first and second lien indebtedness, and temporary and permanent equity balances. See “-Recent Developments.” The IPO, driven by the associated first and second lien term loan repayments, significantly reduced our interest expense relative to historical results.
Impact of Acquisitions
We seek to grow through both internal development and the acquisition of businesses that broaden and strengthen our platform. Our recent acquisitions include NeverBounce in September 2018, Pre-Acquisition ZI in February 2019, Komiko in October 2019, Clickagy in October 2020, and EverString in November 2020. In addition, Pre-Acquisition ZI acquired Datanyze in September 2018. As discussed below under “-Results of Operations,” these acquisitions have been a significant driver of our revenue, cost of service, operating expense, and interest expense growth. Purchase accounting requires that all assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recorded at fair value on the acquisition date, including unearned revenue. Revenue from contracts that are impacted by the estimate of fair value of the unearned revenue upon acquisition will be recorded based on the fair value until such contract is terminated or renewed, which will differ from the receipts received by the acquired company allocated over the service period for the same reporting periods.
Impact of the Zoom Information Acquisition
On February 1, 2019, we acquired, through a newly formed wholly owned subsidiary, Zebra Acquisition Corporation, 100% of the stock of Pre-Acquisition ZI for $748.0 million, net of cash acquired (the “Zoom Information Acquisition”). Pre-Acquisition ZI was a provider of company and contact information to sales and marketing professionals.
The Zoom Information Acquisition qualifies as a business combination and was accounted for as such. We included the financial results of Pre-Acquisition ZI in the consolidated financial statements of ZoomInfo OpCo from the date of the Zoom Information Acquisition. Accordingly, the financial statements for the period prior to the Zoom Information Acquisition may not be comparable to those from the periods after the Zoom Information Acquisition.
In connection with the Zoom Information Acquisition, ZoomInfo OpCo entered into an $865.0 million first lien term loan facility, a $100.0 million first lien revolving credit facility, which was undrawn at the time of the acquisition, and a $370.0 million second lien term loan facility, and issued $207.0 million of Series A Preferred Units. In addition to funding the Zoom Information Acquisition, the additional proceeds from such facilities and Series A Preferred Units were used to repay existing debt. These debt facilities drove a significant impact to our interest expense from the date of the acquisition. We would have expected interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 to be greater than that of the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the debt being outstanding for the entire period in 2020. However, this increase was mitigated and offset by (a) a reduction in interest rates period over period, and (b) the debt repayments and prepayments referenced above and in Note 8 to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
We recognized approximately $85.3 million of revenue from legacy Pre-Acquisition ZI platform contracts with acquired customers, including the renewals and upsells thereof, during the year ended December 31, 2019, of which $32.3 million was included in the unearned revenue balance recorded at the acquisition date. The fair value of acquired unearned revenue was $34.5 million, which differs from the unearned revenue recorded by Pre-Acquisition ZI immediately prior to the acquisition of $68.3 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the amounts received or billed by Pre-Acquisition ZI in advance of revenue recognition as of the acquisition date allocated over the service period post-acquisition was $63.9 million, which was $31.6 million greater than the amount recognized into revenue for those receipts and billings based on their fair value.
We incurred approximately $2.7 million of transaction costs related to the Zoom Information Acquisition. We paid $29.7 million related to the secured credit facilities, which was accounted for as a debt discount. We also incurred $0.6 million in transaction costs associated with issuing the new Series A Preferred Units, which were issued at a 3% discount, which transaction costs were deducted from the proceeds received from the units.
During 2019, we completed the integration of Pre-Acquisition ZI, including aligning reporting structures for all employees along functional lines, migrating all front-office sales and marketing activities onto a single technology stack with a single instance for key technology components, migrating back-office activities onto a single technology stack, integrating accounting, legal, and human resources activities, including financial reporting processes and benefits for employees, and developing a single platform that is being used for all sales to new customers.
Additionally, as part of the integration of Pre-Acquisition ZI, we identified that certain roles and responsibilities were redundant between the two companies and terminated the employment of certain executives immediately upon the closing of the transaction. We subsequently eliminated additional positions that were no longer needed as a result of the functionally aligned reporting structure, including the Russia operations of Pre-Acquisition ZI, certain development positions in Vancouver, Washington, and certain executives from DiscoverOrg and Pre-Acquisition ZI. Expenses relating to severance paid were recorded as restructuring and transaction expenses on the statement of operations with the majority of those expenses being recognized in the three months ended March, 31, 2019, and not recurring in 2020. Expenses relating to any accelerated payments under the Cash Vesting Payment Program (see Note 4 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K) were recorded as operating expense according to the functional area aligning to the employee’s salary and is included in integration and transaction-related compensation expenses when calculating non-GAAP metrics.
All new customers are sold the ZoomInfo platform that we released in September 2019. We continue to support pre-existing customers on the legacy DiscoverOrg and Pre-Acquisition ZI platforms, although many pre-existing customers have agreed to upgrade to the ZoomInfo platform. The pricing constructs for subscriptions on the platforms are similar among the platforms and based on a combination of the number of seats to which the customer commits and the level of functionality and data access that the customer requires. Based on the increased level of functionality and data access, upgrading to the ZoomInfo platform will often require an increase in subscription pricing for an equivalent number of users.
We incurred expenses related to the integration of Pre-Acquisition ZI during 2019. Additionally, as part of the purchase of Pre-Acquisition ZI, we agreed with the former owners of Pre-Acquisition ZI to implement a Cash Vesting Payment Program to make payments to employees with respect to unvested options that were canceled at the time of the Zoom Information Acquisition. We agreed to make the payments to employees according to the remaining vesting schedule as of the acquisition date in amounts that would have been paid had the options been vested at the time of the acquisition. We reduced the originally agreed purchase price to the former owners of Pre-Acquisition ZI as a result of agreeing to make such payments. These payments are recorded as expense over the period of service on our statement of operations in the same expense line item as the salary of recipients, and we will continue to record expense for the majority of employees until 2021, and for some employees into 2022. Additionally, we engaged consulting firms and other professional services firms to help integrate our companies, including developing branding and pricing strategies for the combined platform. These expenses were recorded as sales and marketing and general and administrative expenses on our statement of operations. For analyses and non-GAAP metrics that include adjustments to operating expenses, the expenses are deemed to be integration expenses and acquisition-related compensation.
Equity-Based Compensation
In December 2019, HSKB modified all outstanding awards to add an alternative performance and time vesting condition and to also permit settlement through exchange into the Company’s public shares in addition to the existing cash-settlement option. This modification resulted in the revaluation of the awards in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Through the date of modification, no equity-based compensation had been recognized for these awards as the qualifying event (i.e., the IPO) was not probable. Upon completion of the IPO, the Company recognized $57.6 million of additional compensation expense attributable to service periods already elapsed on HSKB awards and the acceleration of vesting select Class P Units. The remaining unamortized fair value as of the modification date will be recognized as equity-based compensation over the remaining service period of the awards. In addition to the impact of the modified HSKB awards, new awards and modifications that took place as part of the Reorganization Transactions and the IPO will contribute to higher equity-based compensation expense in 2020 and 2021. See Note 16 - Equity-based Compensation for unamortized equity-based compensation costs related to each type of equity-based incentive award.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that the growth and future success of our business depends on many factors, including the following:
Continuing to Acquire New Customers
We are focused on continuing to grow the number of customers that use our platform. The majority of revenue growth when comparing the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019 was the result of new customers added over the last 24 months. Our operating results and growth prospects will depend in part on our ability to continue to attract new customers. Additionally, acquiring new customers strengthens the power of our contributory network. We will need to continue to invest in our efficient go-to-market effort to acquire new customers. As of December 31, 2018, we had over 11,000 customers on a combined basis, including non-overlapping customers of Pre-Acquisition ZI. As of December 31, 2019, we had over 14,000 customers. As of December 31, 2020, we had over 20,000 customers. We define a customer as a company that maintains one or more active paid subscriptions to our platform.
Delivering Additional High-Value Solutions to Our Existing Customers
Many of our customers purchase additional high-value solutions as they expand their use of our platform. Customers add additional services and/or upgrade their platform. We believe there is a significant opportunity for expansion with our existing customers through additional solutions.
Expanding Relationships with Existing Customers
Many of our customers increase spending with us by adding users or integrating incremental data as they increase their use of our platform. Several of our largest customers have expanded the deployment of our platform across their organizations following their initial deployment. We believe there is a significant opportunity to add additional users and data integration within our existing customers.
Our ability to expand relationships with existing customers and deliver additional high-value solutions is demonstrated by our net annual retention rate. We measure our retention rate on an annual basis and define annual net revenue retention as the total ACV generated by our customers and customers of Pre-Acquisition ZI at the end of the year divided by the ACV generated by the same group of customers at the end of the prior year. Our net annual retention rate was 108%, 109%, and 102% for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. We also measure our success in expanding relationships with existing customers by the number of customers that contract for more than $100,000 in ACV. As of December 31, 2020, we had more than 850 customers with over $100,000 in ACV.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we believe certain non-GAAP measures are useful in evaluating our operating performance. These measures include, but are not limited to, Adjusted Operating Income, Adjusted Operating Income Margin, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income, and Adjusted Net Income per diluted share which are used by management in making operating decisions, allocating financial resources, internal planning and forecasting, and for business strategy purposes. We believe that non-GAAP financial information is useful to investors because it eliminates certain items that affect period-over-period comparability, and it provides consistency with past financial performance and additional information about our underlying results and trends by excluding certain items that may not be indicative of our business, results of operations, or outlook.
We view Adjusted Operating Income, Adjusted Operating Income Margin, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Net Income per diluted share as operating performance measures. We believe that the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure to Adjusted Operating Income is U.S. GAAP operating income. We believe that the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP finance measure to Adjusted Operating Income Margin is U.S. GAAP operating income divided by U.S. GAAP revenue. We believe that the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure to Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income is U.S. GAAP Net Income, and the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure to Adjusted Net Income per diluted share is U.S. GAAP net earnings per diluted share.
Non-GAAP financial measures are not meant to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the comparable GAAP measures, but rather as supplemental information to our business results. This information should be read only in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. There are limitations to these non-GAAP financial measures because they are not prepared in accordance with GAAP and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies due to potential differences in methods of calculation and items or events being adjusted. In addition, other companies may use different measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of our non-GAAP financial measures as tools for comparison. A reconciliation is provided below for each non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP.
Adjusted Operating Income, Adjusted Operating Income Margin, and Adjusted Net Income
We define Adjusted Operating Income as income from operations plus (i) impact of fair value adjustments to acquired unearned revenue, (ii) amortization of acquired technology and other acquired intangibles, (iii) equity-based compensation expense, (iv) restructuring and transaction-related expenses, and (v) integration costs and acquisition-related compensation. We exclude the impact of fair value adjustments to acquired unearned revenue and amortization of acquired technology and other acquired intangibles, as well as equity-based compensation, because these are non-cash expenses or non-cash fair value adjustments and we believe that excluding these items provides meaningful supplemental information regarding performance and ongoing cash-generation potential. We exclude restructuring and transaction-related expenses, as well as integration costs and acquisition-related compensation, because such expenses are episodic in nature and have no direct correlation to the cost of operating our business on an ongoing basis. Adjusted Operating Income is presented because it is used by management to evaluate our financial performance and for planning and forecasting purposes. Additionally, we believe that it and similar measures are widely used by securities analysts and investors as a means of evaluating a company’s operating performance. Adjusted Operating Income should not be considered as an alternative to operating income as an indicator of operating performance.
We define Adjusted Net Income as Adjusted Operating Income less (i) interest expense, net (ii) other (income) expense, net, excluding TRA liability remeasurement expense (benefit) and (iii) income tax expense (benefit) including incremental tax effects of adjustments to arrive at Adjusted Operating Income and current tax benefits related to the TRA. Adjusted Net Income is presented because it is used by management to evaluate our financial performance and for planning and forecasting purposes. Additionally, we believe that it and similar measures are widely used by securities analysts and investors as a means of evaluating a company’s operating performance. Adjusted Net Income should not be considered as an alternative to cash flows from operating activities as a measure of liquidity or as an alternative to operating income or net income as indicators of operating performance.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Net loss to Adjusted Net Income and Income from operations to Adjusted Operating Income for the periods presented:
__________________
(a)Primarily represents revaluations on tax receivable agreement liability and foreign exchange remeasurement gains and losses.
(b)Represents the impact of fair value adjustments to acquired unearned revenue relating to services billed by an acquired company, including Pre-Acquisition ZI, prior to our acquisition of that company. These adjustments represent the difference between the revenue recognized based on management’s estimate of fair value of acquired unearned revenue and the receipts billed prior to the acquisition less revenue recognized prior to the acquisition.
(c)Represents costs directly associated with acquisition or disposal activities, including employee severance and termination benefits, contract termination fees and penalties, and other exit or disposal costs. For the year ended December 31, 2020, this expense related primarily to professional fees for the preparation for an initial public offering and deferred acquisition cost revaluations. For the year ended December 31, 2019, this expense related primarily to the acquisition of Pre-Acquisition ZI, including professional fees, severance and acceleration of payments for terminated employees. For the year ended December 31, 2018, this expense related primarily to Carlyle’s investment in us.
(d)Represents costs directly associated with integration activities for acquisitions and acquisition-related compensation, which includes transaction bonuses and retention awards. For the year ended December 31, 2020, this expense related primarily to cash vesting payments from the acquisition of Pre-Acquisition ZI. For the year ended December 31, 2019, this expense related primarily to activities resulting from the acquisition of Pre-Acquisition ZI, including cash vesting payments and transaction bonuses, as well as expense incurred for retention awards granted upon the Company’s acquisitions of RainKing, NeverBounce, and Komiko. For the year ended December 31, 2018, this expense related primarily to retention awards granted upon our acquisition of RainKing and transaction bonuses paid upon Carlyle’s investment in us. See Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report. This expense is included in cost of service, sales and marketing expense, research and development expense, and general and administrative expense as follows:
We define Adjusted Operating Income Margin as Adjusted Operating Income divided by the sum of revenue and the impact of fair value adjustments to acquired unearned revenue.
Adjusted Operating Income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $226.0 million and represented an Adjusted Operating Income Margin of 47%. Adjusted Operating Income for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $167.1 million and represented an Adjusted Operating Income Margin of 51%. Growth in Adjusted Operating Income in the year ended December 31, 2020 relative to the year ended December 31, 2019 was an increase of $58.8 million, or 35%, and was driven primarily from the growth in customers and increasing revenue from existing customers. Adjusted Operating Income Margin decreased to 47% in the year ended December 31, 2020 from 51% in the year ended December 31, 2019 due to incremental sales and marketing expenses related to signing new customers and retaining and upselling existing customers, and general and administration costs to support incremental public company related requirements.
Adjusted Operating Income for the year ended December 31, 2018 was $83.7 million and represented an Adjusted Operating Income Margin of 57%. Growth in Adjusted Operating Income in the year ended December 31, 2019 relative to the year ended December 31, 2018 was an increase of $83.5 million, or 100%, and was driven primarily from the growth in revenue that resulted from the acquisition of Pre-Acquisition ZI and additional customers in 2019. Adjusted Operating Income Margin decreased to 51% in the year ended December 31, 2019 from 57% in the year ended December 31, 2018 due to the lower margin profile of the Pre-Acquisition ZI business and investment to drive revenue growth.
Adjusted EBITDA
EBITDA is defined as earnings before debt-related costs, including interest and loss on debt extinguishment, provision for taxes, depreciation, and amortization. Management further adjusts EBITDA to exclude certain items of a significant or unusual nature, including other (income) expense, net, impact of certain non-cash items, such as fair value adjustments to acquired unearned revenue and equity-based compensation, restructuring and transaction-related expenses, and integration costs and acquisition-related compensation. We exclude these items because these are non-cash expenses or non-cash fair value adjustments, which we do not consider indicative of performance and ongoing cash-generation potential or are episodic in nature and have no direct correlation to the cost of operating our business on an ongoing basis. Adjusted EBITDA is presented because it is used by management to evaluate our financial performance and for planning and forecasting purposes. Additionally, we believe that it and similar measures are widely used by securities analysts and investors as a means of evaluating a company’s operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to cash flows from operating activities as a measure of liquidity or as an alternative to operating income or net income as indicators of operating performance.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented:
__________________
(a)Primarily represents revaluations on tax receivable agreement liability and foreign exchange remeasurement gains and losses.
(b)Represents the impact of fair value adjustments to acquired unearned revenue relating to services billed by an acquired company, including Pre-Acquisition ZI, prior to our acquisition of that company. These adjustments represent the difference between the revenue recognized based on management’s estimate of fair value of acquired unearned revenue and the receipts billed prior to the acquisition less revenue recognized prior to the acquisition.
(c)Represents costs directly associated with acquisition or disposal activities, including employee severance and termination benefits, contract termination fees and penalties, and other exit or disposal costs. For the year ended December 31, 2020, this expense related primarily to professional fees for the preparation for an initial public offering and deferred acquisition cost revaluations. For the year ended December 31, 2019, this expense related primarily to the acquisition of Pre-Acquisition ZI, including professional fees, severance and acceleration of payments for terminated employees. For the year ended December 31, 2018, this expense related primarily to Carlyle’s investment in us.
(d)Represents costs directly associated with integration activities for acquisitions and acquisition-related compensation, which includes transaction bonuses and retention awards. For the year ended December 31, 2020, this expense related primarily to cash vesting payments from the acquisition of Pre-Acquisition ZI. For the year ended December 31, 2019, this expense related primarily to activities resulting from the acquisition of Pre-Acquisition ZI, including cash vesting payments and transaction bonuses, as well as expense incurred for retention awards granted upon the Company’s acquisitions of RainKing, NeverBounce, and Komiko. For the year ended December 31, 2018, this expense related primarily to retention awards granted upon our acquisition of RainKing and transaction bonuses paid upon Carlyle’s investment in us. See Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report. This expense is included in cost of service, sales and marketing expense, research and development expense, and general and administrative expense as follows:
Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $234.8 million, an increase of $61.6 million, or 36%, relative to the year ended December 31, 2019. This growth was driven primarily from the growth in revenue that resulted from additional customers in 2020 and 2019.
Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $173.2 million, an increase of $86.9 million, or 101%, relative to the year ended December 31, 2018. This growth was driven primarily from the growth in revenue that resulted from the acquisition of Pre-Acquisition ZI and additional customers in 2019 and 2018.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
We derive 99% of our revenue from subscription services and the remainder from recurring usage-based services. Our subscription services consist of our SaaS applications. Pricing of our subscription contracts are generally based on the functionality provided, the number of users that access our applications, the amount of data that the customer integrates into their systems, and add-on functionality that is provided. Our subscription contracts typically have a term ranging from one to three years and are non-cancellable. We typically bill for services in advance either annually, semi-annually or quarterly, and we typically require payment at the beginning of each annual, semi-annual or quarterly period.
Subscription revenue is generally recognized ratably over the contract term starting with when our service is made available to the customer. Email verification service revenue is recognized in the period services are utilized by our customers. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for these services. We record a contract asset when revenue recognized on a contract exceeds the billings to date for that contract.
Unearned revenue results from cash received or amounts billed to customers in advance of revenue recognized upon the satisfaction of performance obligations. The unearned revenue balance is influenced by several factors, including purchase accounting adjustments, seasonality, the compounding effects of renewals, invoice duration, invoice timing, dollar size, and new business timing within the period. The unearned revenue balance does not represent the total contract value of annual or multi-year, non-cancellable subscription agreements.
Cost of Service
Cost of Service, excluding amortization of acquired technology. Cost of service, excluding amortization of acquired technology includes direct expenses related to the support and operations of our SaaS services and related to our research teams, including salaries, benefits, equity-based compensation, and related expenses, such as employer taxes, allocated overhead for facilities, IT, third-party hosting fees, third-party data costs, and amortization of internally developed capitalized software.
We anticipate that we will continue to invest in costs of service and that costs of service as a percentage of revenue will stay consistent or modestly decrease as we realize operating leverage in the business.
Amortization of acquired technology. Amortization of acquired technology includes amortization expense for technology acquired in business combinations.
We anticipate that amortization of acquired technology will only increase if we make additional acquisitions in the future.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit is revenue less cost of service, and gross margin is gross profit as a percentage of revenue. Gross profit has been and will continue to be affected by various factors, including leveraging economies of scale, the costs associated with third-party hosting services and third-party data, the level of amortization of acquired technology, and the extent to which we expand our customer support and research organizations. We expect that our gross margin will fluctuate from period to period depending on the interplay of these various factors.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of sales and marketing, research and development, general and administrative, restructuring and transaction expenses, and amortization of acquired intangibles. The most significant component of our operating expenses is personnel costs, which consists of salaries, bonuses, sales commissions, stock-based compensation, and other employee-related benefits. Operating expenses also include overhead costs for facilities, technology, professional fees, depreciation and amortization expense, and marketing.
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of employee compensation such as salaries, bonuses, sales commissions, stock-based compensation, and other employee-related benefits for our sales and marketing teams, as well as overhead costs, technology, and marketing programs. Sales commissions and related payroll taxes directly related to contract acquisition are capitalized and recognized as expenses over the estimated period of benefit.
We anticipate that we will continue to invest in sales and marketing capacity to enable future growth, but that sales and marketing expense as a percentage of revenue will decrease as equity-based compensation expense related to the modification of HSKB awards and triggered by the IPO become a less significant component of overall sales and marketing expense. We anticipate that sales and marketing expense excluding equity-based compensation will fluctuate from period to period depending on the interplay of our growing investments in sales and marketing capacity excluding equity-based compensation, the recognition of revenue, and the amortization of contract acquisition costs.
Research and development. Research and development expenses support our efforts to enhance our existing platform and develop new software products. Research and development expenses primarily consist of employee compensation such as salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation, and other employee-related benefits for our engineering and product management teams, as well as overhead costs. Research and development expenses do not reflect amortization of internally developed capitalized software. We believe that our core technologies and ongoing innovation represent a significant competitive advantage for us, and we expect our research and development expenses to continue to increase as we invest in research and development resources to further strengthen and enhance our solutions.
We anticipate that we will continue to invest in research and development in order to develop new features and functionality to drive incremental customer value in the future and that research and development expense as a percentage of revenue will modestly increase in the long term.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses primarily consist of employee-related costs such as salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation, and other employee related benefits for our executive, finance, legal, human resources, IT, and business operations and administrative teams, as well as overhead costs. Additionally, we incur expenses for professional fees including legal services, accounting, and other consulting services, including those associated with operating as a public company.
We expect general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue to stay consistent or modestly decrease from 2020, as we realize operating leverage in the business.
Amortization of other acquired intangibles. Amortization of acquired intangibles primarily consists of amortization of customer relationships, trade names, and brand portfolios.
We anticipate that amortization of other acquired intangibles will only increase if we make additional acquisitions in the future.
Restructuring and transaction expenses. Restructuring and transaction expenses primarily consist of various restructuring and acquisition activities we have undertaken to achieve strategic or financial objectives. Restructuring and acquisition activities include, but are not limited to, consolidation of offices and responsibilities, office relocation, administrative cost structure realignment, and acquisition-related professional services fees.
We anticipate that restructuring and transaction expenses will be correlated with future acquisition activity or strategic restructuring activities, which could be greater than or less than our historic levels.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense represents the interest payable on our debt obligations and the amortization of debt discounts and debt issuance costs, less interest income.
We anticipate that our interest expense will be substantially lower after having repaid a portion of our outstanding indebtedness with the proceeds from the IPO. Interest expense could increase in the future based on changes in variable interest rates or the issuance of additional debt.
Loss on Debt Extinguishment
Loss on debt extinguishment consists of prepayment penalties and impairment of deferred financing costs associated with the extinguishment of debt.
We anticipate that losses related to debt extinguishment will only occur if we extinguish indebtedness before the contractual repayment dates.
Other (Income) Expense, Net
Other (income) expense, net consists primarily of the revaluation of tax receivable agreement liabilities and foreign currency realized and unrealized gains and losses related to the impact of transactions denominated in a foreign currency.
We anticipate that the magnitude of other income and expenses may increase as tax receivable agreement liabilities increase, or we expand operations internationally and add complexity to our operations.
Benefit (expense) from Income Taxes
ZoomInfo OpCo is currently treated as a pass-through entity for U.S. federal income tax purposes and most applicable state and local income tax purposes. Benefit (expense) from income taxes, Deferred tax assets, Deferred tax liabilities, and liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits reflect management’s best assessment of estimated current and future taxes to be paid by our corporate subsidiaries and, to the extent paid directly by our limited liability companies and partnerships that are treated as partnerships for tax purposes, our partnerships. Our corporate subsidiaries, RKSI Acquisition Corporation and Zebra Acquisition Corporation, are subject to income taxes in the United States and hold noncontrolling interests in our subsidiary, ZoomInfo Technologies LLC. ZoomInfo Technologies LLC is treated as a partnership for U.S. federal and most applicable state and local income tax purposes. Any taxable income or loss generated by ZoomInfo Technologies LLC is passed through to and included in the taxable income or loss of its partners, including ZoomInfo LLC, RKSI Acquisition Corporation, and Zebra Acquisition Corporation. However, because RKSI Acquisition Corporation and Zebra Acquisition Corporation are subject to income taxes in both the United States and foreign jurisdictions, income allocated to such corporate subsidiaries for tax purposes reduces the taxable income allocated to and distributions made to ZoomInfo OpCo. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining our consolidated income tax expense. See Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
After consummation of the Reorganization Transactions, ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. became subject to U.S. federal income taxes with respect to our allocable share of any U.S. taxable income of ZoomInfo OpCo, and is taxed at the prevailing corporate tax rates. ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. is treated as a U.S. corporation for U.S. federal, state, and local income tax purposes. Accordingly, a provision for income taxes will be recorded for the anticipated tax consequences of our reported results of operations for federal income taxes. In addition to tax expenses, we also will incur expenses related to our operations, as well as payments under the tax receivable agreements, which we expect to be significant. The limited liability company agreement of ZoomInfo OpCo, provides that certain distributions to cover the taxes of the ZoomInfo Tax Group and ZoomInfo Technologies Inc.’s obligations under the tax receivable agreements will be made. See Note 18 to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. However, our ability to make such distributions may be limited due to, among other things, restrictive covenants in our secured credit facilities. In addition, because RKSI Acquisition Corporation and Zebra Acquisition Corporation will continue to be subject to income taxes in the United States, income allocated to such corporate subsidiaries for tax purposes will reduce the distributions made to ZoomInfo OpCo, thereby reducing our allocable share of U.S. taxable income of ZoomInfo OpCo. See “Risk Factors - Risks Related to Our Organizational Structure” in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
The following table presents our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018:
__________________
(1)Includes equity-based compensation expense as follows:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 and Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue. Revenue was $476.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $182.9 million, or 62%, as compared to $293.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase was primarily due to the addition of new customers over the past 18 months and net expansion with existing customers, and, to a lesser extent, due to the recognition of revenue for renewed contracts at the contracted value, as opposed to the fair value ascribed to acquired contracts under purchase accounting during the prior year period or recognized by Pre-Acquisition ZI before the acquisition on February 1, 2019.
Cost of Service. Cost of service was $107.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $38.8 million, or 57%, as compared to $68.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to additional stock-based compensation expense related to grants previously made by HSKB, modified in December 2019, and triggered by the IPO. Additional expenses related to additional headcount and hosting expense to support new and growing customers also contributed to the increase.
Operating Expenses. Operating expenses were $331.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $143.0 million, or 76%, as compared to $188.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to additional stock-based compensation expense related to grants previously made by HSKB, modified in December 2019, and triggered by the IPO. Excluding stock-based compensation expenses, operating expenses were $237.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $70.0 million, or 42%, as compared to $167.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to:
•an increase in sales and marketing expense (excluding an increase in stock-based compensation of $51.3 million) of $43.4 million, or 55%, to $122.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, due primarily to additional headcount and related salaries and benefits expenses added to drive continued incremental sales, as well as additional commission expense and amortization of deferred commissions related to obtaining contracts with customers;
•an increase in research and development expense (excluding an increase in stock-based compensation of $8.9 million) of $12.5 million, or 49%, to $37.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, due primarily to additional engineering and product management resources added to support continued innovation of our services;
•an increase in general and administrative expense (excluding an increase in stock-based compensation of $12.8 million) of $14.8 million, or 49%, to $44.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, due primarily to additional headcount and related salaries and benefits expenses to support the larger organization and additional corporate expenses related to operating as a public company, which were partially offset by a decrease in integration-related expenses in the year ended December 31, 2019, which did not recur in the year ended December 31, 2020;
•an increase in amortization of acquired intangibles expense of $1.1 million, or 6%, to $18.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to amortization expense related to intangible assets acquired in the Zoom Information Acquisition during the full period for the current year; and
•restructuring and transaction-related expense of $13.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, that were primarily related to the IPO. This represented a decrease of $1.8 million, or 12%, as compared to expense of $15.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, that were related to the Zoom Information Acquisition.
Interest Expense, Net. Interest expense, net was $69.3 million for the year December 31, 2020, a decrease of $33.2 million, or 32%, as compared to $102.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to interest savings resulting from the repayment of our second lien term loans in full and $100.0 million of first lien term loans, offset by nonrecurring interest expense recognized upon partial dedesignation of cash flow hedges resulting from reclassification from accumulated other comprehensive income (loss).
Loss on Debt Extinguishment. Loss on debt extinguishment was $14.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, related to penalties and derecognition of deferred and unamortized debt issuance costs resulting from the repayment of the second lien term loans and $100.0 million first lien term loan principal repayment after the IPO. This represented a decrease of $3.2 million, or 18%, as compared to expense of $18.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, related to costs incurred with respect to prior debt instruments that were repaid in conjunction with the Zoom Information Acquisition in February 2019.
Other (Income) Expense, Net. Other (income) expense, net was $(15.4) million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $15.4 million, as compared to $0.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the recognition of a TRA remeasurement gain of $15.7 million.
Benefit (expense) from Income Taxes. Income tax benefit (expense) for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $(4.7) million (a (14.8)% effective tax rate) compared to $6.5 million (a 7.7% effective tax rate) for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in the effective tax rate was primarily due to a GAAP loss driven by non-deductible stock-based compensation expense resulting in positive tax expense despite the GAAP loss. Furthermore, the reorganization transactions resulted in a higher proportion of GAAP earnings being allocated to tax paying entities.
Year Ended December 31, 2019 and Year Ended December 31, 2018
Revenue. Revenue was $293.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $149.1 million, or 103%, as compared to $144.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. This increase was primarily due to new customers acquired in the acquisitions of Pre-Acquisition ZI, NeverBounce, and Komiko, as well as the organic addition of new customers and net expansion with existing customers. Excluding the impact of the legacy platform contracts with customers acquired in the purchases of Pre-Acquisition ZI, NeverBounce, and Komiko, and the renewals and upsells thereof, revenue increased by $60.5 million. The increase in revenue, excluding the impact of customers acquired, was primarily driven by sales to new customers and, to a lesser extent, by the addition of additional subscriptions to existing customers, offset by cancellations and subscription reductions upon renewal. As of December 31, 2019, we had over 14,000 customers, an increase of about 3,000 customers, or 25%, as compared to over 11,000 customers on a combined basis, including non-overlapping customers of Pre-Acquisition ZI, as of December 31, 2018. As of December 31, 2019, over 580 of our customers spent more than $100,000 in ACV, an increase of approximately 200 customers, or 53%, as compared to over 380 customers of ZoomInfo and Pre-Acquisition ZI on a combined basis who spent more than $100,000 in ACV, as of December 31, 2018. On a pro forma basis, the combined revenue of ZoomInfo OpCo and Pre-Acquisition ZI would have been $334.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $128.4 million, or 62%, as compared to $205.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, calculated as if the acquisition had occurred on January 1, 2018.
Cost of Service. Cost of service was $68.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $30.8 million, or 81%, as compared to $37.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to additional amortization of acquired technology that arose from the Zoom Information Acquisition and additional headcount and hosting expense to support acquired and new customers. On a pro forma basis, the combined cost of services of ZoomInfo OpCo and Pre-Acquisition ZI would have been $70.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $9.9 million, or 16%, as compared to $60.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, calculated as if the acquisition had occurred on January 1, 2018.
Operating Expenses. Operating expenses were $188.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $108.7 million, or 136%, as compared to $79.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to:
•an increase in sales and marketing expense of $47.8 million, or 113%, to $90.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to additional sales and marketing resources added through the Zoom Information Acquisition and additional hiring to drive continued incremental sales;
•an increase in research and development expense of $24.0 million, or 392%, to $30.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to additional engineering and product management resources added through the Zoom Information Acquisition;
•an increase in general and administrative expense of $14.4 million, or 69%, to $35.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, due primarily to additional resources added through the Zoom Information Acquisition and additional hiring to support the larger organization;
•an increase in amortization of acquired intangibles expense of $10.6 million, or 153%, to $17.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, due to additional amortization expense related to intangible assets acquired in the Zoom Information Acquisition; and
•an increase in restructuring and transaction-related expense of $12.0 million, or 334%, to $15.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, due to expenses incurred in completing the Zoom Information acquisition of Pre-Acquisition ZI and restructuring activities undertaken as part of and after the Zoom Information Acquisition to rationalize certain research, engineering, and general and administrative activities, offset by restructuring and transaction-related expenses in the year ended December 31, 2018 related to the investment in us by Carlyle and the NeverBounce acquisition that did not recur.
Interest Expense, Net. Interest expense, net was $102.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $44.3 million, or 76%, as compared to $58.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily due to additional debt that we incurred to fund the Zoom Information Acquisition, partially offset by decreasing LIBOR rates.
Loss on Debt Extinguishment. Loss on debt extinguishment was $18.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, related to costs incurred with respect to prior debt instruments that were repaid in conjunction with the Zoom Information Acquisition in February 2019. There was no loss on debt extinguishment for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Other (Income) Expense, Net. Other (income) expense, net was $0.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $0.1 million, or 67%, as compared to $(0.1) million for the year ended December 31, 2018.
Benefit from Income Taxes. Income tax benefit (expense) for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $6.5 million (a 7.7% effective tax rate) compared to $2.9 million (a 9.1% effective tax rate) for the year ended December 31, 2018. The decrease in the effective tax rate was primarily due to a decrease in the impact of state taxes.
The pro forma results shown above with respect to our revenue and cost of service include amortization of fair value adjustments to acquired intangible assets and fair value adjustments to unearned revenue as if the acquisition had occurred on January 1, 2018. Management believes presenting such pro forma results is useful to investors because it demonstrates the significant impact on revenue trends resulting from the Zoom Information Acquisition during the periods presented, and the related fair value adjustments required under purchase accounting that impact year-over-year comparisons. The pro forma results shown above are provided for informational purposes only and is not necessarily indicative of the operating results that would have occurred if the acquisitions had occurred on January 1, 2018, nor is it indicative of our future results.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020, we had $269.8 million of cash and cash equivalents, $30.6 million of short-term investments, $1.2 million of restricted cash, and $100.0 million available under our first lien revolving credit facility. In February 2021, we entered into an amendment to our first lien credit agreement which increased the aggregate commitments to $250.0 million under our first lien revolving credit facility. We have financed our operations primarily through cash generated from operations and financed various acquisitions through cash generated from operations supplemented with debt offerings.
We believe that our cash flows from operations and existing available cash and cash equivalents, together with our other available external financing sources, will be adequate to fund our operating and capital needs for at least the next 12 months. We are currently in compliance with the covenants under the credit agreements governing our secured credit facilities and we expect to remain in compliance with our covenants.
We generally invoice our subscription customers annually, semi-annually, or quarterly in advance of our subscription services. Therefore, a substantial source of our cash is from such prepayments, which are included in the Consolidated Balance Sheets as unearned revenue. Unearned revenue consists of billed fees for our subscriptions, prior to satisfying the criteria for revenue recognition, which are subsequently recognized as revenue in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. As of December 31, 2020, we had unearned revenue of $222.7 million, of which $221.3 million was recorded as a current liability and is expected to be recorded as revenue in the next 12 months, provided all other revenue recognition criteria have been met.
After the consummation of the Restructuring Transactions, ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. became a holding company with no material assets other than its ownership of HoldCo Units, and ZoomInfo HoldCo became a holding company with no material assets other than its ownership of OpCo Units. ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. has no independent means of generating revenue. The limited liability company agreement of ZoomInfo OpCo provides that certain distributions to cover the taxes of the ZoomInfo Tax Group and ZoomInfo Technologies Inc.’s obligations under the tax receivable agreements will be made. The manager of ZoomInfo HoldCo has broad discretion to make distributions out of ZoomInfo HoldCo. In the event ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. declares any cash dividend, we expect that the manager of ZoomInfo HoldCo would cause ZoomInfo HoldCo to cause ZoomInfo OpCo to make distributions to ZoomInfo HoldCo, which in turn will make distributions to ZoomInfo Technologies Inc., in an amount sufficient to cover such cash dividends declared by us. Deterioration in the financial condition, earnings, or cash flow of ZoomInfo OpCo and its subsidiaries for any reason could limit or impair their ability to pay such distributions. In addition, the terms of our financing arrangements, including the secured credit facilities, contain covenants that may restrict ZoomInfo OpCo and its subsidiaries from paying such distributions, subject to certain exceptions. Further, ZoomInfo HoldCo and ZoomInfo OpCo are generally prohibited under Delaware law from making a distribution to a member to the extent that, at the time of the distribution, after giving effect to the distribution, liabilities of ZoomInfo HoldCo or ZoomInfo OpCo (with certain exceptions), as applicable, exceed the fair value of its assets. Subsidiaries of ZoomInfo OpCo are generally subject to similar legal limitations on their ability to make distributions to ZoomInfo OpCo. See “Risk Factors - Risks Related to Our Organizational Structure” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our cash flows from operations, borrowing availability, and overall liquidity are subject to risks and uncertainties. We may not be able to obtain additional liquidity on reasonable terms, or at all. In addition, our liquidity and our ability to meet our obligations and to fund our capital requirements are dependent on our future financial performance, which is subject to general economic, financial, and other factors that are beyond our control. Accordingly, our business may not generate sufficient cash flow from operations and future borrowings may not be available from additional indebtedness or otherwise to meet our liquidity needs. If we decide to pursue one or more significant acquisitions, we may incur additional debt or sell additional equity to finance such acquisitions, which would result in additional expenses or dilution. See “Risk Factors.”
Historical Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Cash Flows from (used in) Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operations was $169.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of a net loss of $36.4 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $201.5 million and the change in our operating assets net of operating liabilities of $4.5 million. The non-cash charges are primarily comprised of depreciation and amortization of $50.8 million, equity-based compensation of $121.6 million, loss on early extinguishment of debt of $14.9 million, and amortization of deferred commission costs of $25.1 million, partially offset by tax receivable agreement remeasurement of $15.7 million. The change in operating assets net of operating liabilities was primarily the result of an increase in unearned revenue of $60.1 million and an increase in accrued expenses and other liabilities of $21.9 million, largely offset by an increase in deferred costs and other assets of $40.0 million and an increase in accounts receivable of $32.9 million.
Net cash provided by operations was $44.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 as a result of a net loss of $78.0 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $93.8 million and a change of $28.6 million in our operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges are primarily comprised of depreciation and amortization of $48.7 million, equity-based compensation of $25.1 million, and loss on debt extinguishment of $9.4 million. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily the result of an increase in unearned revenue of $71.9 million, and an increase in accrued expenses and other liabilities of $18.2 million, partially offset by increases in accounts receivable of $34.5 million and deferred costs and other assets of $27.8 million.
Net cash provided by operations was $43.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 as a result of a net loss of $28.6 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $67.3 million and a change of $5.1 million in our operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges are primarily comprised of $32.7 million in equity-based compensation, $17.3 million in depreciation and amortization, and $16.4 million in paid-in-kind accrued interest. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily the result of an increase in unearned revenue of $15.0 million, partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable of $8.9 million and in deferred costs and other assets of $3.3 million.
Restructuring and transaction-related cash costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily related to cash IPO costs and are not expected to recur. However, we may continue to make future acquisitions as part of our business strategy which may require the use of capital resources and drive additional future restructuring and transaction-related cash expenditures as well as integration and acquisition-related compensation cash costs. During the years ended December 31, 2020, 2019, and 2018, we incurred the following cash expenditures:
__________________
(a)Represents cash payments directly associated with acquisition or disposal activities, including employee severance and termination benefits, contract termination fees and penalties, and other exit or disposal costs. For the year ended December 31, 2020, these payments related primarily to the IPO, including professional fees, severance and acceleration of payments for terminated employees, and deferred consideration. For the year ended December 31, 2019, these payments related primarily to the acquisition of Pre-Acquisition ZI, including professional fees, severance and acceleration of payments for terminated employees, and deferred consideration. For the year ended December 31, 2018, these payments related primarily to Carlyle’s investment in us.
(b)Represents cash payments directly associated with integration activities for acquisitions and acquisition-related compensation, which includes transaction bonuses and retention awards. For the year ended December 31, 2020, these payments related primarily to cash vesting payments from the acquisition of Pre-Acquisition ZI. For the year ended December 31, 2019, these payments related primarily to activities resulting from the acquisition of Pre-Acquisition ZI, including consulting and professional services costs, cash vesting payments (see Note 4 - Business Combinations to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K), and transaction bonuses and other compensation, as well as payments of retention awards granted upon the Company’s acquisitions of RainKing and NeverBounce. For the year ended December 31, 2018, these payments related primarily to retention awards granted upon our acquisition of RainKing and transaction bonuses paid upon Carlyle’s investment in us.
Future demands on our capital resources associated with our debt facilities may also be impacted by changes in reference interest rates and the potential that we incur additional debt in order to fund additional acquisitions or for other corporate purposes. Future demands on our capital resources associated with transaction expenses and restructuring activities and integration costs and transaction-related compensation will be dependent on the frequency and magnitude of future acquisitions and restructuring and integration activities that we pursue. As part of our business strategy, we expect to continue to pursue acquisitions of, or investments in, complementary businesses from time to time; however, we cannot predict the magnitude or frequency of such acquisitions or investments.
Cash Flows from (used in) Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $113.3 million, consisting of cash paid for acquisitions of $65.9 million, purchases of short-term investments of $30.6 million, and purchases of property and equipment and other assets of $16.8 million.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $736.7 million, primarily as a result of cash paid for acquisitions of $723.1 million and purchases of property and equipment and other assets of $13.6 million.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2018 was $13.1 million, primarily as a result of cash payments for the acquisition of NeverBounce of $8.5 million and purchases of property and equipment and other assets of $4.6 million.
As we continue to grow and invest in our business, we expect to continue to invest in property and equipment and opportunistically pursue acquisitions.
Cash Flows from (used in) Financing Activities
Cash provided from financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $172.2 million, primarily consisting of the IPO proceeds, net of the underwriters discount, of $1,023.7 million, proceeds from debt of $35.0 million, partially offset by the redemption of Series A Preferred Units of $274.2 million, repayment of debt of $510.9 million, purchase of OpCo Units from Pre-IPO OpCo Unitholders for $47.2 million, payments of deferred consideration of $24.7 million, payment of IPO issuance costs of $7.2 million, and tax distributions to equity partners of $9.9 million.
Cash provided from financing activities for year ended December 31, 2019 was $725.8 million, primarily as a result of the issuance of new debt of $1,220.8 million and the Series A Preferred Unit issuance of $200.2 million, partially offset by payments on long-term debt of $649.8 million, payment of debt issuance costs of $16.7 million, and tax distributions to equity partners of $16.5 million.
Cash used in financing activities for year ended December 31, 2018 was $29.9 million, primarily as a result of distributions to equity partners of $93.4 million, partially offset by the issuance of new debt of $67.3 million.
Refer to Note 8 - Financing Arrangements of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information related to each of our borrowings.
Debt Obligations
As of December 31, 2020, the aggregate remaining balance of $756.4 million of first lien term loans is due, in its entirety, at the contractual maturity date of February 1, 2026, which represents the only existing required future debt principal repayment obligations that will require future uses of the Company’s cash.
The first lien debt has a variable interest rate whereby the Company can elect to use a Base Rate or LIBOR plus an applicable rate. The applicable margin is 2.75% to 3.00% for Base Rate loans or 3.75% or 4.00% for LIBOR Based Loans, depending on the Company’s leverage. On June 17, 2020, the Company used approximately $101.2 million to prepay $100.0 million aggregate principal amount of the first lien term loans outstanding under the First Lien Credit Agreement, including accrued interest thereon of $1.2 million. The repayment was funded with a portion of the net proceeds received from the initial public offering of the Company’s Class A common stock. As of December 31, 2020, $756.4 million aggregate principal amount of term loans were outstanding under the First Lien Credit Agreement. The interest related portion of the repayment was recorded within Interest expense, net in its Consolidated Statements of Operations, and represented use of cash from operating activities in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. The quarterly repayment requirement on first lien borrowings has been satisfied for the remainder of the term after the $100.0 million principal payment. The effective interest rate on the first lien debt was 4.3% and 7.5% as of December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively.
Our consolidated first lien net leverage ratio is defined in our first lien credit agreement, and the EBITDA used for that ratio (“Credit Agreement EBITDA”) differs from Adjusted EBITDA due to certain defined add-backs, including pro forma cost savings from synergies and cash generated from changes in unearned revenue; see table below for reconciliation. Credit Agreement EBITDA for the 12 months ended December 31, 2020 was $291.5 million. Our consolidated first lien net leverage ratio as of December 31, 2020 was 1.9x.
__________________
(a)Primarily represents revaluations on tax receivable agreement liability and foreign exchange remeasurement gains and losses.
(b)Represents the impact of fair value adjustments to acquired unearned revenue relating to services billed by an acquired company prior to our acquisition of that company. These adjustments represent the difference between the revenue recognized based on management’s estimate of fair value of acquired unearned revenue and the receipts billed prior to the acquisition less revenue recognized prior to the acquisition.
(c)Represents costs directly associated with acquisition or disposal activities, including employee severance and termination benefits, contract termination fees and penalties, and other exit or disposal costs. For the year ended December 31, 2020, this expense related primarily to professional fees for the preparation for an initial public offering and deferred acquisition cost revaluations.
(d)Represents costs directly associated with integration activities for acquisitions and acquisition-related compensation, which includes transaction bonuses and retention awards. For the year ended December 31, 2020, this expense related primarily to cash vesting payments from the acquisition of Pre-Acquisition ZI. This expense is included in cost of service, sales and marketing expense, research and development expense, and general and administrative expense as follows:
In addition, our credit agreement governing our first lien term loan contains restrictive covenants that may limit our ability to engage in activities that may be in our long-term best interest. These restrictive covenants include, among others, limitations on our ability to pay dividends or make other distributions in respect of, or repurchase or redeem, capital stock, prepay, redeem, or repurchase certain debt, make acquisitions, investments, loans, and advances, or sell or otherwise dispose of assets. Our failure to comply with those covenants could result in an event of default which, if not cured or waived, could result in the acceleration of substantially all of our debt. The Company may be able to incur substantial additional indebtedness in the future. The terms of the credit agreements governing our first lien term loan limit, but do not prohibit, the Company from incurring additional indebtedness, and the additional indebtedness incurred in compliance with these restrictions could be substantial. These restrictions will also not prevent the Company from incurring obligations that do not constitute “Indebtedness” as defined in the agreements governing our indebtedness.
In February 2021, ZoomInfo Technologies LLC and ZoomInfo Finance Corp., indirect subsidiaries of ZoomInfo Technologies Inc., completed an offering of $350.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 3.875% senior notes due 2029. We used all of the net proceeds, along with cash on hand, to consummate the Debt Prepayment.. Following the Debt Prepayment, as of February 2, 2021, $400.0 million aggregate principal amount of first lien term loans were outstanding under our first lien credit agreement.
In February 2021, ZoomInfo LLC entered into an amendment to our first lien credit agreement, pursuant to which, among other things, there will be (i) an increase in the aggregate commitments to $250.0 million under our first lien revolving credit facility, (ii) the addition of the ZoomInfo Technologies LLC as a co-borrower, (iii) the repricing of our first lien term loan facility and first lien revolving credit facility and (iv) an extension of the maturity date of our first lien revolving credit facility to November 2025.
Capital Expenditures
Capital expenditures increased by $3.2 million, or 24%, to $16.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase reflects increased capital expenditures to support the larger company and greater capitalization of internal development costs.
Capital expenditures increased by $9.0 million, or 196%, to $13.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018. The increase reflects increased capital expenditures to support the larger company and greater capitalization of internal development costs.
Tax Receivable Agreements
We have entered into two tax receivable agreements. We entered into (i) the Exchange Tax Receivable Agreement with certain of our Pre-IPO OpCo Unitholders and (ii) the Reorganization Tax Receivable Agreement with the Pre-IPO Blocker Holders. These tax receivable agreements provide for the payment by members of the ZoomInfo Tax Group to such Pre-IPO Owners and certain Pre-IPO HoldCo Unitholders of 85% of the benefits, if any, that the ZoomInfo Tax Group is deemed to realize (calculated using certain assumptions) as a result of certain tax attributes and benefits covered by the tax receivable agreements. The Exchange Tax Receivable Agreement provides for the payment by members of the ZoomInfo Tax Group to certain Pre-IPO OpCo Unitholders and certain Pre-IPO HoldCo Unitholders of 85% of the benefits, if any, that the ZoomInfo Tax Group is deemed to realize (calculated using certain assumptions) as a result of (i) the ZoomInfo Tax Group’s allocable share of existing tax basis acquired in the IPO and (ii) increases in the ZoomInfo Tax Group’s allocable share of existing tax basis and tax basis adjustments that will increase the tax basis of the tangible and intangible assets of the ZoomInfo Tax Group as a result of sales or exchanges of OpCo Units for shares of Class A common stock after the IPO, and certain other tax benefits, including tax benefits attributable to payments under the Exchange Tax Receivable Agreement. The Reorganization Tax Receivable Agreement provides for the payment by ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. to Pre-IPO Blocker Holders and certain Pre-IPO HoldCo Unitholders of 85% of the benefits, if any, that the ZoomInfo Tax Group is deemed to realize (calculated using certain assumptions) as a result of the ZoomInfo Tax Group’s utilization of certain tax attributes of the Blocker Companies (including the ZoomInfo Tax Group’s allocable share of existing tax basis acquired in the Reorganization Transactions), and certain other tax benefits, including tax benefits attributable to payments under the Reorganization Tax Receivable Agreement. In each case, these increases in existing tax basis and tax basis adjustments generated over time may increase (for tax purposes) the ZoomInfo Tax Group’s depreciation and amortization deductions and, therefore, may reduce the amount of tax that the ZoomInfo Tax Group would otherwise be required to pay in the future, although the IRS may challenge all or part of the validity of that tax basis, and a court could sustain such a challenge. The ZoomInfo Tax Group’s allocable share of existing tax basis acquired in the IPO and the increase in the ZoomInfo Tax Group’s allocable share of existing tax basis and the anticipated tax basis adjustments upon exchanges of OpCo Units for shares of Class A common stock may also decrease gains (or increase losses) on future dispositions of certain capital assets to the extent tax basis is allocated to those capital assets. The payment obligations under the tax receivable agreements are an obligation of members of the ZoomInfo Tax group, but not of ZoomInfo OpCo. The ZoomInfo Tax Group expects to benefit from the remaining 15% of realized cash tax benefits. For purposes of the tax receivable agreements, the realized cash tax benefits will be computed by comparing the actual income tax liability of the ZoomInfo Tax Group (calculated with certain assumptions) to the amount of such taxes that the ZoomInfo Tax Group would have been required to pay had there been no existing tax basis, no anticipated tax basis adjustments of the assets of the ZoomInfo Tax Group as a result of exchanges and no utilization of certain tax attributes of the Blocker Companies (including the Blocker Companies’ allocable share of existing tax basis), and had ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. not entered into the tax receivable agreements. The term of each tax receivable agreement will continue until all such tax benefits have been utilized or expired, unless (i) ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. exercises its right to terminate one or both tax receivable agreements for an amount based on the agreed payments remaining to be made under the agreement, (ii) ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. breaches any of its material obligations under one or both tax receivable agreements in which case all obligations (including any additional interest due relating to any deferred payments) generally will be accelerated and due as if ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. had exercised its right to terminate the tax receivable agreements, or (iii) there is a change of control of ZoomInfo Technologies Inc., in which case the Pre-IPO Owners may elect to receive an amount based on the agreed payments remaining to be made under the agreement determined as described above in clause (i). Estimating the amount of payments that may be made under the tax receivable agreements is by its nature imprecise, insofar as the calculation of amounts payable depends on a variety of factors. The amount of existing tax basis and the anticipated tax basis adjustments, as well as the amount and timing of any payments under the tax receivable agreements, will vary depending upon a number of factors, including the timing of exchanges, the price of shares of our Class A common stock at the time of the exchange, the extent to which such exchanges are taxable, the amount of tax attributes, and the amount and timing of our income.
We expect that as a result of the size of the ZoomInfo Tax Group’s allocable share of existing tax basis acquired in the IPO, the increase in the ZoomInfo Tax Group’s allocable share of existing tax basis and the anticipated tax basis adjustment of the tangible and intangible assets of the ZoomInfo Tax Group upon the exchange of OpCo Units for shares of Class A common stock and our possible utilization of certain tax attributes, the payments that ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. may make under the tax receivable agreements will be substantial. We estimate the amount of existing tax basis with respect to which our Pre-IPO Owners will be entitled to receive payments under the tax receivable agreements (assuming all Pre-IPO OpCo Unitholders exchange their outstanding OpCo Units (together with a corresponding number of shares of Class B common stock) for shares of Class A common stock on December 31, 2020) is approximately $295.2 million (assuming a price of $48.23 per share of Class A common stock, which is the last reported sale price of our Class A common stock on the Nasdaq on December 31, 2020). The payments under the tax receivable agreements are not conditioned upon continued ownership of us by the exchanging holders of OpCo Units. See Note 18 to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our material contractual obligations as of December 31, 2020 and the years in which these obligations are due:
__________________
(1)Includes future principal payments on long-term indebtedness through the scheduled maturity dates thereof. Indebtedness is discussed in Note 8 - Financing Arrangements to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Interest incurred on amounts we borrow is based on relative borrowing levels, fluctuations in the variable interest rates, and the spread we pay over those interest rates. As such, we are unable to quantify our future obligations relating to interest and therefore no amounts have been included in the above table.
(2)Represents future payments on existing operating leases through the scheduled expiration dates thereof. This amount excludes lease agreements executed after December 31, 2020.
(3)Includes deferred consideration related to the Zoom Information Acquisition and contingent consideration related to the Komiko acquisitions at non-discounted, currently estimated payout amounts. Acquisitions and related deferred or contingent consideration are discussed in Note 4 - Business Combinations to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Estimated contingent consideration is subject to change depending on results of factors each is based on.
(4)Primarily relates to third-party cloud hosting and software as a service arrangements.
The amounts included in the table above represent agreements that are enforceable and legally binding; any obligations under contracts that we can cancel without significant penalty are not included here. The ultimate timing of these liabilities cannot be determined; therefore, we have excluded these amounts from the contractual obligations table above. Purchase orders issued in the ordinary course of business are not included in the table above as they represent authorizations to purchase the items rather than binding agreements. However, if such claims arise in the future, they could have a material effect on our financial position, results of operations, and cash flows.
The payments that we may be required to make under the tax receivable agreements that we entered into may be significant and are not reflected in the contractual obligations tables set forth above, as we are currently unable to estimate the amounts and timing of the payments that may be due thereunder.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, there were “no off-balance sheet arrangements,” as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). Our critical accounting policies are those that we believe have the most significant impact to the presentation of our financial position and results of operations and that require the most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a transaction is specifically dictated by U.S. GAAP with no need for the application of judgment.
In certain circumstances, however, the preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make certain estimates, judgments, and assumptions that effect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, we believe the following topics reflect our critical accounting policies and our more significant judgment and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We derive revenue primarily from subscription services. Our subscription services consist of our SaaS applications and related access to our databases. Subscription contracts are generally based on the number of users that access our applications, the level of functionality that they can access, and the amount of data that a customer integrates with their systems. Our subscriptions contracts typically have a term of one to three years and are non-cancellable. We typically bill for services annually, semi-annually or quarterly in advance of delivery.
We account for revenue contracts with customers using the following steps: (i) identification of contracts with customers, (ii) identification of distinct performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determination of contract transaction price, (iv) allocation of contract transaction price to the performance obligations, and (v) determination of revenue recognition based on the timing of satisfaction of the performance obligation(s).
We recognize revenue for subscription contracts on a ratable basis over the contract term based on the number of calendar days in each period, beginning on the date that our service is made available to the customer. Unearned revenue results from revenue amounts billed to customers in advance or cash received from customers in advance of the satisfaction of performance obligations. Determining the transaction price often involves judgments and estimates that can have a significant impact on the timing and amount of revenue reported. At times, the Company may adjust billing under a contract based on the addition of services or other circumstances, which are accounted for as variable consideration. The Company estimates these amounts based on historical experience and reduces revenue recognized.
Equity-Based Compensation
Equity instruments issued in exchange for services performed by officers, employees, and directors of the Company are accounted for using a fair-value based method, and the fair value of such equity instruments are recognized as expense in the consolidated statements of operations. Historically, the Company has issued profits interests to employees and officers with a return threshold that is set based on the fair value of the Company, as determined by the board of directors.
Equity-based compensation expense is measured at the grant date of the equity-based awards that vest over set time periods. Compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite services period. For profits interests, fair value is estimated using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. We determine the assumptions for the option-pricing model as follows:
•Risk-free interest rate - The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the date closest to the grant date for zero-coupon U.S. Treasury notes with maturities approximately equal to the expected life of the equity grants.
•Expected life - The expected life represents the period of time that the equity-based awards are expected to remain outstanding, giving consideration to vesting schedules and forfeiture patterns.
•Volatility - The volatility is based on the historical volatility of the stock prices for comparable companies with a look-back period consistent with the expected life.
•Dividend yield - The dividend yield is assumed to be zero.
Equity-based compensation that vests based on a performance event, such as a liquidity event, begins to be recognized at the date that the performance event becomes probable, and compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over any remaining service period. As of January 1, 2019, the Company adopted ASU 2018-07 and upon the adoption, the Company determined the fair value of outstanding non-vested, non-employee awards and will recognize expense in the same periods and in the same manner as if the Company were to pay cash to the recipient in lieu of the non-employee award. Performance vesting programs are primarily payable in cash from an upper-tier holder of Company equity units based on the appreciation of such units. These awards were modified in December 2019 to add an alternative performance and time vesting condition and to also permit settlement through exchange into the Company’s shares in addition to the existing cash-settlement option. The Company re-determined the fair value of these outstanding non-vested, non-employee awards at the time of the modification in December 2019. The modified fair value of these incentive units is based on the Company’s underlying common unit equivalent.
Business Combinations
We allocate the purchase consideration to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values. The purchase price is determined based on the fair value of the assets transferred, liabilities assumed, and equity interests issued, after considering any transactions that are separate for the business combination. The excess of fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of the identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets and contingent liabilities. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired customer bases, acquired technology and acquired trade names, useful lives, royalty rates, and discount rates.
The estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement during the measurement period for an acquisition, which may last up to one year from the acquisition date. During the measurement period, we may record adjustments to the fair value of tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with a corresponding offset to goodwill. After the conclusion of the measurement period or the final determination of the fair value of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
In addition, uncertain tax positions and tax related valuation allowances assumed in connection with a business combination are initially estimated as of the acquisition date. We re-evaluate these items based upon the facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date, with any adjustments to our preliminary estimates being recorded to goodwill, provided that the timing is within the measurement period. Subsequent to the measurement period, changes to uncertain tax positions and tax related valuation allowances will be recorded to earnings.
Goodwill and Acquired Intangible Assets
Goodwill is calculated as the excess of the purchase consideration paid in a business combination over the fair value of the assets acquired less liabilities assumed. Goodwill is not amortized, but instead is assigned to each of the Company’s reporting units and is tested for impairment at least annually or when events and circumstances indicate that fair value of a reporting unit may be below its carrying value. The Company has one reporting unit.
We first assess qualitative factors to evaluate whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than the carrying amount or elect to bypass such assessment. If it is determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, or we elect to bypass the qualitative assessment, we perform a quantitative test by determining the fair value of the reporting unit. The estimated fair value of the reporting unit is based on a projected discounted cash flow model that includes significant assumptions and estimates, including the discount rate, growth rate, and future financial performance. Valuations of similarly situated public companies are also evaluated when assessing the fair value of the reporting unit. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds the fair value, then an impairment loss is recognized for the difference.
Acquired technology, customer lists, trade names or brand portfolios, and other intangible assets are related to previous acquisitions. Acquired intangible assets determined to have definite lives are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated period over which we expect to realize economic value related to the intangible asset. The amortization periods range from two years to 15 years. Acquired intangible assets determined to have indefinite lives are not amortized, but rather tested for impairment annually, or more often if and when events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
Tax Receivable Agreements
In connection with our IPO, we entered into two Tax Receivable Agreements with certain non-controlling interest owners (the “TRA Holders”). The TRAs generally provide for payment by the Company to the TRA Holders of 85% of the net cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax or franchise tax that the Company actually realizes or is deemed to realize in certain circumstances. The Company will retain the benefit of the remaining 15% of these net cash savings.
We account for amounts payable under the TRA in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 450, Contingencies. As such, subsequent changes to the measurement of the TRA liability are recognized in the statements of income as a component of other income (expense), net. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had a liability of $271.0 million related to its projected obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreements in connection with the Reorganization Transactions and OpCo units exchanged. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a TRA remeasurement gain of $15.7 million. See Note 18 - Tax Receivable Agreements for further details on the TRA liability.
Income Taxes
Deferred taxes are recorded using the asset and liability method, whereby tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. We regularly evaluate the valuation allowances established for deferred tax assets for which future realization is uncertain. In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, we consider both positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax assets and liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and results of recent operations. If, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized, a valuation allowance is recorded.
ZoomInfo Technologies Inc. is a corporation and is subject to U.S. federal as well as state income tax related to its ownership percentage in ZoomInfo Holdings LLC. ZoomInfo Holdings LLC is a limited liability company treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes and files a U.S. Return of Partnership Income. Consequently, the members of ZoomInfo Holdings are taxed individually on their share of earnings for U.S. federal and state income tax purposes. However, ZoomInfo Holdings is subject to the Texas Margins Tax. Additionally, our operations in Israel are subject to local country income taxes. See Note 19 - Income Taxes for additional information regarding income taxes.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 - Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements.