Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of financial condition and operating results together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current plans, expectations and beliefs involving risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on 10-K, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. For convenience of presentation some of the numbers have been rounded in the text below. A discussion of the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2018 has been reported previously in our final prospectus, dated July 29, 2020, filed with the SEC pursuant to Rule 424(b)(4) (File No. 333-240115), under the heading "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations."
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on discovering and developing small molecule therapeutics targeting fundamental biological pathways of cancers. We use our highly efficient drug discovery engine, which we refer to as our “Integrated Discovery Engine”, to identify targets and develop small molecule new chemical entities, or NCEs, with properties that we believe could result in potentially differentiated product profiles. Our discovery engine combines our extensive experience and capabilities across cancer biology and medicinal chemistry. We are developing a broad pipeline of product candidates with an initial focus on validated oncology targets with the potential to address large patient populations. We believe our product candidates are differentiated from current programs targeting similar pathways and have the potential to significantly impact the lives of patients with cancer.
ZN-c5-Our lead product candidate, ZN-c5, is an oral selective estrogen receptor degrader, or SERD, currently in a Phase 1/2 clinical trial for the treatment of estrogen receptor-positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative, or ER+/HER2-, advanced or metastatic breast cancer. We have designed ZN-c5 to have high potency and selectivity, as well as favorable tolerability and pharmacokinetic, or PK, properties. We intend to initiate the Phase 2 monotherapy and combination (with palbociclib) portions of this Phase 1/2 trial in the first half of 2021. In addition, we initiated a Phase 1b open label, multi-center trial evaluating ZN-c5 in combination with abemaciclib (marketed as Verzenio ® by Lilly) in patients with ER+/HER2- advanced or metastatic breast cancer in November 2020 as part of a clinical research collaboration with Lilly. Abemaciclib is a CDK 4/6 inhibitor FDA approved for the treatment of hormone receptor-positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative, or HR+/HER2-, advanced or metastatic breast cancer in combination with fulvestrant, aromatase inhibitors or as a single agent in certain patients with disease progression following treatment with prior endocrine therapy or chemotherapy regimens. We also intend to initiate, subject to feedback from the FDA, a Phase 2/3 clinical trial evaluating ZN-c5 in earlier stage breast cancer patients in 2021 and to initiate a Phase 1b clinical trial evaluating ZN-c5 in combination with ZN-d5, our BCL-2 inhibitor product candidate, in patients with ER+/HER2- breast cancer in 2021.
ZN-c3-Our lead product candidate ZN-c3, an inhibitor of WEE1, a protein tyrosine kinase, currently in a Phase 1 clinical trial for the treatment of advanced solid tumors and in a phase 1b in combination with chemotherapy in patients with advanced ovarian cancer. We plan to report initial results from the Phase 1 portion of the ongoing trial of ZN-c3 at the AACR Annual Meeting in April 2021. In addition, we initiated a Phase 1b clinical trial evaluating ZN-c3 in combination with chemotherapy in patients with advanced ovarian cancer in the October 2020 and plan to initiate a Phase 2 trial evaluating ZN-c3 as monotherapy in patients with uterine serous carcinoma, or USC, in 2021. USC comprises 10%, and has the highest mortality rate, of all endometrial cancers, with approximately 6,000 new cases and 4,500 deaths in the United States per year. We continue to actively evaluate other potential combinations for the future clinical development of ZN-c3, and intend to initiate two (2) additional Phase 1 clinical trials evaluating ZN-c3 in combination with chemotherapy and PARP inhibitor in ovarian cancer and other targeted indications in 2021.
ZN-d5-Our other product candidate ZN-d5 is a selective inhibitor of B-cell lymphoma 2, or BCL-2, initially in development for the treatment of hematological malignancies. We initiated a Phase 1 clinical trial of ZN-d5 in patients with acute myeloid leukemia, or AML, or B-cell lymphoma in October 2021. In addition, we intend to initiate a Phase 1b clinical trial evaluating ZN-d5 in combination with ZN-c5, our oral SERD product candidate in patients with ER+/HER2- breast cancer in 2021.
ZN-e4- ZN-e4 is an irreversible inhibitor of epidermal growth factor receptor, or EGFR, currently in a Phase 1/2 clinical trial for the treatment of advanced non-small cell lung cancer, or NSCLC. We expect to report initial results from the Phase 1 portion of the ongoing trial of ZN-e4 in 2021
We currently own worldwide development and commercialization rights to each of our product candidates, other than in select Asian countries (including China) for each of ZN-c5, ZN-c3 and ZN-d5, for which we have out-licensed these rights to
our majority-owned joint venture, Zentera Therapeutics (Cayman), Ltd., or Zentera, and for ZN-e4 for which we have out-licensed these rights to SciClone Pharmaceuticals International (Cayman) Development Ltd. Zentera submitted an investigational new drug application, or IND, in China for ZN-c5 in December 2020, for ZN-c3 in February 2021 and intends to submit for ZN-d5 in 2021.
Other Preclinical Programs-We are also currently advancing multiple small molecule programs in preclinical development for other cancer indications, including select solid tumors and hematological malignancies. We are now in lead optimization for our fifth product candidate and plan to submit an IND to the FDA in 2021.
Since our inception, our operations have been limited to organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, establishing our intellectual property portfolio and performing research and development of our product pipeline. We do not have any products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenues from product sales. In April 2020, we completed our IPO and issued and sold approximately 10.6 million shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $18.00 per share, including approximately 1.4 million shares in connection with the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $172.4 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. In August 2020, we completed a follow-on offering of our common stock and issued and sold approximately 4.7 million shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $35.00 per share, including approximately 0.6 million shares in connection with the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $155.2 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses.
We had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $338.5 million as of December 31, 2020. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2020 will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into 2023. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be imprecise, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
Since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our net losses were $118.5 million and $46.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We had an accumulated deficit of $200.8 million as of December 31, 2020. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future.
We will not generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approval for our product candidates. In addition, if we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our commercialization capabilities to support product sales, marketing and distribution activities, either alone or in collaboration with others. Furthermore, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company, including significant legal, accounting, investor relations and other expenses that we did not incur as a private company.
As a result, we will need to raise substantial additional capital to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we plan to finance our operations through the sale of equity, debt financings or other capital sources, which may include collaborations with other companies or other strategic transactions. There are no assurances that we will be successful in obtaining an adequate level of financing as and when needed to finance our operations on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to secure adequate additional funding as and when needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development and commercialization of one or more product candidates or delay our pursuit of potential in-licenses or acquisitions.
Corporate Conversion
In connection with our IPO, we converted from a Delaware limited liability company into a Delaware corporation pursuant to a statutory conversion, and changed our name from Zentalis Pharmaceuticals, LLC to Zentalis Pharmaceuticals, Inc. We refer to all transactions related to our conversion to a corporation as the Corporate Conversion. As a result of the Corporate Conversion, all holders of units of Zentalis Pharmaceuticals, LLC became holders of shares of common stock of Zentalis Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
In connection with the Corporate Conversion, our outstanding Series A convertible preferred units, Series B convertible preferred units, Series C convertible preferred units, Class A common units and Class B common units, or Units, converted into an aggregate of 25,288,854 shares of our common stock (including 1,160,277 shares of restricted common stock) based on the IPO price of $18.00 per share of common stock.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
We continue to monitor how the COVID-19 pandemic is affecting our employees, business, preclinical studies and clinical trials. In response to the spread of COVID-19, we have closed our executive offices with our administrative employees continuing their work outside of our offices and limited the number of staff in any given research and development laboratory by operating on rotational schedules. Disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic have resulted in difficulties including delays in initiating new trial sites and certain supply chain activities, suspension of enrollment at some of our existing trial sites, and the incurrence of additional costs as a result of preclinical study and clinical trial delays and adjustments. Limited operations at our laboratory facilities have also resulted in delays in our research-stage programs. As a result, we expect that the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact our business, results of operations, clinical development timelines and financial condition. At this time, there is significant uncertainty relating to the trajectory of the COVID-19 pandemic and impact of related responses. The impact of COVID-19 on our future results will largely depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the ultimate geographic spread of the disease, the duration of the pandemic, travel restrictions and social distancing in the United States and other countries, business closures or business disruptions, the continued impact on financial markets and the global economy, and the effectiveness of the global response to contain and treat the disease. See “Risk Factors-The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic has adversely impacted and we expect will continue to adversely impact our business, including our preclinical studies and clinical trials.” in Part I, Item 1A. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
License Agreements and Strategic Collaborations Agreements
Recurium IP Holdings, LLC
In December 2014, and as amended and restated effective as of December 2017 and September 2019 and as amended in May 2020, we entered into a license agreement, or the Recurium Agreement, with Recurium IP Holdings, LLC, or Recurium IP, under which we were granted an exclusive worldwide license to certain intellectual property rights owned or controlled by Recurium IP to develop and commercialize pharmaceutical products for the treatment or prevention of disease, other than for pain. In connection with the May 2020 amendment, we clarified certain aspects of the sublicensing payment provisions. We have the right to sublicense our rights under the Recurium Agreement, subject to certain conditions. We are required to use commercially reasonable efforts to develop and commercialize at least one product that comprises or contains a licensed compound and to execute certain development activities.
Under the terms of the Recurium Agreement, we are obligated to make development and regulatory milestone payments, pay royalties for net sales and make sublicensing payments with respect to certain licensed products directed to one of ten specific biological targets, including ZN-c5, ZN-c3 and ZN-e4. We are obligated to make development and regulatory milestone payments for such licensed products of up to $44.5 million. In addition, we are obligated to make milestone payments up to $150,000 for certain licensed products used in animals. We are also obligated to pay royalties on sales of such licensed products at a mid- to high-single digit percentage. In addition, if we choose to sublicense or assign to any third parties our rights under the Recurium Agreement with respect to such licensed products, we must pay to Recurium IP 20% of sublicensing income received in connection with such transaction.
Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research
In February 2016, and as amended in April 2017 and December 2017, we entered into an option agreement, or the Mayo Agreement, with Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research under which we were granted an exclusive option to obtain a nonexclusive worldwide license to know-how and an exclusive worldwide license to related patent rights created by Mayo under the Mayo Agreement. The Mayo Agreement provided that it will expire on the date of the last to expire of the Mayo patent rights or, if no Mayo patent rights arise, on February 11, 2021. No Mayo patent rights were created under the Mayo Agreement and therefore the agreement expired on February 11, 2021. In consideration for the grant of know-how we provided grants of common stock on the first anniversary and Class A common units on the second and third anniversaries following entry into the Mayo Agreement. As of December 31, 2020, we have granted equity securities which amount to 15,435 shares of common stock under the Mayo Agreement.
SciClone Pharmaceuticals International (Cayman) Development Ltd.
In December 2014, and as amended in December 2016 and December 2017, we entered into a collaboration and license agreement, or the SciClone Agreement, with SciClone Pharmaceuticals International (Cayman) Development Ltd., or SciClone, under which we granted an exclusive license certain intellectual property rights in the People’s Republic of China (including the territories of Macao and Hong Kong), South Korea, Taiwan and Vietnam, or the SciClone Territory, for SciClone to develop and commercialize a licensed product for the treatment or prevention of oncologic diseases and an exclusive option to obtain a similar license for up to two (2) additional licensed products. Under the SciClone Agreement, SciClone is responsible for clinical development activities required in order to obtain regulatory approval in the SciClone Territory. SciClone paid to us a
one-time upfront payment of $1.0 million upon entering into the SciClone Agreement, and $4.0 million in aggregate milestone payments. No additional development or commercial milestones or reimbursement for research and development expenses are payable under the SciClone Agreement, as amended. We are entitled to receive a mid-single digit royalty on net sales of licensed products in the SciClone Territory, which royalty is subject to certain reductions in the event that SciClone is unable to achieve certain gross margins or if generic products are sold or if technology covering a licensed product is licensed from a third party. We have also agreed to pay SciClone tiered royalties pursuant to the terms of the SciClone Agreement, the applicable rate of which are determined based on whether a compound is developed to a successful dual IND submission and the costs incurred by SciClone for the development of such product candidate. Following the December 2016 amendment to the SciClone Agreement, SciClone retains the exclusive license to develop and commercialize our EGFR inhibitor product candidate, ZN-e4, in the SciClone Territory, and the exclusive option to obtain an exclusive license to develop up to two (2) specified compounds under the SciClone Agreement for which we submit an IND by providing notice and paying $5 million to us. SciClone’s and our royalty obligations will expire on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis on the later of fifteen years from the date of first commercial sale or when there is no longer a valid patent claim covering such licensed product in such country.
Pfizer Clinical Trial Collaboration and Supply Agreement
In May 2018, we entered into a clinical trial collaboration and supply agreement with Pfizer, Inc. to evaluate the safety, tolerability and efficacy of ZN-c5 in combination with their CDK4/6 inhibitor, palbociclib, in our ongoing Phase 1/2 clinical trial of ZN-c5. Pursuant to this agreement, we will be responsible for the conduct and cost of the relevant studies, under the supervision of a joint development committee made up of our representatives and representatives of Pfizer that meets quarterly. Pfizer will supply palbociclib for use in the trial, at no cost to us.
Eli Lilly and Company Clinical Trial Collaboration and Supply Agreement
In July 2020, we entered into a clinical trial collaboration and supply agreement with Eli Lilly and Company, or Lilly, to evaluate the safety, tolerability and efficacy of ZN-c5 in combination with their CDK4/6 inhibitor, abemaciclib, in a Phase 1b open label multi-center clinical trial that we initiated in November 2020. Pursuant to this agreement, we will be responsible for the conduct and cost of the relevant studies. Lilly is obligated to supply abemaciclib for use in the trial, at no cost to us. We are required to provide to Lilly clinical data and other reports at major decision points during the trial and no later than 60 days following completion of the planned Phase 1b clinical trial.
This agreement does not grant any right of first negotiation to participate in future clinical trials, and each of the parties retains all rights and ability to evaluate their respective compounds in any clinical studies, either as monotherapy or in combination with any other product or compound, in any therapeutic area.
The agreement with Lilly will expire upon completion of all obligations of the parties thereunder or upon termination by either party. We and Lilly each have the right to terminate the agreement for material breach by the other party. In addition, the agreement may be terminated by either party due to safety considerations or if either party decides to discontinue development of its own compound for medical, scientific, legal or other reasons or if a regulatory authority takes any action preventing that party from supplying its compound for the study. Lilly also has the right to terminate this agreement if it notifies us in writing that it reasonably and in good faith believes that abemaciclib is being used in an unsafe manner, and we fail to incorporate changes to address such issue, and the issue is unable to be resolved following elevation to appropriate parties.
Zentera Therapeutics
In May 2020, each of our subsidiaries Zeno Alpha, Inc., K-Group Alpha, Inc. and K-Group Beta, Inc. entered into a collaboration and license agreement with our majority-owned joint venture, Zentera , which we refer to as the Zentera Sublicenses, pursuant to which we collaborate with Zentera on the development and commercialization of ZN-c5, ZN-d5 and ZN-c3, respectively, whether alone or in a licensed product, or the Collaboration Products, in each case for the treatment or prevention of disease, other than for pain, which is referred to as the Zentera Field, in the People’s Republic of China, Macau, Hong Kong and Taiwan, which is referred to as the Zentera Collaboration Territory. Under each Zentera Sublicense, Zentera will lead development, and upon regulatory approval, the commercialization, of the Collaboration Products in the Zentera Collaboration Territory. On May 19, 2020, Zentera issued an aggregate of 60.2% of its issued shares of common stock to Zeno Alpha, Inc., K-Group Alpha, Inc., K-Group Beta, Inc., Zeno Management, Inc. and Zeno Beta, Inc. Anthony Y. Sun, M.D., our President and Chief Executive Officer, serves as Chief Executive Officer and a member of the board of directors of Zentera, and Kevin D. Bunker, Ph.D., our Chief Operating Officer, serves as a member of the board of directors of Zentera.
Under each Zentera Sublicense, we granted Zentera an exclusive, royalty-bearing license under certain of our technology, including technology licensed from Recurium under the Recurium Agreement, to develop and commercialize the Collaboration Products in the Zentera Field and in the Zentera Collaboration Territory, subject to certain rights that we retain, and upon a successful manufacturing transfer, a non-exclusive license under certain of our manufacturing technology to manufacture
Collaboration Products in the Zentera Field and in the Zentera Collaboration Territory. Zentera has the right to sublicense its rights under the Zentera Sublicenses subject to certain conditions.
Under the terms of the Zentera Sublicenses, Zentera is responsible for the costs of developing the Collaboration Products in the Zentera Collaboration Territory, and we are responsible for the costs of developing the Collaboration Products outside the Zentera Collaboration Territory, provided that Zentera will reimburse us for a portion of its costs for global data management, pharmacovigilance, safety database management, and chemistry, manufacturing and controls activities with respect to each Collaboration Product. Under the Zentera Sublicenses, we will be eligible to receive future development and regulatory milestones of up to $4.45 million per Collaboration Product. Zentera will pay us royalties on net sales of Collaboration Products in the Zentera Collaboration Territory at a mid- to high-single digit percentage, subject to certain reductions. In addition, if Zentera or its affiliate chooses to sublicense or assign to any third parties its rights under the Zentera Sublicenses with respect to any Collaboration Product, Zentera must pay to us 20% of sublicensing income received by Zentera or its affiliates in connection with such transaction.
Zentera’s royalty obligations will expire on a Collaboration Product-by-Collaboration Product and region-by-region basis upon the later of the date on which such product is no longer covered by a valid claim of a licensed patent and the 15th anniversary of the first commercial sale of such product in such region.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue, and we do not expect to generate any revenue in the foreseeable future from product sales. We have generated, and may in the future generate, revenue from payments received under our collaboration agreements, which includes payments of upfront fees, license fees, milestone-based payments and reimbursements for research and development efforts.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our discovery efforts, and the development of our product candidates, and include:
•salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation expense, for personnel engaged in research and development functions;
•expenses incurred under agreements with third parties, including contract research organizations, or CROs, and other third parties that conduct research, preclinical activities and clinical trials on our behalf as well as contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, that manufacture drug material for use in our preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•costs of outside consultants, including their fees, stock-based compensation and related travel expenses;
•the costs of laboratory supplies and acquiring, developing and manufacturing preclinical study and clinical trial materials;
•license payments made for intellectual property used in research and development activities; and
•allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other operating costs.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Reimbursed research and development costs under government grant arrangements are recorded as a reduction to research and development expenses and are recognized in the period in which the related costs are incurred.
We track external development costs by product candidate or development program, but we do not allocate personnel costs, license payments made under our licensing arrangements or other internal costs to specific development programs or product candidates. These costs are included in unallocated research and development expenses in the table below.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by product candidate or development program:
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have a higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase substantially for the foreseeable future and will comprise a larger percentage of our total expenses as we complete our ongoing clinical trials, initiate new clinical trials, continue to discover and develop additional product candidates and prepare regulatory filings for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical development.
The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot determine with certainty the duration and costs of our existing and future clinical trials of our product candidates or any other product candidate we may develop or if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any product candidate for which we obtain marketing approval. We may never succeed in obtaining marketing approval for any product candidate. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of our product candidates and any other product candidate we may develop in the future will depend on a variety of factors, including:
•per patient trial costs;
•the number of patients who enroll in each trial;
•the number of trials required for approval;
•the number of sites included in the trials;
•the countries in which the trials are conducted;
•the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
•the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
•any delays in clinical trials as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•potential additional safety monitoring requested by regulatory agencies;
•the duration of patient participation in the trials and follow-up;
•the phase of development of the product candidate;
•the efficacy and safety profile of the product candidate.
•uncertainties in clinical trial design and patient enrollment rates;
•the actual probability of success for our product candidates, including the safety and efficacy, early clinical data, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability;
•significant and changing government regulation and regulatory guidance;
•the timing and receipt of any marketing approvals; and
•the expense of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, if the FDA or another regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development of a product candidate, or if we experience significant delays in our clinical trials due to patient enrollment or other reasons, we would be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in our executive, finance, business development and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include legal fees relating to intellectual property and corporate matters; professional fees for
accounting, auditing, tax and consulting services; insurance costs; travel expenses; and facility-related expenses, which include direct depreciation costs and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other operating costs.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our personnel headcount to support increased research and development activities relating to ZN-c3, ZN-c5, ZN-d5, ZN-e4, and any other product candidate we may develop. We also expect to incur increased expenses associated with being a public company, including costs of accounting, audit, legal, regulatory and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with Nasdaq and SEC requirements; director and officer insurance costs; and investor and public relations costs.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on cash and cash equivalents. We expect our interest income to increase due to the net proceeds from our IPO and August 2020 follow-on offering.
Income Taxes
Since our inception, we and our corporate subsidiaries have generated cumulative federal, state and foreign net operating loss for which we have not recorded any net tax benefit due to uncertainty around utilizing these tax attributes within their respective carryforward periods.
Net Loss Attributable to Noncontrolling Interest
Since December 21, 2017, the date of our initial investment in Kalyra Pharmaceuticals, Inc., or Kalyra, we have consolidated the financial results of our affiliate, Kalyra. Although we do not have a controlling interest in Kalyra, we determined that Kalyra was a variable interest entity, of which we were the primary beneficiary. For more information on the treatment of Kalyra as a variable interest entity, please see Note 3 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, together with the changes in those items in dollars:
Revenue
We did not generate any revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $84.9 million, compared to $38.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $46.5 million was primarily due to increases in external research and development expenses related to our lead product candidates, as we advanced our Phase 1/2 clinical trials for each of ZN-c5, ZN-c3 and ZN-d5 in 2020. In addition, in 2020, we conducted additional preclinical studies, incurred additional manufacturing costs, and incurred increased costs for study and lab materials. Unallocated research and development expenses increased by $22.7 million primarily due to $14.8 million of additional employee related costs of which $6.4 million was driven by non-cash stock-based compensation from incentive grants and increased headcount to support our platform development, and $3.7 million of facilities and other allocated overhead expenses, $2.2 million of consulting and outside services, $1.3 million of collaboration and licensing related costs and decreased federal grant reimbursements of $0.7 million.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $33.9 million, compared to $8.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase of $25.4 million was primarily attributable to an increase of $22.0 million in employee-related costs, of which $16.1 million was driven by non-cash stock-based compensation from incentive grants issued during the year and increased headcount to support our growth. Professional service fees for legal services increased $2.3 million and consulting and other outside services increased $0.9 million to support the increased operations of the organization. Insurance costs increased by $2.1 million related to operating as a public company.
Investment and Other Income, Net
Investment and other income was $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $0.2 million was the result of interest earned on higher invested cash balances.
Net Loss
Net loss was $118.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $46.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $72.1 million was primarily the result of the increases in research and development and general and administrative expenses discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, our operations have been limited to organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, establishing our intellectual property portfolio and performing research and development of our product pipeline. We do not have any products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenues from product sales and we have incurred significant operating losses. We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we advance the preclinical and clinical development of our research programs and product candidates. We expect that our research and development and general and administrative costs will increase in connection with conducting additional preclinical studies and clinical trials for our current and future research programs and product candidates, contracting with CMOs to support preclinical studies and clinical trials, expanding our intellectual property portfolio, and providing general and administrative support for our operations.
As a result, we will need to raise substantial additional capital to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we plan to finance our operations through the sale of equity, debt financings or other capital sources, which may include collaborations with other companies or other strategic transactions. There are no assurances that we will be successful in obtaining an adequate level of financing as and when needed to finance our operations on terms acceptable to us or at all, particularly in light of the economic downturn and ongoing uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic could adversely affect the economies and financial markets of the global economy, resulting in an economic downturn that could also affect our operations, our ability to conduct our clinical trials, our ability to raise additional funds through public offerings and the volatility of our stock price and trading in our stock. Even after the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided, we expect we will continue to experience adverse impacts to our business as a result of any economic recession or depression that has occurred or may occur in the future. If we are unable to secure adequate additional funding as and when needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development and commercialization of one or more product candidates or delay our pursuit of potential in-licenses or acquisitions.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing and commercializing therapeutics, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability.
Even if we are able to generate revenue from product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, then we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
We do not currently have any approved products and have never generated any revenue from product sales. To date, we have financed our operations primarily through the sale of equity securities. From inception through December 31, 2020, we raised a total of $518.1 million in gross proceeds from the sale of shares of our common stock and Series A, B and C convertible preferred units. As of December 31, 2020, we had $55.0 million in cash and cash equivalents, $283.6 million in marketable securities, and an accumulated deficit of $200.8 million. We had no indebtedness as of December 31, 2020.
On April 7, 2020, we completed our IPO and issued and sold approximately 10.6 million shares of our common stock, including approximately 1.4 million shares in connection with the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, at a public offering price of $18.00 per share, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $172.4 million, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
On August 3, 2020, we completed a follow-on offering of our common stock and issued and sold approximately 4.7 million shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $35.00 per share, including approximately 0.6 million shares in connection with the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $155.2 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for the period presented:
Operating Activities
We have incurred losses since inception. Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $86.8 million, consisting primarily of our net loss of $118.5 million as we incurred expenses associated with research activities for our lead product candidates and incurred general and administrative expenses, and partially offset by changes in operating assets and liabilities of $7.8 million and non-cash adjustments of $23.9 million.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $39.1 million, consisting primarily of our net loss of $46.4 million as we incurred expenses associated with research activities for our lead product candidates and incurred general and administrative expenses, and partially offset by changes in operating assets and liabilities of $6.5 million and non-cash adjustments of $0.7 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $284.8 million was attributable to the net investment of excess cash of $284.1 million and the purchases of property and equipment of $0.8 million.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $0.4 million consisting of purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 of $360.4 million relates to net proceeds from the completion of our initial public offering of $172.5 million, net proceeds from our follow-on offering of $155.9 million, net proceeds from the issuance of our Series C convertible preferred units of $14.2 million, and contributions from noncontrolling interest owners of $18.4 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2019 of $81.8 million primarily relates to net proceeds from the issuance of our Series C convertible preferred units.
Funding Requirements
Our operating expenses have increased substantially in 2020 and are expected to increase substantially in the future in connection with our ongoing activities.
Specifically, our expenses will increase as we:
•advance the clinical development of ZN-c5, ZN-c3 and ZN-e4 for the treatment of oncology indications;
•pursue the preclinical and clinical development of other current and future research programs and product candidates, including ZN-d5;
•in-license or acquire the rights to other products, product candidates or technologies;
•maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•hire additional personnel in research, manufacturing and regulatory and clinical development as well as management personnel;
•seek regulatory approval for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical development; and
•expand our operational, financial and management systems and increase personnel, including personnel to support our operations as a public company.
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2020 will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into 2023. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be imprecise, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical drugs, it is difficult to estimate with certainty the amount of our working capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the progress, costs and results of our clinical trials for our programs for ZN-c5, ZN-c3 and ZN-e4;
•the progress, costs and results of additional research and preclinical studies in ZN-d5 and other research programs we initiate in the future;
•the costs and timing of process development and manufacturing scale-up activities associated with our product candidates and other programs we advance them through preclinical and clinical development;
•our ability to establish and maintain strategic collaborations, licensing or other agreements and the financial terms of such agreements;
•the extent to which we in-license or acquire rights to other products, product candidates or technologies; and
•the costs and timing of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and protecting our intellectual property rights and defending against any intellectual property-related claims.
In addition, the magnitude and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our liquidity and future funding requirements is uncertain as the pandemic continues to evolve globally. We have considered and will continue to consider the availability of relief provided by such legislative actions as the Families First Act and the CARES Act, and have opted to pursue certain, but not all measures including the deferral of employer payroll taxes, but not including Payroll Protection Plan loans. See “Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic” and “Risk Factors". The outbreak of the novel coronavirus disease, COVID-19, has adversely impacted and we expect will continue to adversely impact our business, including our preclinical studies and clinical trials.
Further, our operating results may change in the future, and we may need additional funds to meet operational needs and capital requirements associated with such operating plans.
Until such time, if ever, that we can generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaboration agreements, other third-party funding, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements and marketing and distribution arrangements.
We currently have no credit facility or committed sources of capital. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, your ownership interest will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a common stockholder. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through other third-party funding, collaboration agreements, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements or marketing and distribution arrangements, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market products or product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, costs and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Goodwill
Methodology Judgment and Uncertainties Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
Our goodwill represents the excess of the cost over the fair value of net assets acquired from its business combination. The determination of the value of goodwill and intangible assets arising from business combinations and asset acquisitions requires extensive use of accounting estimates and judgments to allocate the purchase price to the fair value of net tangible assets and intangible assets acquired. Goodwill is reviewed for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if an event occurs indicating the potential for impairment.
During the impairment review process, we consider qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying amount, including goodwill. If we determine that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit is less than the carrying amount, then no additional assessment is deemed necessary. Otherwise, we proceed to compare the estimated fair values of the reporting units with the carrying values, including goodwill. If the carrying amounts of the reporting units exceed the fair value, we record an impairment loss based on the difference.
We use available market information and valuation methodologies using estimates to determine the fair values of the goodwill. We base our estimates on the best information available at the time and available market information may vary. If we over estimate the fair value of the goodwill, our actual impairment charge may differ from our estimates.
In-Process Research and Development
Methodology Judgment and Uncertainties Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
Intangible assets acquired in a business combination that are used for IPR&D activities are considered indefinite lived until the completion or abandonment of the associated research and development efforts. We assess the carrying value of our IPR&D assets at least annually, or more frequently if an event occurs indicating the potential for impairment, which requires us to make assumptions and judgements regarding the future cash flows of these assets. During the impairment review process, the fair value of the IPR&D is determined by a combination of third-party sources and forecasted discounted cash flows. If the assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment we recognize is the amount by which the carrying value of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. If our third party sources and forecasted cash flows differ materially from actual future operating results, our actual impairment change may differ from our estimates.
Research and Development Expenses - Clinical Trial Accruals
Methodology Judgment and Uncertainties Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
All of our clinical trials have been executed with support from contract research organizations, (CROs), and other vendors. We accrue costs for clinical trial activities performed by CROs and other vendors based upon the estimated amount of work completed on each trial. For clinical trial expenses, the significant factors used in estimating accruals include the number of patients enrolled, the activities to be performed for each patient, the number of active clinical sites, and the duration for which the patients will be enrolled in the trial. We monitor patient enrollment levels and related activities to the extent possible through internal reviews, correspondence with CROs and review of contractual terms.
We base our estimates on the best information available at the time. However, additional information may become available to us, which may allow us to make a more accurate estimate in future periods. If we do not identify costs that we have begun to incur or if we underestimate or overestimate the level of services performed or the costs of these services, our actual expenses could differ from our estimates. There were no such significant changes during the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2019.
Share-Based Payments
Methodology Judgment and Uncertainties Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
The Company maintains a Stock Incentive Plan, which provides for share-based payment awards, including stock options, restricted stock and performance awards. We determine the fair value of our stock option awards and performance awards at the date of grant using a Black-Scholes model. We determine the fair value of our restricted stock awards at the date of grant using the closing market value of our common stock on the date of grant. Option-pricing models and generally accepted valuation techniques require management to make assumptions and to apply judgment to determine the fair value of our awards. These assumptions and judgments include estimating the future volatility of our stock price, expected dividend yield and future employee stock option exercise behaviors. Changes in these assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimate.
Our performance awards require management to make assumptions regarding the likelihood of achieving long-term Company goals. We do not currently believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in estimates or assumptions we use to determine stock-based compensation expense. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to changes in share-based compensation expense that could be material.
If actual results are not consistent with the assumptions used, the share-based compensation expense reported in our financial statements may not be representative of the actual economic cost of the share-based compensation. A 10% change in our share-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, would have affected pre-tax earnings by approximately $2.3 million in 2020.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the JOBS Act, and we may take advantage of reduced reporting requirements that are otherwise applicable to public companies. Section 107 of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies are required to comply with those standards. We have elected to take advantage of the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards; and as a result of this election, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates. The JOBS Act also exempts us from having to provide an auditor attestation of internal control over financial reporting under Sarbanes-Oxley Act Section 404(b).
We will remain an “emerging growth company” until the earliest to occur of (1) the last day of the fiscal year in which our annual gross revenue is $1.07 billion or more, (2) the last day of 2025, (3) the date that we become a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, which would occur if the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700.0 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter; and (4) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during any three-year period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on certain accounting standards that have been adopted during 2020 or that have not yet been required to be implemented and may be applicable to our future operations.