Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION
AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to help the reader understand the results of operations and financial condition of the Company. The Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto for the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition to historical information, this Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and forward-looking information under applicable Canadian securities law requirements (collectively, “forward-looking statements”) which are intended to be covered by the safe harbors created thereby. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those discussed in our forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under the “Part I - Item 1A Risk Factors” section and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as, in other reports and documents we file with the Securities and Exchange Commission from time to time. Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a veterinary health company creating products for companion animals by focusing on the unmet needs of clinical veterinarians. We expect that our product portfolio will include innovative diagnostics and medical devices that emphasize patient health and practice health. With a team that includes clinical veterinary professionals, our goal is to provide veterinarians the opportunity to increase productivity and grow revenue while better serving the animals in their care.
Our strategic focus is on the final development and commercialization of our TRUFORMA® diagnostic biosensor platform and the first five assays for the detection of adrenal and thyroid disorders in cats and dogs. The TRUFORMA® platform uses Bulk Acoustic Wave (BAW) technology to provide a non-optical and fluorescence free detection system for use at the point-of-care. We believe that BAW technology will enable precise and repeatable test results at the point-of-care during a typical veterinary appointment. We believe that the TRUFORMA® diagnostic platform does not require pre-market regulatory approval for use with companion animals in the United States. We intend to launch our TRUFORMA® platform and our first three assays on or about March 30, 2021.
Following the commercial launch of TRUFORMA®, we expect to continue the development of another point-of-care diagnostic platform, which is based on miniaturized laser-based Raman spectroscopy technology and is designed to detect pathogens in companion animals. We believe this platform will enable the identification of biological and biochemical signatures in complex biological samples and has the potential to achieve reference lab sensitivity/specificity to screen for a wide range of pathogens in companion animal feces, urine, respiratory, and dermatological samples in minutes without the need for extensive sample prep or the use of reagents. The diagnostic platform requires a small fecal sample preparation. Additionally, the platform has automated analysis and does not require specialized staff training. We believe that this diagnostic platform does not require pre-market regulatory approval for use with companion animals in the United States.
We have performed initial development work on a circulating tumor cell (CTC) “liquid biopsy” platform for use in a reference lab setting as a canine cancer diagnostic. This platform is intended for use to detect canine cancers faster, more affordably and less invasively compared to existing methods, which can be expensive and cost-prohibitive for pet owners. We have worked on the development of an assay for use with this platform that targets hard-to-diagnose canine cancers, such as hemangiosarcoma and osteosarcoma.
Consistent with our focus on the development of point-of-care diagnostic platforms, we intend to seek one or more partners for the further development and commercialization of the liquid biopsy platform.
Through the year ended December 31, 2020, we were a development-stage company with no commercialized products, and we did not generate any revenue from product sales. We have incurred significant net losses since our inception. We incurred net losses of approximately $16.9 million and $19.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 respectively. These losses have resulted principally from costs incurred in connection with investigating and developing our product candidates, research and development activities, and general and administrative costs associated with our operations. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $69.0 million and cash and cash equivalents of approximately $62.0 million.
For the foreseeable future, we expect to continue to incur losses, which will increase from historical levels as we commence the commercialization of our TRUFORMA® platform, expand our product development activities, and expand our sales and marketing activities.
For further information on the regulatory, business and product pipeline, please see the “Business” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For further information on the risk factors, please see the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue
Through the year ended December 31, 2020, we were a development-stage company with no commercialized products, and we did not generate any revenue from product sales. We intend to launch our TRUFORMA® platform and our first three assays on or about March 30, 2021.
Operating Expenses
The majority of our operating expenses to date have been for the general and administrative activities related to general business activities, capital market activities and stock-based compensation, and research and development activities related to our lead product candidates. With the commercial launch of our TRUFORMA® platform, we expect to incur cost of goods sold expenses.
Research and Development Expense
All costs of research and development are expensed in the period in which they are incurred. Research and development costs primarily consist of salaries and related expenses for personnel, fees paid to consultants, outside service providers, professional services, travel costs and materials used in clinical trials and research and development.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense consists primarily of personnel costs, including salaries, related benefits and stock-based compensation for employees, consultants and directors. General and administrative expenses also include rent and other facilities costs and other general business services.
Professional Fees
Professional fees include attorney’s fees, accounting and tax fees and consulting fees incurred in connection with product investigation and analysis, regulatory analysis, government relations, audit, securities offerings, investor relations, and general corporate and intellectual property advice.
Income Taxes
As of December 31, 2020, we had net operating loss carryforwards for U.S. federal and state income tax purposes of approximately $19.6 million and non-capital loss carryforwards for Canada of approximately $27.8 million, which will begin to expire in fiscal year 2035. We have evaluated the factors bearing upon the realizability of our deferred tax assets, which are comprised principally of net operating loss carryforwards and non-capital loss carryforwards. We concluded that, due to the uncertainty of realizing any tax benefits as of December 31, 2020, a valuation allowance was necessary to fully offset our deferred tax assets.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, and revenue, costs and expenses and related disclosures during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those described below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 3 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this document, we believe that the estimates and assumptions involved in the following accounting policies may have the greatest potential impact on our financial statements.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act, or the JOBS Act, contains provisions that, among other things, reduce certain reporting requirements for an “emerging growth company.” We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of the JOBS Act provision that an emerging growth company may delay adopting new or revised accounting standards until such times as those standards apply to private companies.
In addition, as an “emerging growth company” we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, and (ii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis). These exemptions will apply until December 31, 2022 or until we no longer meet the requirements of being an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the year. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Areas where significant judgment is involved in making estimates are the determination of fair value of stock-based compensation; the useful lives of property and equipment, allocation of proceeds from financings to shares and warrants fair value of warrants and placement agent warrants.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development expenses comprise costs incurred in performing research and development activities, including salaries and benefits, safety and efficacy studies, contract manufacturing costs, contract research costs, patent procurement costs, materials and supplies and occupancy costs. Research and development activities include internal and external activities associated with research and development studies of current product candidates and advancing product candidates towards commercialization.
Research and development costs related to continued research and development programs are expensed as incurred in accordance with ASC topic 730.
Translation of Foreign Currencies
The functional currency, as determined by management, is U.S. dollars, which is also our reporting currency. Transactions denominated in currencies other than U.S. dollars and the monetary value of assets and liabilities are translated at the period end exchange rates. Revenue and expenses are measured at rates of exchange prevailing on the transaction dates. All of the exchange gains or losses resulting from these other transactions are recognized in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure the cost of equity-settled transactions by reference to the fair value of the equity instruments at the date at which they are granted if the fair value of the goods or services received by us cannot be reliably estimated.
We calculate stock-based compensation using the fair value method, under which the fair value of the options at the grant date is calculated using the Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model, and subsequently expensed over the vesting period of the option using the graded vesting method. The provisions of our stock-based compensation plans do not require us to settle any options by transferring cash or other assets, and therefore we classify the awards as equity. Stock-based compensation expense recognized during the period is based on the value of stock-based payment awards that are ultimately expected to vest. We estimate forfeitures at the time of grant and revise these estimates, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. Volatility is determined based on volatilities of comparable companies when the Company does not have its own trading history. The expected term, which represents the period of time that options granted are expected to be outstanding, is estimated based on an average of the term of the options. The risk-free rate assumed in valuing the options is based on the Canadian treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant for the expected term of the option. The expected dividend yield percentage at the date of grant is Nil as we are not expected to pay dividends in the foreseeable future.
Loss Per Share
Basic loss per share, or EPS, is computed by dividing the loss attributable to common shareholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding. Diluted EPS reflects the potential dilution that could occur from common shares issuable through the exercise or conversion of stock options, restricted stock awards, warrants and convertible securities. In certain circumstances, the conversion of options, warrants and convertible securities are excluded from diluted EPS if the effect of such inclusion would be anti-dilutive.
The dilutive effect of stock options is determined using the treasury stock method. Stock options and warrants to purchase our common shares issued during the period were not included in the computation of diluted EPS, as the effect would be anti-dilutive.
Comprehensive Loss
We follow ASC topic 220. This statement establishes standards for reporting and display of comprehensive (loss) income and its components. Comprehensive loss is net loss plus certain items that are recorded directly to shareholders' equity. We currently have no other comprehensive loss items.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
Our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 are as follows:
Revenue
We did not generate any revenue during the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019.
Research and Development
Research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $8.0 million, compared to approximately $10.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of approximately $2.3 million or 22%. The decrease primarily was due to a reduction in general research and development activity as we focused on TRUFORMA® activities, and is more specifically related to lower milestone expenses, contracted expenditures, salaries, bonus and benefits, supplies, and consulting fees as compared to the 2019 year.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $6.0 million, compared to approximately $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of approximately $1.0 million or 15%. The decrease was due to a decrease in salaries, bonus and benefits of approximately $1.3 million primarily resulting from a reduction in stock compensation expense of approximately $0.9 million compared to the 2019 year, along with a general reduction in salaries for marketing and other administrative personnel of approximately $0.4 million. Other decreases include a reduction of travel and accommodation expense of approximately $0.4 million and marketing and investor relations expense of approximately $0.2 million. These decreases were partially offset by increases in regulatory fees of approximately $0.3 million, rent expense of approximately $0.3 million, related to the reclassification of right-of-use asset expense from amortization to rent, office expense of approximately $0.2 million associated with the expensing of office furniture in the first quarter of 2020 and insurance expense of approximately $0.1 million. Due to stock option grants on December 31, 2020 we anticipate an increase in expenses related to salaries, bonus and benefits in future periods.
Professional Fees
Professional fees for the year ended December 31, 2020 were approximately $2.2 million, compared to approximately $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of approximately $0.5 million or 30%. The increase primarily was due to increased expenses in costs associated with our two shareholder meetings held in 2020 as well as our 2020 offering activity as described below.
Net Loss
Our net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $16.9 million, or $0.05 per share, compared with a net loss of approximately $19.8 million, or $0.19 per share, for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of approximately $2.9 million or 15%. The net loss in each period was attributed to the matters described above. We expect to continue to record net losses in future periods until such time as we have sufficient revenue from product sales to offset our operating expenses.
Cash Flows
Year ended December 31, 2020 compared to year ended December 31, 2019
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the periods set forth below:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $16.2 million, compared to approximately $15.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of approximately $0.6 million or 4%. The increase primarily resulted from an increased use of operating cash including decreasing accounts payable by approximately $0.9 million and increasing deposits and prepaid expenses for inventory, insurance, and property tax paid by $0.8 million, partially offset by a lower net loss in 2020 and an increase in non-cash expenses including stock based compensation of approximately $1.7 million, depreciation and amortization of approximately $0.5 million and loss on asset disposition of approximately $0.1 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $76.7 million, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of approximately $14.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of approximately $61.8 million or 415%. The increase in cash from financing activities resulted from approximately $56.5 million in proceeds from two equity offerings of common shares and warrants, net of financing costs of approximately $5.1 million, approximately $24.8 million in proceeds from the exercise of warrants, and approximately $0.5 million in Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loans.
Investing Activities
Net cash from investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $1.0 million, compared to net cash used of approximately $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of approximately $1.7 million, or 246%. The increase in net cash from investing activities during the current year 2020 related primarily to approximately $1.0 million of cash received in connection with the cancellation and buyout of our office lease compared to the prior period in which approximately $0.7 million was used in association with our digital data platform, the construction of marketing assets, and the capitalization of integration costs associated with the implementation of an ERP system.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred losses and negative cash flows from operations and have not generated any revenue since our inception in May 2015. As of December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $69.0 million. We have funded our working capital requirements primarily through the sale of our common shares and the exercise of stock options and warrants. At December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $62.0 million.
At December 31, 2020, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $62.0 million, prepaid expenses and deposits of approximately $1.7 million, and tax credits receivable of approximately $0.1 million. Current assets amounted to approximately $62.9 million with current liabilities of approximately $2.0 million, resulting in a working capital (defined as current assets minus current liabilities) of approximately $60.9 million.
Subsequent to December 31, 2020, warrants to purchase an aggregate of 200,248,821 common shares were exercised, resulting in cash proceeds of approximately $32.0 million. We also completed an underwritten public offering of 105,013,158 common shares, resulting in net cash proceeds of approximately $185.4 million. After giving effect to these transactions, as of February 26, 2021, we had cash of approximately $277.5 million and 947,298,207 common shares issued and outstanding.
In the second quarter of 2019, we sold $12,000,000 of our Series 1 Preferred Shares to an accredited investor in a private placement at a purchase price of $1,000,000 per Series 1 Preferred Share. Each Series 1 Preferred Share has a stated value of $1,000,000. The Series 1 Preferred Shares do not have voting rights except to the extent required by applicable law and are not convertible into the Company’s common shares. Holders of the Series 1 Preferred Shares will not be entitled to dividends but, in lieu thereof, will receive Net Sales Returns (“Net Sales Returns” is defined as annual payments equal to 9 percent of net sales) until such time as the holders have received total Net Sales Returns equal to 9 times the aggregate stated value of the outstanding Series 1 Preferred Shares. We will have the right to redeem the outstanding Series 1 Preferred Shares at any time at a redemption price equal to 9 times the aggregate stated value of the Series 1 Preferred Shares outstanding less the aggregate amount of the Net Sales Returns paid (the “Redemption Amount”). Upon any dissolution, liquidation or winding up, whether voluntary or involuntary, holders of Series 1 Preferred Shares will be entitled to a liquidation preference equal to the stated value of the Series 1 Preferred Shares less the Net Sales Returns paid on the Series 1 Preferred Shares. In the event of a fundamental transaction (defined in the Series 1 Preferred Shares to include an amalgamation, merger or other business combination transaction involving our Company in which our shareholders do not have the right to cast more than 50% of the votes that may be cast for the election of directors, or a sale, lease or other disposition of the properties and/or assets of our company as an entirety or substantially as an entirety to a third party), the holders of the Series 1 Preferred Shares will be entitled to receive consideration for their Series 1 Preferred Shares equal to a multiple of the stated value of the Series 1 Preferred Shares ranging from 5.0 to 9.0 depending on the timing of the fundamental transaction, subject to a cap equal to the Redemption Amount.
In December 2018, we entered into an at-the-market equity offering sales agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. under which we may sell pursuant to the universal shelf registration statement common shares in the United States only, from time to time, for up to $50.0 million and was amended on March 25, 2019 to $10.0 million in aggregate sales proceeds in "at the market" transactions. No sales of common shares were made under the sales agreement in the second and third quarters, and the program was inactive at December 31, 2020.
On October 17, 2017 we entered into a five-year $5,000,000 unsecured working capital facility with Equidebt LLC, one of our shareholders (the “Equidebt Facility”). Amounts borrowed under the Equidebt Facility bear interest at a rate of 14% per annum payable at maturity. All amounts borrowed under the Equidebt Facility become due and payable on October 17, 2022. We can make two borrowings per month under the Equidebt Facility, each of which must be for a minimum of $250,000. No amounts were outstanding under the Equidebt Facility at December 31, 2020.
We believe that our existing cash resources will be sufficient to fund our expected working capital needs through December 2023. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our existing security holders will likely experience dilution, and the incurring of indebtedness would result in increased debt service obligations and could require us to agree to operating and financial covenants that could restrict operations. In the event that we are unable to obtain sufficient capital to meet our working capital requirements, we may be required to change or curtail current or planned operations in order to conserve cash until such time, if ever, that sufficient proceeds from operations are generated. In such an event, we may not be able to take advantage of business opportunities and may have to terminate or delay safety and efficacy studies, curtail our product development programs, or sell or assign rights to our product candidates, products and technologies.
Our future capital requirements depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
• the scope, progress, results and costs of researching and developing our current or future product candidates;
• the number and characteristics of the product candidates we pursue;
• the cost of manufacturing our current and future product candidates and any products we successfully commercialize;
• the cost of commercialization activities if any of our current or future product candidates are approved for sale, including marketing, sales, service, customer support and distribution costs;
• the expenses needed to attract and retain skilled personnel;
• the costs associated with being a public company;
• our ability to establish and maintain strategic collaborations, licensing or other arrangements and the financial terms of such agreements;
• the scope and terms of our business plans from time to time, and our ability to realize upon our business plans; and
• the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing possible patent claims, including litigation costs and the outcome of any such litigation.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since inception, we have not engaged in the use of any off-balance sheet arrangements, such as structured finance entities, special purpose entities or variable interest entities.
Outstanding Share Data
The only class of outstanding voting equity securities of the Company are the common shares. As of February 26, 2021:
• there are 947,298,207 common shares issued and outstanding;
• there are stock options outstanding under our Stock Option Plan to acquire an aggregate of 35,620,500 common shares;
• and there were common share purchase warrants (collectively, the “February Warrants”) originally outstanding to acquire an aggregate of 21,875,001 common shares, which February Warrants were issued in connection with an offering completed by the Company on February 14, 2020 (which has been described in a Form 8-K dated February 12, 2020). Of these February Warrants, 20,833,334 are Series A Warrants exercisable for a cash price of $0.20 per share, and 1,041,667 are Series A Placement Agent Warrants exercisable for a cash price of $0.15 per share. There are currently 197,917 February Warrants outstanding to acquire 197,917 shares.
• there were common share purchase warrants (collectively, the “April Warrants”) originally outstanding to acquire an aggregate of 18,333,334 common shares, which April Warrants were issued in connection with an offering completed by the Company on April 9, 2020 (which has been described in a Form 8-K dated April 7, 2020). Of these April Warrants, 16,666,667 are Series B Warrants, 1,666,667 are Series B Placement Agent Warrants, and all are exercisable for a cash price of $0.15 per share. There are currently 366,585 April Warrants outstanding to acquire an aggregate of 366,585 common shares.
• there were common share purchase warrants (collectively, the “May Warrants”) originally outstanding to acquire an aggregate of 145,503,333 common shares, which May Warrants were issued in connection with an offering completed by the Company on May 29, 2020 (which has been described in a registration statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-238322) filed on May 26, 2020). Of these May Warrants, 133,333,333 are Series C Warrants, all exercisable for a cash price of $0.15 per share, and 12,170,000 are Pre-funded Warrants, all of which have now been exercised. There are currently 276,500 May Warrants outstanding to acquire an aggregate of 276,500 common shares
• there were common share purchase warrants (collectively, the “July Warrants”) originally outstanding to acquire an aggregate of 212,500,000 common shares, which July Warrants were issued in connection with an offering completed by the Company on July 7, 2020 (which has been described in a Form 8-K dated July 6, 2020). Of these July Warrants, 187,500,000 are Series D Warrants, all exercisable for a cash price of $0.16 per share, and 25,000,000 are Pre-funded Warrants, all of which have now been exercised. There are currently 931,000 July Warrants outstanding to acquire an aggregate of 931,000 common shares.
• All of the currently outstanding warrants also have a “cashless exercise” feature which is applicable in certain circumstances. The cashless exercise feature could result in the potential issuance of common shares based upon the “in-the-money” value of the applicable warrants at the time of exercise of the applicable warrants. The number of the common shares that may be issued is not determinable. However, the number of common shares that are issuable is based upon a formula contained in the applicable warrants, which determines the number of common shares issuable by dividing the “in-the-money” value (based upon the then current market price, as provided in the applicable warrants) by the then current market price, and multiplying this result by the number of common shares that are issuable under the applicable warrants pursuant to cash exercise.