Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. As discussed in the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, as well as assumptions that, if they never materialize or prove incorrect, could cause our results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” under Part I, Item 1A in this Form 10-K. Our fiscal year ends January 31.
We have omitted discussion of fiscal 2019 results where it would be redundant to the discussion previously included in Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 31, 2020.
Overview
Business Summary
Zuora provides a cloud-based subscription management platform, architected specifically for dynamic, recurring business models. Our solution enables companies across multiple industries and geographies to launch, manage and scale a subscription business, automating the entire subscription order-to-revenue process, including billing, collections and revenue recognition. With Zuora’s solution, businesses can change pricing and packaging for products and services to grow and scale, efficiently comply with revenue recognition standards, analyze customer data to optimize their subscription offerings, and build meaningful relationships with their subscribers.
Many of today’s enterprise software systems manage their order-to-revenue processes using software built for a product driven economy. These systems were not designed for the dynamic, ongoing nature of subscription services and are extremely difficult to configure. In traditional product-based businesses, order-to-revenue was a linear process-a customer orders a product, is billed for that product, payment is collected, and the revenue is recognized. These legacy product-based systems were not specifically designed to handle the complexities and ongoing customer events of recurring relationships, commonly found in a subscription business, and their impact on areas such as billing proration, revenue recognition, and reporting in real-time. Using product-based software to build a subscription business often results in inefficient processes with prolonged and complex manual downstream work, hard-coded customizations, and a proliferation of stock-keeping units (SKUs).
However, new subscription business models are inherently dynamic, with multiple interactions and constantly-changing relationships and events. The capabilities to launch, price, and bill for products, facilitate and record cash receipts, process and recognize revenue, and analyze data to drive key decisions are mission critical and particularly complex for companies with subscription business models. As a result, as companies launch or grow a subscription business, they often conclude that legacy systems are inadequate. That’s where Zuora comes in.
Our vision is “The World Subscribed” -- the idea that one day every company will be a part of the Subscription Economy. Our focus has been on developing software that enables our customers to thrive as a subscription business.
Our solution includes Zuora Central Platform, Zuora Billing, Zuora Revenue, Zuora Collect, and other software that support and expand upon these core products. Our software helps companies analyze data - including information such as which customers are delivering the most recurring revenue, or which segments are showing the highest churn, enabling customers to make informed decisions for their subscription business and quickly implement changes such as launching new services, updating pricing (usage, time, or outcome based), delivering new offerings, or making other changes to their customers’ subscription experience. We also have a large subscription ecosystem of global partners and the Subscribed Strategy Group, that can assist our customers with additional strategies and services throughout the subscription journey.
Companies in a variety of industries - technology, manufacturing, media and entertainment, telecommunications, and many others - are using our solution to scale and adapt to a world that is increasingly choosing subscription-based offerings.
COVID-19 Pandemic Impact
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused certain disruptions to our business operations-such as delays and lengthening of our customary sales cycles and postponed implementations, certain customers not purchasing or renewing our products or services, requests for extended payment terms and contract restructurings by certain customers more severely impacted by the pandemic, challenges in sales and customer success efforts due to travel restrictions, and shifting certain customer events to virtual-only experiences. During the year ended January 31, 2021, we experienced disruptions including customer loss, down-sells, customer requests for extended payment terms and other relief due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe that such COVID-related disruptions negatively impacted our ability to generate new business and increased churn for the year. However, because our financial results are driven by multiple factors, some of which are not quantifiable, it is not possible to determine the significance of the specific impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial results in any given period.
Because our products are generally offered as subscription-based licenses and a portion of that revenue is recognized over time, the effect of the pandemic may not be fully reflected in our operating results until future periods. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our business operations in future periods will depend on multiple uncertain factors, including the duration and severity of the pandemic, its overall negative impact on the global economy generally and on our customers, which operate in numerous industries, and continued responses by governments and businesses to COVID-19.
We are continuing to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business operations and financial results. As a prudent cost-saving measure and to preserve cash, we have implemented plans to manage our costs in certain areas such as travel, events, and marketing and have previously reduced our pace of hiring while continuing to prioritize new headcount critical to operations, sales and customer support. For example, during fiscal 2021, we generally did not increase base salaries in order to preserve cash in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. During the three months ended July 31, 2020, for retention purposes, we issued RSU grants to eligible non-executive employees that vested in full during fiscal 2021. See Note 16. Employee Stock Plans to the consolidated financial statements contained herein for additional details. To the extent the business disruption continues for an extended period, additional cost management actions may be considered. The uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on the global economy could also lead to a more significant adverse impact on our business operations and financial performance in the future.
The COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on us and the economy has significantly limited our ability to forecast our future operating results, including our ability to predict revenue and expense levels, and plan for and model future operating results. Our competitors could experience similar or different impacts as a result of COVID-19, which could result in changes to our competitive landscape. While we have developed and continue to develop plans to help mitigate the negative impact of the pandemic on our business, these efforts may not be effective and any protracted economic downturn could significantly affect our business and operating results. We will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic to our business. See Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and financial results.
Fiscal 2021 Business Highlights
Our business highlights for the fourth quarter and full year fiscal 2021 include the following:
•During the fourth quarter, we closed eight deals that exceeded $500,000 in ACV, a record for deals of this size.
•During the fourth quarter, subscription revenue represented 82% of total revenue and subscription gross margin was 77%, the highest levels in our history as a public company.
•During the fourth quarter, we achieved both positive operating cash flow and positive free cash flow for the first time, a key milestone for the company.
•Our subscription revenue was $242.3 million for the year, an increase of 17% over last fiscal year.
•We improved our total gross margin to 57% for the year, compared to 51% last year, as we shifted more of our services work to our system integrator partners and improved our cost structure.
•Customer transaction volume processed through Zuora's Billing platform was $56.7 billion during the year, an increase of 29% compared to last fiscal year.
•We grew our business to 676 customers with ACV exceeding $100,000 as of January 31, 2021, which represents 8% year-over-year growth.
•We hired Todd McElhatton, our Chief Financial Officer in June 2020 and Sri Srinivasan, our Chief Engineering and Product Officer in January 2021.
•We announced new strategic partnerships with Stripe and GoCardless that provide for certain payment-related integrations with the Zuora platform.
For a definition of ACV, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Key Operational and Financial Metrics.”
Fiscal 2021 Financial Performance Summary
Our financial performance for fiscal 2021, compared to fiscal 2020, reflects the following:
•Subscription revenue was $242.3 million, an increase of $35.8 million, or 17%, and total revenue was $305.4 million, an increase of $29.4 million, or 11%. This growth reflects our acquisition of new customers as well as increased transaction volume and sales of new products to our existing customers.
•Total cost of revenue decreased to $130.8 million, or 43% of total revenue, compared to $134.2 million, or 49% of revenue, last year. We invested additional resources during the year to support the growth in the number of customers as well as the increased activity from existing customers.
•Loss from operations improved to $73.9 million, or 24% of revenue, compared to a loss of $85.7 million, or 31% of revenue, last year.
Key Operational and Financial Metrics
We monitor the following key operational and financial metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans and make strategic decisions:
Customers with Annual Contract Value Equal to or Greater than $100,000
We believe our ability to enter into larger contracts is indicative of broader adoption of our solution by larger organizations. It also reflects our ability to expand our revenue footprint within our current customer base. We define ACV as the subscription revenue we would contractually expect to recognize from that customer over the next twelve months, assuming no increases or reductions in their subscriptions. We define the number of customers at the end of any particular period as the number of parties or organizations that have entered into a distinct subscription contract with us for which the term has not ended. Each party with which we have entered into a distinct subscription contract is considered a unique customer, and in some cases, there may be more than one customer within a single organization. We have increased the number of customers with ACV equal to or greater than $100,000 to 676 as of January 31, 2021, as compared to 624 as of January 31, 2020.
Dollar-Based Retention Rate
We believe our dollar-based retention rate is a key measure of our ability to retain and expand revenue from our customer base over time. We calculate our dollar-based retention rate as of a period end by starting with the sum of the ACV from all customers as of twelve months prior to such period end, or prior period ACV. We then calculate the sum of the ACV from these same customers as of the current period end, or current period ACV. Current period ACV includes any upsells and also reflects contraction or attrition over the trailing twelve months, but excludes revenue from new customers added in the current period. We then divide the current period ACV by the prior period ACV to arrive at our dollar-based retention rate. Our dollar-based retention rate decreased to 100% as of January 31, 2021, as compared to 104% as of January 31, 2020. While we saw an improvement in dollar-based retention rate during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, there was a year-over-year decline primarily due to certain impacts related to the COVID-19 pandemic, including increased churn as some customers renewed with lower transaction volume, experienced business failure, and sought other relief, particularly in the second quarter of fiscal 2021. We expect this higher churn will negatively affect our dollar-based retention rate through the second quarter of fiscal 2022. Additionally, we may continue to experience fluctuations in this metric in the near term due to the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on the global economy and our business.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
Subscription revenue. Subscription revenue consists of fees for access to, and use of, our products, as well as customer support. We generate subscription fees pursuant to non-cancelable subscription agreements with terms that typically range from one to three years. Subscription revenue is primarily based on fees to access our services platform over the subscription term. We typically invoice customers in advance in either annual or quarterly installments. Customers can also elect to purchase additional volume blocks or products during the term of the contract. We typically recognize subscription revenue ratably over the term of the subscription period, beginning on the date that access to our platform is provided, which is generally on or about the date the subscription agreement is signed.
Professional services revenue. Professional services revenue consists of fees for services related to helping our customers deploy, configure, and optimize the use of our solutions. These services include system integration, data migration, process enhancement, and training. Professional services projects generally take three to twelve months to complete. Once the contract is signed, we generally invoice for professional services on a time and materials basis, although we occasionally engage in fixed-price service engagements and invoice for those based upon agreed milestone payments. We recognize revenue as services are performed for time and materials engagements and on a proportional performance method as the services are performed for fixed fee engagements. We expect to transition a portion of our professional services implementations to our strategic partners, including system integrators, and as a result we expect our professional services revenue to decrease over time as a percentage of total revenue.
Deferred Revenue
Deferred revenue consists of customer billings in advance of revenue being recognized from our subscription and support services and professional services arrangements. We primarily invoice our customers for subscription services arrangements annually or quarterly in advance. Amounts anticipated to be recognized within one year of the balance sheet date are recorded as deferred revenue, current portion, and the remaining portion is recorded as deferred revenue, net of current portion in our consolidated balance sheets.
Overhead Allocation and Employee Compensation Costs
We allocate shared costs, such as facilities costs (including rent, utilities, and depreciation on capital expenditures related to facilities shared by multiple departments), information technology costs, and certain administrative personnel costs to all departments based on headcount and location. As such, allocated shared costs are reflected in each cost of revenue and operating expenses category.
Employee compensation costs consist of salaries, bonuses, commissions, benefits, and stock-based compensation.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Cost of subscription revenue. Cost of subscription revenue consists primarily of costs related to hosting our platform and providing customer support. These costs include data center costs and third-party hosting fees, employee compensation costs associated with our cloud-based infrastructure and our customer support organizations, amortization expense associated with capitalized internal-use software and purchased technology, allocated overhead, software and maintenance costs, and outside services associated with the delivery of our subscription services. We intend to continue to invest in our platform infrastructure, including third-party hosting capacity, and support organizations. However, the level and timing of investment in these areas could fluctuate and affect our cost of subscription revenue in the future.
Cost of professional services revenue. Cost of professional services revenue consists primarily of costs related to the deployment of our platform. These costs include employee compensation costs for our professional services team, allocated overhead, travel costs, and costs of outside services associated with supplementing our internal staff. We believe that investment in our system integrator partner network will lead to total margin improvement, however costs may fluctuate in the near term as we shift deployments to our partner network.
Gross profit and gross margin. Our gross profit and gross margin may fluctuate from period to period as our revenue fluctuates, and as a result of the timing and amount of investments to expand hosting capacity, including through third-party cloud providers, amortization expense associated with our capitalized internal-use software and purchased technology, and our continued efforts to build platform support and professional services teams.
Operating Expenses
Research and development. Research and development expense consists primarily of employee compensation costs, allocated overhead, and travel costs. We capitalize research and development costs associated with the development of internal-use software and we generally amortize these costs over a period of three years into cost of subscription revenue. All other research and development costs are expensed as incurred. We believe that continued investment in our platform is important for our growth, and as such, expect our research and development expense to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future but may increase or decrease as a percentage of total revenue.
Sales and marketing. Sales and marketing expense consists primarily of employee compensation costs, including the amortization of deferred commissions related to our sales personnel, allocated overhead, costs of general marketing and promotional activities, and travel costs. Commission costs that are incremental to obtaining a contract are amortized in sales and marketing expense over the period of benefit, which is expected to be five years. While our sales and marketing expense as a percentage of total revenue has decreased slightly in recent periods, we expect to continue to make significant investments as we expand our customer acquisition and retention efforts. Therefore, we expect that sales and marketing expense will increase in absolute dollars but may vary as a percentage of total revenue for the foreseeable future.
General and administrative. General and administrative expense consists primarily of employee compensation costs, allocated overhead, and travel costs for finance, accounting, legal, human resources, and recruiting personnel. In addition, general and administrative expense includes non-personnel costs, such as accounting fees, legal fees, charitable contributions and all other supporting corporate expenses not allocated to other departments. We expect to incur ongoing costs as a result of operating as a public company, including costs related to compliance and reporting obligations of public companies, and continued investment to support our growing operations. As a result, we expect our general and administrative expense to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future but may vary as a percentage of total revenue in the near term. Over the long-term, we expect general and administrative expense to decline as a percentage of total revenue as we realize efficiencies.
Interest and Other Income (Expense), net
Interest and other income (expense), net primarily consists of interest income from our investment holdings, interest expense associated with our Debt Agreement, and foreign exchange fluctuations.
Income Tax Provision
Income tax provision consists primarily of income taxes related to foreign and state jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We maintain a full valuation allowance on our federal and state deferred tax assets as we have concluded that it is more likely than not that the deferred assets will not be utilized.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our consolidated results of operations data for the periods presented in dollars and as a percentage of our total revenue:
Note: Percentages in the table above may not sum due to rounding.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our consolidated financial statements presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we monitor and consider non-GAAP cost of subscription revenue, non-GAAP cost of professional services revenue, non-GAAP gross profit, non-GAAP research and development expense, non-GAAP sales and marketing expense, non-GAAP general and administrative expense, non-GAAP loss from operations, non-GAAP net loss, non-GAAP net loss per share, and free cash flow. We use non-GAAP financial measures in conjunction with GAAP measures as part of our overall assessment of our performance, including the preparation of our annual operating budget and quarterly forecasts, to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies and to communicate with our Board of Directors concerning our financial performance. We believe our non-GAAP financial measures provide investors consistency and comparability with our past financial performance and facilitate period-to-period comparisons of our operating results. We also believe our non-GAAP financial measures are useful in evaluating our operating performance compared to that of other companies in our industry, as they generally eliminate the effects of certain items that may vary for different companies for reasons unrelated to overall operating performance.
Investors are cautioned that there are material limitations associated with the use of non-GAAP financial measures as an analytical tool. The non-GAAP financial measures we use may be different from non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies, limiting their usefulness for comparison purposes. We compensate for these limitations by providing specific information regarding the GAAP items excluded from our non-GAAP financial measures. The presentation of these non-GAAP financial measures is not intended to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or superior to, financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP. Reconciliations of our non-GAAP financial measures to the nearest respective GAAP measures are provided below.
We exclude the following items from one or more of our non-GAAP financial measures:
•Stock-based compensation expense. We exclude stock-based compensation expense, which is a non-cash expense, because we believe that excluding this item provides meaningful supplemental information regarding operational performance. In particular, stock-based compensation expense is not comparable across companies given it is calculated using a variety of valuation methodologies and subjective assumptions.
•Amortization of acquired intangible assets. We exclude amortization of acquired intangible assets, which is a non-cash expense. We exclude these amortization expenses because we do not believe these expenses have a direct correlation to the operation of our business.
•Internal-use software. We exclude non-cash adjustments for capitalization and the subsequent amortization of internal-use software, including any impairment charges, from certain of our non-GAAP measures. We capitalize certain costs incurred for the development of computer software for internal use and then amortize those costs over the estimated useful life. Capitalization and amortization of software development costs can vary significantly depending on the timing of products reaching technological feasibility and being made generally available. Moreover, because of the variety of approaches taken and the subjective assumptions made by other companies in this area, we believe that excluding the effects of capitalized software costs allows investors to make more meaningful comparisons between our operating results and those of other companies.
•Charitable donations. We exclude expenses associated with charitable donations of our common stock from certain of our non-GAAP financial measures. We believe that excluding these non-cash expenses allows investors to make more meaningful comparisons between our operating results and those of other companies.
•Certain litigation. We exclude non-recurring charges and benefits, including litigation expenses and settlements, related to litigation matters that are outside of the ordinary course of our business. We believe these charges and benefits do not have a direct correlation to the operations of our business and may vary in size depending on the timing and results of such litigation and related settlements. We began excluding litigation that is outside of the ordinary course of our business from our non-GAAP financial measures in the second quarter of fiscal 2021 as these expenses significantly increased, specifically expenses relating to our ongoing securities class actions and derivative litigation.
•New headquarters costs. We exclude non-recurring costs associated with our new corporate headquarters. In January 2020, we incurred costs associated with water damage, net of insurance recovery, at our new headquarters in Redwood City, California, as well as costs to relocate our operations from other offices to the new headquarters. We expect that the costs related to the water damage and associated insurance recoveries will be fully recognized by the end of our next quarter ending April 30, 2021. We believe that excluding these non-recurring costs allows investors to make more meaningful comparisons between our operating results and those of other companies due to the infrequent nature of these costs.
The following tables provide a reconciliation of our GAAP to Non-GAAP measures:
(1) Calculated based upon 117,598 and 111,122 weighted-average shares of common stock outstanding during the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Free Cash Flow
We define free cash flow as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities, less cash used for purchases of property and equipment, net of insurance recoveries. Insurance recoveries include amounts paid to us for property and equipment that were damaged in January 2020 at our corporate headquarters. We include the impact of net purchases of property and equipment in our free cash flow calculation because we consider these capital expenditures to be a necessary component of our ongoing operations. We consider free cash flow to be a liquidity measure that provides useful information to management and investors about the amount of cash generated by the business that can possibly be used for investing in our business and strengthening our balance sheet, but it is not intended to represent the residual cash flow available for discretionary expenditures.
Fiscal Years Ended January 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Subscription revenue increased by $35.8 million, or 17%, for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was driven by growth in our customer base, including both new and existing customers, and includes $2.7 million and $1.3 million of revenue recognized in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively, primarily related to contract resolutions with two customers and customers that elected to extend their on-premise licenses in fiscal 2021 as they transition to our Zuora Revenue cloud offering that will not be recurring in future periods. New customers contributed approximately $19.5 million of the increase in subscription revenue, excluding the one-time recognition discussed above, for fiscal 2021 compared to the prior year period, while increased transaction volume and sales of additional products to our existing customers contributed the remainder. We calculate subscription revenue from new customers for the fiscal year by adding the revenue recognized from new customers acquired in the 12 months prior to the reporting date.
Professional services revenue decreased by $6.4 million, or 9%, for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 as a result of shifting more services work to our system integrator partners as we improve our sales mix towards recurring subscription revenue.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of subscription revenue increased by $5.8 million, or 11%, for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. This was driven by increases of $3.5 million in data center costs, primarily related to third-party cloud hosting as we grow our customer base and transition our data center model to the cloud, $2.8 million in employee compensation costs driven by an increase in stock-based compensation expense, and $0.9 million in allocated overhead primarily due to facilities expansions, partially offset by decreases of $0.8 million in capitalized internal-use software costs and $0.4 million in travel costs.
Cost of professional services revenue decreased by $9.2 million, or 11%, for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. This was driven by decreases of $3.8 million in third-party consulting expenses, $3.6 million in travel costs, $1.3 million in compensation costs related to a decrease in headcount, and $0.6 million in event costs. Cost of professional services decreased as a result of shifting more services work to our system integrator partners.
Our gross margin for subscription services increased to 76% in fiscal 2021 compared to 74% in fiscal 2020 as we improved our cost structure.
Our gross margin for professional services improved to (14)% for fiscal 2021 compared to (17)% for fiscal 2020, primarily due to a decrease in third-party consulting costs as we shifted more of our services work to our system integrator partners to improve our mix towards recurring subscription revenue.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expense increased by $2.4 million, or 3%, for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, primarily due to increases of $2.2 million in outside professional services, $2.0 million in stock-based compensation expense, $0.8 million in allocated overhead primarily due to facilities expansions, $0.5 million in data center costs, and $0.5 million in capitalized internal-use software costs, partially offset by decreases of $2.2 million in employee compensation costs, other than stock-based compensation, resulting from lower headcount and $1.6 million in travel costs. Research and development expense decreased to 25% of total revenue during fiscal 2021 from 27% during fiscal 2020.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased by $8.7 million, or 8%, for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, primarily due to increases of $9.8 million in employee compensation costs driven by increases in stock-based compensation expense and commissions expense, $2.1 million in allocated overhead primarily due to facilities expansions, $1.3 million in outside professional services, and $0.6 million in software license costs. These increased costs were partially offset by a decrease of $5.3 million in travel costs. The increase in sales and marketing expense was primarily driven from investments in our customer success and alliances organizations to focus on customer retention and building our alliance ecosystem. Sales and marketing expense was consistent at 38% of total revenue during fiscal 2021 compared to 39% during fiscal 2020.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased by $9.9 million, or 22%, for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, primarily due to increases of $4.4 million in employee compensation costs driven by increases in stock-based compensation expense and bonus expense, $3.3 million in shareholder litigation expenses, $1.0 million in donations of our Class A common stock to a charitable donor-advised fund, $1.0 million in allocated overhead primarily due to facilities expansions, and $0.6 million in outside professional services costs, partially offset by a decrease of $0.7 million in travel costs. General and administrative expense increased to 18% of total revenue during fiscal 2021 from 16% during fiscal 2020.
Interest and Other Income, net
Interest and other income, net decreased by $0.2 million for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, primarily due to a decrease of $2.4 million in income from short-term investments, offset by a $2.1 million increase in revaluation gains resulting from assets and liabilities held in a foreign currency.
Income Tax Provision
We are subject to federal and state income taxes in the United States and taxes in foreign jurisdictions. For fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 we recorded a tax provision of $1.9 million and $0.4 million on losses before income taxes of $71.3 million and $83.0 million, respectively. The effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 was 2.6% and 0.5%, respectively. The effective tax rates differ from the statutory rate primarily as a result of providing no
benefit on pretax losses incurred in the United States. For fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, we maintained a full valuation allowance on our U.S. federal and state net deferred tax assets as it was more likely than not that those deferred tax assets will not be realized. The decrease in tax expense resulted primarily from a decline in pre-tax earnings in our foreign jurisdictions.
Quarterly Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our unaudited quarterly consolidated statement of operations data for each of the eight quarters presented. The unaudited consolidated statement of operations data set forth below has been prepared on the same basis as our audited consolidated financial statements and, in the opinion of management, reflect all adjustments, consisting only of normal recurring adjustments, that are necessary for the fair presentation of such data. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected in the future and the results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of results to be expected for a full year or any other period. The following quarterly financial data should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this filing:
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
The following table sets forth our unaudited quarterly consolidated results of operations data for each of the periods indicated as a percentage of total revenue.
Note: Percentages in the table above may not sum due to rounding.
Quarterly Revenue Trends
Our quarterly subscription revenue increased sequentially in each of the periods presented primarily due to growth in our customer base and sales of increased volume and additional products to our existing customers. We have historically entered into more subscription agreements in the fourth quarter of our fiscal year, though this seasonality is sometimes not apparent in our subscription revenue because we recognize subscription revenue over the term of the contract.
Quarterly professional services revenue has decreased as a result of shifting more services work to our system integrator partners. With this shift, we expect our professional services revenue to decrease over time as a percentage of total revenue.
Quarterly Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin Trends
Our quarterly gross margin from subscription revenue has generally been consistent over the fiscal quarters presented. This reflects the growth in the number of customers and the cost of building out the infrastructure for migrating our data center to a fully serviced provider.
Our quarterly gross margin from professional services has generally increased sequentially, as we shifted more of our services work to our system integrator partners to improve our mix towards recurring subscription revenue. We intend to increase our utilization of external partners in the future to augment our implementation services, which may cause further fluctuation in our professional services revenue and related margins.
Quarterly Operating Expenses Trends
Total operating expenses have generally increased sequentially for the fiscal quarters presented, primarily due to higher employee compensation costs driven by stock-based compensation expense, which were partially offset by lower travel costs in fiscal 2021. Additionally, the second, third and fourth quarters of fiscal 2021 reflect higher legal costs as a result of shareholder litigation.
Stock-based compensation expense in the quarters ended July 31, 2020, October 31, 2020 and January 31, 2021 increased due to one-time RSU grants made in light of the COVID-19 pandemic and for retention purposes to eligible non-executive employees, that fully vested during fiscal 2021. These grants contributed a total of $7.6 million of expense in fiscal 2021. We do not expect any additional expense from these grants as they fully vested in fiscal 2021.
Facilities costs increased toward the latter half of fiscal 2020 as we moved to a larger headquarters facility in Redwood City, California.
Our sales and marketing expense increased primarily due to continued investment in expanding our customer acquisition and retention efforts. In addition, we invested in our customer success and alliances organizations in fiscal 2021. Our sales and marketing expense can also fluctuate between quarters due to the timing of our annual sales kick-off and our annual user conferences, which are typically held in the first and second quarter of the fiscal year, respectively.
Our research and development expense increased primarily due to our continued investment in technology, innovation, and new products.
Our general and administrative expense increased in certain periods primarily due to higher headcount to support our growth and the additional costs related to shareholder litigation expenses. In addition, we donated $1.0 million of of our Class A common stock to a charitable donor-advised fund in the second quarter of fiscal 2021, which increased our general and administrative expense.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is a measure of our ability to access sufficient cash flows to meet the short-term and long-term cash requirements of our business operations.
As of January 31, 2021 and 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments of $186.6 million and $171.9 million, respectively, that were primarily invested in deposit accounts, money market funds, corporate debt securities, commercial paper, and U.S. government securities. We don't enter into investments for trading or speculative purposes.
We finance our operations primarily through sales to our customers, which are generally billed in advance on an annual or quarterly basis. Customers with annual or multi-year contracts are generally only billed one annual period in advance. We also finance our operations through proceeds from issuances of stock under our employee stock plans and borrowings under our Debt Agreement. In fiscal 2021, we repaid $4.4 million of principal on our term loans and have the ability borrow up to an additional $30.0 million in revolving loans under our Debt Agreement until October 2022. In April 2018, we received $159.7 million in aggregate net proceeds from our IPO, for use in operating our business.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, cash provided by operating activities and funds available under our Debt Agreement will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including revenue growth and costs incurred to support revenue growth, the timing and extent of spending on research and development efforts and other business initiatives, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced product offerings, and the continuing market adoption of our products.
We continually evaluate our capital needs and may decide to raise additional capital to fund the growth of our business for general corporate purposes through public or private equity offerings or through additional debt financing. We also may in the future make investments in or acquire businesses or technologies that could require us to seek additional equity or debt financing. To facilitate acquisitions or investments, we may seek additional equity or debt financing, which may not be available on terms favorable to us or at all. Sales of additional equity could result in dilution to our stockholders. We expect proceeds from the exercise of stock options in future years to be impacted by the increased mix of restricted stock units versus stock options granted to employees and to vary based on our share price. The uncertainty created by the changing markets and economic conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic may also impact our customers' ability to pay us on a timely basis, which could negatively impact our cash flows.
Debt Agreement
See Note 9. Debt of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K for more information about our Debt Agreement.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities of $11.3 million in fiscal 2021 was comprised primarily of customer collections for our subscription and professional services, cash payments for our personnel, sales and marketing efforts and infrastructure related costs, and payments to vendors for products and services related to ongoing business operations.
Net cash provided by operations in fiscal 2021 increased $14.9 million compared to last year as a result of an increase in our gross profit margin resulting from improvements to our cost structure and shifting more services work to our system integrator partners, as well as a decrease in cash operating costs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities for fiscal 2021 was $12.9 million. We received $25.0 million in net proceeds from short-term investments as some of our investments were converted to cash equivalents. We used $12.2 million, net of insurance recoveries, to purchase property and equipment and to develop internal-use software as we continue to invest in and grow our business.
Net cash provided by investing activities for fiscal 2021 increased $42.6 million compared to last year primarily due to $25.0 million in net proceeds from short-term investments, compared to $8.3 million of net purchases of short-term investments last year. Payments for property and equipment, net of insurance recoveries, were $9.3 million higher last year primarily due to leasehold improvements on our new corporate headquarters.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for fiscal 2021 was $15.0 million, resulting from $11.8 million in stock option exercise proceeds and $7.6 million in proceeds from issuance of common stock under the ESPP, offset by $4.4 million in debt payments.
Net cash provided by financing activities for fiscal 2021 decreased $3.0 million compared to last year primarily due to increased principal payments on long-term debt and less proceeds from common stock issuances under the ESPP and stock option exercises in the current fiscal year.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of January 31, 2021, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated organizations or financial partnerships, such as structured finance or special purpose entities that would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Obligations and Other Commitments
Our principal commitments consist of obligations under our operating leases for office space and our Debt Agreement. The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of January 31, 2021 (in thousands):
_________________________________
(1)Consists of future non-cancelable minimum rental payments under operating leases for our offices including operating leases that have not yet commenced.
(2)Debt principal and interest includes amounts owed under our Debt Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank including principal, interest and a $0.2 million facility fee on the term loan. Interest payments were calculated using the applicable rate as of January 31, 2021. See Note 9. Debt of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K for more information about our Debt Agreement.
(3)Represents contractual obligations to make purchases, primarily related to cloud computing services, from one of our vendors by September 30, 2021.
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into agreements of varying scope and terms pursuant to which we agree to indemnify customers, vendors, lessors, business partners, and other parties with respect to certain matters, including, but not limited to, losses arising out of the breach of such agreements, services to be provided by us, or from data breaches or intellectual property infringement claims made by third parties. In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and certain officers and employees that will require us, among other things, to indemnify them against certain liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as
directors, officers, or employees. No demands have been made upon us to provide indemnification under such agreements and there are no claims that we are aware of that could have a material effect on our consolidated balance sheets, consolidated statements of comprehensive loss, or consolidated statements of cash flows.
As of January 31, 2021, we had accrued liabilities related to uncertain tax positions, which are reflected in our consolidated balance sheets. These accrued liabilities are not reflected in the table above since it is unclear when they will be repaid.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the applicable periods. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
We believe that of our significant accounting policies, which are described in Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in of our consolidated financial statements contained herein, the following accounting policy includes estimates and assumptions with a greater degree of judgment and complexity.
Revenue Recognition Policy
Our revenue recognition policy follows guidance from Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, and is described in Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the consolidated financial statements contained herein. We derive our revenue primarily from subscription fees and professional services fees. Determining whether products and services are distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately or combined as one unit of accounting may require significant judgment.
Our cloud-based software subscriptions are distinct as such services are often sold separately. In addition, our subscription services contracts can include multi-year agreements that include a fixed annual platform fee and a volume block usage fee that may vary based on permitted volume usage each year. To the extent that permitted volume usage each year is the same, we concluded that there is one multi-year stand-ready performance obligation. To the extent that permitted volume usage each year varies, we concluded that each year represents a distinct stand-ready performance obligations and we allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations on a relative standalone-selling price basis and revenue is recognized ratably over each year.
In determining whether professional services are distinct, we consider the following factors for each professional services agreement: availability of the services from other vendors, the nature of the professional services, the timing of when the professional services contract was signed in comparison to the cloud-based software, start date and the contractual dependence of the cloud-based software on the customer’s satisfaction with the professional services work. To date, we have concluded that all of the professional services included in contracts with multiple performance obligations are distinct.
The determination of standalone selling price (“SSP”) for each distinct performance obligation requires judgment. We establish SSP for both our subscription services and professional services elements primarily by considering the actual sales prices of the element when sold on a stand-alone basis or when sold together with other elements. Our actual sales prices for subscription services and professional services for stand-alone sales do not typically vary from our prices for each element when sold together with other elements. When we are unable to rely on actual observable SSPs, we determine SSP based on inputs such as actual sales prices when sold together with other promised subscriptions or services and our overarching pricing objectives and strategies.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements-Adopted in Fiscal 2021
See “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Recent Accounting Pronouncements” in Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Recent Accounting Pronouncements of our accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements-Not Yet Adopted
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes, which simplifies the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles in the existing guidance for income taxes and making other minor improvements. The amendments in the ASU are effective for us on February 1, 2021. We are currently evaluating the impact of adopting this standard and do not expect the adoption to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Recent SEC Rule Changes
In August 2020, the SEC issued final rules 33-10825 and 34-89670 Modernization of Regulation S-K Items 101, 103, and 105, which amend the disclosure requirements in Item 101, Description of Business; Item 103, Legal Proceedings; and Item 105, Risk Factors of Regulation S-K. Consistent with the SEC’s ongoing efforts to modernize Regulation S-K disclosure requirements, the amendments aim to improve the readability of disclosures, reduce repetition, and eliminate immaterial information. Amendments to disclosure requirements include changes to the description of business and risk factors to a principles-based approach, providing more flexibility to tailor disclosures, while disclosure amendments to legal proceedings continue to reflect the current, more prescriptive approach. The final rules are effective for all annual reports filed on or after November 9, 2020. We have reflected the changes throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In November 2020, the SEC issued final rules 33-10890 and 34-90459 Management’s Discussion and Analysis, Selected Financial Data, and Supplementary Financial Information, which modernizes and simplifies certain disclosure requirements of Regulation S-K. Certain key rule amendments eliminate the requirement to disclose Selected Financial Data; Selected Quarterly Financial Data, with certain exceptions; the impact of inflation and changing prices, provided the impact is not material; off-balance sheet arrangements in tabular form; and the aggregate amount of contractual obligations in tabular form. The final rules also amended various aspects of Item 303, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” among others. The final rules are effective for all registration statements, annual reports and quarterly reports filed on or after August 9, 2021, with early adoption permitted. We are currently evaluating the impact of the disclosure changes on our Annual Report.