Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our annual consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” and reflects the effects of the reclassification discussed in Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements. In addition to historical information, this discussion includes forward-looking information that involves risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from management’s expectations. See Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” at the beginning of this report.
Overview
Zovio Inc is an education technology services company that partners with higher education institutions and employers to deliver innovative, personalized solutions to help learners and leaders achieve their aspirations. For additional information regarding our business, see Part I, Item 1, “Business.”
Until December 1, 2020, the Company, through its wholly owned subsidiary, Ashford University, LLC, a California limited liability company (“AU LLC”), owned and operated Ashford University, a regionally-accredited, online university (the “University”). The University’s mission is to provide high-quality, accessible, affordable, and innovative educational programs that meet the diverse needs of individuals pursuing advancement in their lives, professions, and communities. The University is helping to define the modern college experience by providing the flexibility and effectiveness of online learning. The University offers associate’s, bachelor’s, master’s and doctoral degree programs online.
On December 1, 2020, the Company and AU LLC finalized the Purchase Agreement, by and among the Company, AU LLC, the Arizona Board of Regents, a body corporate, for and on behalf of the University of Arizona (the “University of Arizona”), and the University of Arizona Global Campus, a newly formed Arizona nonprofit corporation (“Global Campus”).
On April 1, 2019, we acquired Fullstack Academy, a Delaware corporation, pursuant to an Agreement and Plan of Reorganization entered into by the parties on March 12, 2019. Following the Fullstack Acquisition, Fullstack became a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. Fullstack is an innovative web development school offering immersive technology bootcamps.
On April 3, 2019, we acquired TutorMe, a California corporation, pursuant to an Agreement and Plan of Reorganization entered into by the parties on April 3, 2019. TutorMe is an online education platform that provides 24/7 on-demand tutoring and online courses. Following the TutorMe Acquisition, TutorMe became a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company.
Segment Information
Prior to December 1, 2020, the Company operated in one segment for reporting purposes. Following the Sale Transaction on December 1, 2020, we now operate our business in two reportable segments, including the University Partners Segment and the Zovio Growth Segment. The Company’s reportable segments are determined based on (i) financial information reviewed by the chief operating decision maker, the CEO, (ii) internal management and related reporting structure, and (iii) the basis upon which the CEO makes resource allocation decisions. The Company’s University Partners Segment includes the technology and services provided to colleges and universities to enable the online delivery of degree programs. The inaugural partner in the University Partners Segment is Global Campus. The University Partners Segment also includes the tuition revenue related to the University prior to the Sale Transaction on December 1, 2020. The Company’s Zovio Growth Segment includes our other subsidiaries, including Fullstack and TutorMe.
Key operating data
In evaluating our operating performance, our management focuses in large part on our revenue and operating income (loss). The following table, which should be read in conjunction with our annual consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report, presents our key operating data for each of the periods presented (in thousands):
Key Financial Metrics
Revenue and other revenue
On December 1, 2020, the Company entered into the Services Agreement with Global Campus whereby the Company will provide certain educational technology and support services, which has an initial term of fifteen years, subject to renewal options and certain early termination provisions. The amounts earned from the Services Agreement are denoted as revenue on the consolidated statements of income (loss). On December 1, 2020, the Company also entered into a transition services agreement with Global Campus whereby the Company will provide certain temporary transition services (the “Transition Services Agreement”), which has a term of three years. The amounts earned from the Transition Services Agreement are denoted as other revenue on the consolidated statements of income (loss). Subsequent to December 1, 2020, revenue is primarily derived from service revenue from our university partners.
Prior to December 1, 2020, the majority of the amounts earned by the Company were from tuition, technology fees, and digital materials related to students whose primary funding source is governmental funding. The amounts earned from these streams is denoted as university-related revenue on the consolidated statements of income (loss). Factors affecting this revenue include (i) the number of students who enroll and remain enrolled in courses, (ii) degree and program mix, (iii) changes in tuition rates and (iv) the amount of scholarships offered. Enrollments are a function of the number of continuing students at the beginning of each period and new enrollments during the period, offset by students who either graduated or withdrew during the period.
Costs and expenses
Technology and academic services costs consist primarily of costs related to ongoing maintenance of educational infrastructure, including online course delivery and management, student records, assessment, customer relations management and other internal administrative systems. This also includes costs to provide support for curriculum and new program development, support for faculty training and development, technical support and assistance with state compliance. This expense category includes salaries, benefits and share-based compensation, information technology costs, curriculum and new program development costs (which are expensed as incurred) and other costs associated with these support services. This category also includes an allocation of depreciation, amortization, rent, and occupancy costs attributable to the provision of these services.
Counseling services and support costs consist primarily of costs including team-based counseling and other support to prospective and current students as well as financial aid processing. This expense category includes salaries, benefits and share-based compensation, and other costs such as dues, fees and subscriptions and travel costs. This category also includes an allocation of depreciation, amortization, rent, and occupancy costs attributable to the provision of these services.
Marketing and communication costs consist primarily of lead acquisition, digital communication strategies, brand identity advertising, media planning and strategy, video, data science and analysis, marketing to potential students and other promotional and communication services. This category was primarily from our historical captions of advertising and marketing and promotional. This expense category includes salaries, benefits and share-based compensation for marketing and communication personnel, brand advertising, marketing leads and other promotional and communication expenses. This category also includes an allocation of depreciation, amortization, rent, and occupancy costs attributable to the provision of these services. Advertising costs are expensed as incurred.
General and administrative costs consist primarily of compensation and benefit costs (including related stock-based compensation) for employees engaged in corporate management, finance, human resources, compliance, and other corporate functions. This category also includes an allocation of depreciation, amortization, rent, and occupancy costs attributable to the provision of these services.
University-related expenses represent those costs that were transferred to Global Campus in the Sale Transaction and that are no longer incurred by the Company. These costs were previously primarily components of instructional costs and services, with some costs from admissions advisory and marketing and some general and administrative.
Restructuring and impairment expenses are primarily comprised of (i) charges related to the write off and impairment of certain assets, (ii) severance costs related to headcount reductions made in connection with restructuring plans and (iii) estimated lease losses related to facilities vacated or consolidated under restructuring plans.
Loss on transaction amount represents the net assets transferred in the Sale Transaction, as well as other transaction-related expenses and costs to sell.
Factors Affecting Comparability
We believe the following factors have had, or can be expected to have, a significant effect on the comparability of recent or future results of operations:
Sale transaction
The results of operations prior to December 1, 2020 are not comparable to those following that date. On December 1, 2020, the Company entered into the Services Agreement with Global Campus whereby the Company will provide certain educational technology and support services. On December 1, 2020, the Company also entered into the Transition Services Agreement with Global Campus whereby the Company will provide certain temporary transition services. Subsequent to December 1, 2020, revenue is primarily derived from service revenue from our university partners.
Seasonality
Our operations are generally subject to seasonal trends. Our university partners generally experience a seasonal increase in new enrollments during the first quarter of each year, subsequent to holiday break, as well as during the third quarter each year, when most other colleges and universities begin their fall semesters. While our university partners enroll students throughout the year, the fourth quarter revenue generally is lower than other quarters due to the holiday break in December, with an increase in the first quarter of each year.
Adoption of new accounting standards
As discussed in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements, Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Recent Accounting Pronouncements” we changed our method of accounting for credit losses under ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326) (“ASU 2016-13”) in fiscal year 2020 due to the adoption of the new standard. We adopted the new ASU 2016-13 standard using the modified retrospective approach.
Trends and uncertainties regarding continuing operations
Restructuring and impairment charges
We have implemented various restructuring plans to better align our resources with our business strategy and the related charges are recorded in the restructuring and impairment charges line item on our consolidated statements of income (loss). Changes to these estimates could have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements. For information regarding the restructuring and impairment charges recorded, refer to Note 6, “Restructuring and Impairment Charges” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Valuation allowance
We recognize deferred tax assets if realization of such assets is more-likely-than-not. In order to make this determination, we evaluate factors including the ability to generate future taxable income from reversing taxable temporary differences, and forecasts of financial and taxable income or loss. The cumulative loss incurred over the three-year period ended December 31, 2020 constituted significant negative objective evidence against our ability to realize a benefit from our federal deferred tax assets. Such objective evidence limited our ability to consider in our evaluation other subjective evidence such as our projections for future growth. On the basis of our evaluation, we determined that our deferred tax assets were not more-likely-than-not to be realized and that a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets should continue to be maintained as of December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Critical accounting policies are those policies that, in management’s view, are most important in the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations. The footnotes to our annual consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report include disclosure of significant accounting policies. The methods, estimates and judgments we use in applying our accounting policies have a significant impact on the results we report in our financial statements. These critical accounting policies require us to make difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates regarding matters that are inherently uncertain.
The discussion of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our annual consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. These estimates are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. The results of our analysis form the basis for making assumptions about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, and the impact of such differences may be material to our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue recognition
Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services are transferred, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. Determining whether a valid customer contract exists includes an assessment of whether amounts due under the contract are collectible. We perform this assessment at the beginning of every contract and subsequently thereafter if new information indicates there has been a significant change in facts and circumstances.
On December 1, 2020, the Company entered into the Services Agreement with Global Campus, which has an initial term of fifteen years, subject to renewal options and certain early termination provisions. The amounts earned from the Services Agreement are within the scope of ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”), and are denoted as revenue on the consolidated statements of income (loss). On December 1, 2020, the Company also entered into a the Transition Services Agreement, which has a term of three years. The amounts earned from the Transition Services Agreement are denoted as other revenue on the consolidated statements of income (loss).
The Services Agreement has a single performance obligation, as the promises to provide the identified services are not distinct within the context of these agreements. The single performance obligation constitutes a series of distinct services as the customer benefits as services are provided. Service revenue is recognized over time using the input method cost. The input method provides a faithful depiction of the performance toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation and can be tied to the direct cost incurred. The service fees received over the term of the agreement are variable in nature in that they are dependent upon the number of students attending the university and revenues generated from those students during the service period. The service fees are subject to certain adjustments, including performance-based adjustments, minimum profit level adjustments, and excess direct cost adjustments. These adjustments are all variable in nature in that they depend upon the Company’s performance during each service period. The Company allocates variable consideration to the distinct increments of service to which it relates, as the variability is directly related to the Company’s effort to satisfy the distinct increments of service provided. This is consistent with the allocation objective in ASC 606. The Company meets the criteria in the standard and exercises the practical expedient to not disclose the aggregate amount of the transaction price allocated to the single performance obligation that is unsatisfied as of the end of the reporting period. The Company does not disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations because the variable consideration is allocated entirely to a wholly unsatisfied promise to transfer a service that forms part of a single performance obligation.
Prior to December 1, 2020, the majority of the amounts earned by the Company were from tuition, technology fees, and digital materials related to students whose primary funding source is governmental funding. The amounts earned from these streams are denoted as university-related revenue on the consolidated statements of income (loss). Tuition represents amounts charged for course instruction, and technology fees represent amounts charged for the students’ use of the technology platform on which course instruction is delivered. Digital materials fees represent amounts charged for the digital textbooks that accompany the majority of courses taught. The majority of tuition and technology fees are recognized as revenue as control of the services is transferred to the student, which occurs over the applicable period of instruction. Similarly, the majority of digital materials fees are recognized as revenue when control of the product has been transferred to the student, which occurs when the student is granted unrestricted access to the digital textbook, generally, on the first day of the course. Revenue generated from students within the conditional admission period is deferred and recognized when the student matriculates into the institution, which occurs in the fourth week of the course.
The contracts with students generally include multiple performance obligations, which we identify by assessing whether each good and service promised in the contract is distinct. For each distinct performance obligation, we allocate the transaction price, including fixed and variable consideration, on the basis of the relative standalone selling prices of each good and service in the contract, which is determined using observable prices.
Online students generally enroll in a program that encompasses a series of five to six-week courses that are taken consecutively over the length of the program. With the exception of those students under conditional admission and students enrolled under the Full Tuition Grant (“FTG”) program, online students are billed on a payment period basis on the first day of a course. Students under conditional admission are billed for the payment period upon matriculation.
If a student’s attendance in a class precedes the receipt of cash from the student’s source of funding, we establish an account receivable and corresponding deferred revenue in the amount of the tuition due for that payment period. Cash received either directly from the student or from the student’s source of funding reduces the balance of accounts receivable due from the student. Financial aid from sources such as the federal government’s Title IV programs pertains to the online student’s award year and is generally divided into two disbursement periods. As such, each disbursement period may contain funding for up to four courses. Financial aid disbursements are typically received during the online student’s attendance in the first or second course. Since the majority of disbursements cover more courses than for which a student is currently enrolled, the amount received in excess effectively represents a prepayment from the online student for up to four courses. At the end of each accounting period, the deferred revenue and related account receivable balances are reduced to present amounts attributable to the current course.
In certain cases, the University provided scholarships to students who qualify under various programs. These scholarships are recognized as direct reductions of revenue consistent with the timing of recognition associated with the related performance obligations. Also, for some customers, we do not expect to collect 100% of the consideration to which we are contractually entitled and, as a result, those customers may receive discounts or price adjustments that, based on historical practice, represent implied price concessions and are accounted for as variable consideration. The majority of these price concessions relate to amounts charged to students for goods and services, which management has determined will not be covered by the student’s primary funding source (generally, government aid) and, as a result, the student will become directly financially responsible for them. The reduction in the transaction price that results from this estimate of variable consideration reflects the amount we do not expect to be entitled to in exchange for the goods and services it will transfer to the students, as determined using historical experience and current factors, and includes performing a constraint analysis. These estimates of variable consideration are recorded as direct reductions of revenue consistent with the timing of recognition associated with the related performance obligation.
A portion of University-related revenue is generated from contracts with students enrolled under the corporate FTG program, which is a 12-month grant that, when combined with a corporate partner’s annual tuition assistance program, enables eligible students to earn their degree without incurring student loan debt. Students enrolled under this program are eligible to take up to ten undergraduate or eight graduate courses per 12-month grant period and must first utilize 100% of the funds awarded under their employer’s annual tuition assistance program before they can be awarded the FTG. The Company uses certain key assumptions to calculate revenue under the FTG program including the average number of courses students are expected to take over the 12-month grant period, the average number of replacement courses students will receive for failed courses, and the estimate for revenues other than tuition and technology fees. The grants awarded under the FTG program are considered a material right, and, as such, the Company records a deferred revenue for a portion of the consideration received under these contracts. The standalone selling price of the material right is determined based on the observable standalone selling price of the courses. The transaction price in each FTG contract is allocated to all courses in the 12-month grant period on a relative standalone selling price basis. The deferred revenue is recognized as university-related revenue at the earlier of satisfaction of the future obligation, when the student drops from the university, or contract termination. There are no material differences between the timing of the products and services transferred and the payment terms.
Deferred revenue consists of cash payments that are received or due in advance of performance as well as deferrals associated with certain contracts that include a material right. For the majority of our customers, payment for products and services is due at the beginning of each course. Billing of products and services transferred under an FTG student contract generally occurs after the conclusion of a course. Under special circumstances, some customers may be offered non-interest bearing payment plan arrangements that can extend for up to a maximum of three years. These payment plan arrangements give rise to significant financing components. However, since we historically collect substantially all the consideration to which it expects to be entitled under such payment plans within one year or less, the impact of these significant financing components is not material to any period presented.
Allowance for credit losses
Accounts receivable are initially recorded at the amount management expects to collect under each customer contract and are adjusted for an allowance for credit losses at each reporting period, as deemed necessary. The Company determines its allowance for credit losses using a loss-rate method combined with an aging schedule approach, which is appropriate given the short-term nature of a substantial majority of the Company’s receivables and as collections vary significantly based upon a receivable’s aging bucket. The Company calculates historical loss rates for receivables on the basis of the different risk profiles and historical loss-rate experience with each type of customer. Additionally, the Company monitors macroeconomic activity as well as other current conditions and their potential impact on collections to ensure the historical experience remains in line with current conditions and future short-term expectations.
The allowance for credit losses is recorded in the consolidated statements of income (loss). The Company writes off accounts receivable when the student account is deemed uncollectible, which typically occurs when the Company has exhausted all collection efforts.
Goodwill and intangible assets
We test goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment, testing annually in the third quarter of each fiscal year, or more frequently if events and circumstances warrant. Under ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, to evaluate the impairment of goodwill, we first assess qualitative factors, such as deterioration in general economic conditions or negative company financial performance, to determine whether it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. To evaluate the impairment of the indefinite-lived intangible assets, we assess the fair value of the assets to determine whether they were greater or less than the carrying values. Determining the fair value of indefinite-lived intangible assets is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions are inherently uncertain and may include such items as growth rates used to calculate projected future cash flows, risk-adjusted discount rates, future economic and market conditions, and a determination of appropriate market comparables.
We have three distinct reporting units including (i) Zovio, (ii) Fullstack and (iii) TutorMe. During the third quarter of 2020, our qualitative assessment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets noted no impairment indicators in any of the reporting units. Additionally, during the third quarter of 2020, our quantitative assessment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets noted no impairment indicators in the Fullstack reporting unit, and noted a material amount of fair value in excess of the carrying amount at that time.
Our assessment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets during the fourth quarter of 2020 resulted in no impairment of its indefinite-lived intangibles. We also have definite-lived intangible assets, which primarily consist of purchased intangibles and capitalized curriculum development costs. The definite-lived intangible assets are recognized at cost less accumulated amortization. Amortization is computed using the straight-line method based on estimated useful lives of the related assets
Impairment of long-lived assets
We assess potential impairment to our long-lived assets when there is evidence that events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. An impairment loss is recorded if the carrying amount of the long-lived asset is not recoverable. The carrying amount of a long-lived asset is not recoverable if it exceeds the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the asset. Any required impairment loss is measured as the amount by which the carrying amount of a long-lived asset exceeds fair value, and is recorded as a reduction in the carrying value of the related asset and an expense to operating results.
During 2020, our qualitative assessments of long-lived assets under ASC 360, Property and Equipment, did not note any impairment indicators. As such, no impairment in long-lived assets is deemed necessary as of December 31, 2020.
Income taxes
We utilize the asset-liability method of accounting for income taxes. Significant judgments are required in determining the consolidated provision for income taxes. During the ordinary course of business, there are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax settlement is uncertain. As a result, we recognize tax liabilities based on estimates of whether additional taxes and interest will be due. These tax liabilities are recognized when, despite our belief that our tax return positions are supportable, we believe that it is more-likely-than-not that those positions may not be fully sustained upon review by tax authorities. We believe that our accruals for tax liabilities are adequate for all open audit years based on our assessment of many factors, including past experience and interpretations of tax law. This assessment relies on estimates and assumptions and may involve a series of complex judgments about future events. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters
differs from our expectations, such differences will impact income tax expense in the period in which such determination is made.
We evaluate and account for uncertain tax positions using a two-step approach. Recognition (step one) occurs when we conclude that a tax position, based solely on its technical merits, is more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon examination. Measurement (step two) determines the amount of benefit that is greater than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement with a taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information. Derecognition of a tax position that was previously recognized would occur when we subsequently determine that a tax position no longer meets the more-likely-than- not threshold of being sustained.
We are required to file income tax returns in the United States that includes various state and local tax jurisdictions. The preparation of these income tax returns requires us to interpret the applicable tax laws and regulations in effect in such jurisdictions, which could affect the amount of tax paid by us. The income tax returns are subject to audits by the applicable federal and state taxing authorities. As part of these audits, the taxing authorities may disagree with our tax positions. The ultimate resolution of these tax positions is often uncertain until the audit is complete and any disagreements are resolved. We therefore record an amount for our estimate of the additional tax liability, including interest and penalties, for any uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in an income tax return. We review and update the accrual for uncertain tax positions as more definitive information becomes available from taxing authorities, and upon completion of tax audits and expiration of statutes of limitations. We record interest and penalties related to income tax matters in income tax expense.
In addition to estimates inherent in the recognition of current taxes payable, we estimate the likelihood that we will be able to recover our deferred tax assets each reporting period. Realization of our deferred tax assets is dependent upon future taxable income. To the extent we believe it is more-likely-than-not that all or some portion of our net deferred tax assets will not be realized, we establish a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets. Significant judgment is required in determining any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider all available evidence, including past operating results, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of ongoing tax planning strategies.
Stock-based compensation
We have granted options to purchase our common stock, restricted stock units (“RSUs”) and performance stock units (“PSUs”) to eligible persons under our 2009 Stock Incentive Plan. We also awarded contingent shares of the Company’s common stock for future service during our acquisitions. The benefits provided by these awards are share-based payments and are recorded in our consolidated statements of income (loss) based upon their fair values.
Stock-based compensation cost is measured using the grant date fair value of the award and is expensed over the vesting period. The fair value of RSUs is the stock price on the date of grant multiplied by the number of units awarded. The fair value of PSUs was estimated based on our stock price as of the date of grant using a Monte Carlo simulation model. We estimate the fair value of stock options on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Determining the fair value of stock options and PSUs at the grant date under these models requires judgment, including estimating our volatility, employee stock option exercise behaviors and forfeiture rates. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock options and PSUs represent our best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment.
Stock options awarded under our 2009 Stock Incentive Plan have an exercise price that equals or exceeds the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield of those maturities that are consistent with the expected term of the stock option or PSUs in effect on the date of grant. Dividend rates are based upon historical dividend trends and expected future dividends. As we have never declared or paid any cash dividends and do not presently plan to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future, a zero-dividend rate is assumed in our calculation. We have sufficient historical stock option exercise information to compute an expected term for use as an assumption in the Black-Scholes option pricing and Monte Carlo simulation models, and as such, our computation of expected term was calculated using our own historical data. We also have sufficient historical data on the volatility of our stock to use as a direct assumption in the option pricing models.
The amount of stock-based compensation expense we recognize during a period is based on the portion of the awards that are ultimately expected to vest. We estimate stock option forfeitures at the time of grant and revise those estimates in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. The effect of a 10% change in estimates to any of the individual inputs to the Black-Scholes option pricing model or the Monte Carlo simulation model would not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information regarding recent accounting pronouncements, refer to Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our annual consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
Results of Operations
On December 1, 2020, the Company and AU LLC finalized the Purchase Agreement, by and among the Company, AU LLC, the University of Arizona, and Global Campus. Accordingly, the results of operations discussed herein reflect both the Company’s operations prior to December 1, 2020, which was made up primarily of the operations of the University, as well as the Company’s operations commencing on December 1, 2020 as an education technology service provider. For additional information regarding the resulting reclassification, see Note 3, “Financial Statement Reclassification” to our annual consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of income (loss) data as a percentage of revenue for each of the periods indicated:
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Total revenue and other revenue. Our total revenue and other revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, was $397.1 million and $417.8 million, respectively, representing a decrease of $20.7 million, or 4.9%. For the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, University Partners segment revenue was $376.2 million and $407.6 million, respectively, representing a decrease of 7.7%, and the Zovio Growth segment revenue was $20.9 million and $10.2 million, respectively, representing an increase of 104.9%.
The decrease in revenue in the University Partners segment of $31.4 million between periods was primarily due to the decrease in University-related revenue of $51.3 million, or 7.8%, as compared to the prior year. This decrease was due to a decrease of 7.1% in average weekly enrollment from 37,378 students for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 34,722 students for the year ended December 31, 2020. Partially offsetting the decrease in the University Partners segment was a $19.2 million increase of service revenue due to the Services Agreement entered into on December 1, 2020, as well as an increase in other revenue generated from Transition Services Agreement of approximately $1.0 million.
The increase in revenue in the Zovio Growth segment between periods was primarily due to the growth experienced this year within our subsidiaries, Fullstack Academy and TutorMe.com.
Technology and academic services. Our technology and academic services for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, were $74.4 million and $73.3 million, respectively, representing an increase of $1.1 million, or 1.5%. Specific increases between periods primarily include consulting and outside services of $1.9 million, employee costs of $1.6 million, license fees of $1.5 million, amortization of intangible assets of $0.8 million, and bad debt expense of $0.6 million. These increases were
partially offset by decreases in other technology and academic services expenses of $4.4 million and facility costs of $0.9 million. Our technology and academic services, as a percentage of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, were 18.7% and 17.5%, respectively, representing an increase of 1.2%. This increase primarily included increases in employee costs of 0.8%, consulting and outside services of 0.6%, and license fees of 0.4%. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in other technology and academic services expenses of 1.0%. As a percentage of revenue, bad debt expense decreased to 3.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 3.9% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Counseling services and support. Our counseling services and support expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, were $97.0 million and $110.3 million, respectively, representing a decrease of $13.3 million, or 12.0%. Specific factors contributing to the overall decrease between periods were primarily due to decreases in employee costs of $5.6 million, facility costs of $4.2 million, other counseling services and support expenses of $2.5 million, human resource costs of $0.8 million, and professional fees of $0.6 million. The overall decrease was partially offset by an increase in depreciation of $0.8 million. Our counseling services and support expenses, as a percentage of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, were 24.4% and 26.4%, respectively, representing a decrease of 2.0%. This decrease primarily included decreases in facility costs of 0.9%, other counseling services and support expenses of 0.6%, employee costs of 0.4%.
Marketing and communication. Our marketing and communication expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, were $91.6 million and $96.0 million, respectively, representing a decrease of $4.4 million, or 4.6%. Specific factors contributing to the overall decrease between periods were primarily due to decreases in advertising of $3.7 million, consulting and outside services of $0.8 million and other marketing and communication expenses of $0.4 million. The overall decrease was partially offset by an increase in employee costs of $0.7 million. Our marketing and communication expenses, as a percentage of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, were 23.1% and 23.0%, respectively, representing an increase of 0.1%. This increase primarily included an increase in employee costs of 0.3%.
General and administrative. Our general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, were $47.4 million and $56.8 million, respectively, representing a decrease of $9.5 million, or 16.7%. The decrease between periods was primarily due to decreases in other general and administrative expenses of $8.1 million (including equity award mix and acquisition stock compensation), legal fees of $3.5 million, employee costs of $3.2 million, and consulting and outside services of $0.6 million. These decreases were partially offset by increases in insurance of $0.7 million, human resource costs of $2.0 million, and professional fees of $3.5 million. Our general and administrative expenses, as a percentage of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, were 12.0% and 13.6%, respectively, representing a decrease of 1.6%. This decrease is mainly due to decreases in other general and administrative expenses of 1.8%, legal fees of 0.8% and consulting and outside services of 0.5%, partially offset by increases in professional fees of 0.9% and human resource costs of 0.4%.
University-related expense. Our University-related expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, were $89.0 million and $116.5 million, respectively, representing a decrease of $27.5 million, or 23.6%. The University-related expenses represent those costs that were transferred to Global Campus in the Sale Transaction and that are no longer incurred by the Company.
Restructuring and impairment charges. Our restructuring and impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $4.8 million, as compared to $21.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing a decrease of $16.6 million. The charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 were comprised primarily of $3.0 million relating to severance costs for wages and benefits resulting from a reduction in force.
Loss on transaction. The loss on transaction amount of $54.8 million represents the net assets transferred in the Sale Transaction, as well as other transaction-related expenses and costs to sell.
Other income (loss), net. The other loss, net, for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.1 million, as compared to other income, net, of $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The results for the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily a result of decreased interest income due to changes in the levels of average cash and cash equivalents and investment balances.
Income tax benefit. Income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $13.1 million as compared to income tax benefit of $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, or an increase of $12.3 million in income tax benefit. Income tax benefit was recognized at effective tax rates of 21.1% and 1.4% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The income tax benefit at December 31, 2020 is mainly attributable to tax refunds and interest related to the CARES Act and IRS audit examination, whereas the income tax benefit at December 31, 2019 is primarily attributable to a tax benefit of $2.3 million as a result of a release of valuation allowance associated with the acquisitions of Fullstack and TutorMe, offset by $1.4 million of unrecognized income tax benefit mainly related to the IRS audit examination.
Net loss. Our net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $49.0 million compared to net loss of $54.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a $5.9 million increase in net income as a result of the factors discussed above.
Segment Operating Results
Segment profitability represents net income (loss), before net interest income (expense), taxes, depreciation and amortization expense (“EBITDA”).
University Partners Segment profitability for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a loss of $41.2 million, or 10.9% of revenue, compared to a loss of $30.3 million, or 7.4% of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2019. This represents a $10.9 million decrease in profitability which was primarily due to the decrease in revenue as well as the loss on sale transaction being accounted for in this segment.
Zovio Growth Segment profitability for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a loss of $9.3 million, or 44.6% of revenue, compared to a loss of $15.9 million, or 156.2% of revenue, for the year ended December 31, 2019. This represents a $6.6 million increase in profitability, which was primarily driven by the demand seen within the Fullstack and TutorMe businesses in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We financed our operating activities and capital expenditures during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 through cash on hand. Our cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2020 and 2019, were $35.5 million and $69.3 million, respectively, which can be used for operating activities or capital expenditures. Additionally, at December 31, 2020 and 2019, we had restricted cash of $20.0 million and $23.3 million, respectively, as well as investments of $1.5 million and $2.5 million, respectively. With the funds available to us as of December 31, 2020, we believe that these resources will be sufficient to fund operations for a reasonable time period greater than 12 months.
We manage our excess cash pursuant to the quantitative and qualitative operational guidelines of our cash investment policy. Our cash investment policy, which is managed by our Chief Financial Officer, has the following primary objectives: (i) preserving principal, (ii) meeting our liquidity needs, (iii) minimizing market and credit risk, and (iv) providing after-tax returns. Under the policy’s guidelines, we invest our excess cash exclusively in high-quality, U.S. dollar-denominated financial instruments. For a discussion of the measures we use to mitigate the exposure of our cash investments to market risk, credit risk and interest rate risk, see Item 7A, “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk.”
Stock repurchase programs
The board may authorize us to repurchase outstanding shares of its common stock from time to time in the open market through block trades or otherwise depending on market conditions and other considerations, pursuant to the applicable rules of the SEC. The Company’s policy is to retain these repurchased shares as treasury shares and not to retire them. The amount and timing of future share repurchases, if any, will be made as market and business conditions warrant. The timing and extent of any repurchases will depend upon market conditions, the trading price of our shares and other factors, and subject to the restrictions relating to volume, price and timing under applicable law. We may commence or suspend share repurchases at any time or from time to time.
Available borrowing facilities
As of December 31, 2020, the Company has a notes payable valued at $3.0 million, including accrued interest. The counterparty advanced funds to the Company for certain program development costs, which the Company is obligated to repay out of future revenues from the developed program. The Company recognized these advances as a debt obligation, and expects to begin repayments from future program revenues four years from the contract start date.
The Company had issued letters of credit that are collateralized with cash in the aggregate amount of $18.9 million, which is included as restricted cash as of December 31, 2020.
As part of its normal business operations, the Company is required to provide surety bonds in certain states in which the Company does business. As of December 31, 2020, the surety had issued bonds under the facility totaling $6.2 million on the Company’s behalf.
Title IV and other governmental funding
In the year ended December 31, 2020, Global Campus (previously the University) derived the substantial majority of its respective cash revenues from students who enroll and are eligible for various federal student financial assistance programs
authorized under Title IV of the Higher Education Act. An institution is subject to significant regulatory scrutiny as a result of numerous standards that must be satisfied in order to participate in Title IV programs. The balance of revenues derived by Global Campus is from government tuition assistance programs for military personnel, including veterans, payments made in cash by individuals, reimbursement from corporate partnerships and private loans from third parties.
Operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $25.3 million for 2020, whereas the cash used in operating activities was $46.1 million for 2019. Regarding the change in the net cash provided by operating activities of $71.4 million from 2019 to 2020, the net loss in 2020 excluding the loss on transaction, would have been net income of $3.0 million, as compared to a net loss of $54.8 million in 2019. The loss on transaction is not an operating activity, rather is classified as an investing activity. As such, the primary drivers of the increased net cash provided by operations was the improved 2020 versus 2019 operating results, after adjustment of the 2020 loss on transaction which is classified as an investing activity, and net changes in operating assets and liabilities. These year over year changes include the change in deferred revenue of $12.8 million, change in operating lease liabilities of $12.2 million, and a change of $6.5 million in prepaid and other current assets, partially offset by a change in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $6.9 million. We expect to generate cash from our operating activities in the foreseeable future.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $64.7 million and $51.4 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively. During 2020, cash of $62.3 million was transferred in the Sale Transaction, which did not occur in the prior year. During 2020, we did not make any acquisitions, whereas in 2019, we used $19.5 million of net cash paid for acquisitions. During 2020, we purchased $0.7 million of investments and had $0.3 million of capitalized costs for intangible assets, partially offset by $1.8 million sales of investments. In 2019, we had purchases of investments of $0.1 million, and had $0.8 million of capitalized costs for intangible assets. There were no sales of investments in 2019.
Capital expenditures were $3.2 million and $31.0 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively, with the majority during fiscal year 2019 mainly attributable to the corporate headquarters in Chandler, Arizona. For the year ending December 31, 2021, we expect our capital expenditures to be approximately $4.1 million, primarily in the areas of computer and software upgrades, as well as leasehold improvements.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $2.3 million for 2020, whereas net cash used in financing activities was $0.6 million for 2019. During 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was primarily due to borrowings from notes payable of $2.7 million, partially offset by cash used for tax withholdings related to vesting of restricted stock awards of $0.5 million. During 2019, net cash used in financing activities was primarily due to cash used for the tax withholdings related to vesting of restricted stock awards of $0.8 million, partially offset by cash provided by proceeds from the issuance of stock under our employee stock purchase plan of $0.2 million.
Based on our current level of operations, we believe that our future cash flows from operating activities and our existing cash and cash equivalents will provide adequate funds for ongoing operations, planned capital expenditures and working capital requirements for at least the next 12 months. However, changes could occur that would consume our available capital resources before that time. Our capital requirements depend on numerous factors, including our ability to continue to generate revenue. There can be no assurance that additional funding, if necessary, will be available to us on favorable terms, if at all. For additional information, see Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” which also discuss material risks and uncertainties.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Significant Contractual Obligations
We have entered into a surety bond facility with an insurance company to provide for any surety bonds in certain states where we do business. As of December 31, 2020, the surety had issued bonds totaling $6.2 million on our behalf under such facility.
The following table sets forth, as of December 31, 2020, certain significant cash and contractual obligations that will affect our future liquidity: