ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains statements that are forward-looking, such as statements relating to plans for future organic growth and other business development activities, as well as the impact of reimbursement trends, other capital spending and financing sources. Such forward-looking information involves important risks and uncertainties that could significantly affect anticipated results in the future and, accordingly, such results may differ from those expressed in any forward-looking statements made by or on behalf of the Company. These risks include the ability to engage effective sales representatives, the need to obtain FDA clearance and CE marking of new products, the acceptance of new products as well as existing products by doctors and hospitals, our dependence on the reimbursement from insurance companies for products sold or leased to our customers, acceptance of our products by health insurance providers for reimbursement, larger competitors with greater financial resources, the need to keep pace with technological changes, our dependence on third-party manufacturers to produce key components of our products on time and to our specifications, implementation of our sales strategy including a strong direct sales force, and other risks described herein and included in “Item 1A - Risk Factors.”
OVERVIEW
We operate in one primary business segment, electrotherapy and pain management products. As of December 31, 2020, the Company’s only active subsidiary is ZMI, a wholly-owned Colorado corporation, through which the Company conducts its U.S. electrotherapy and pain management operations. ZMS, a wholly-owned Colorado corporation, has developed a blood volume monitoring device, which has received two utility patents and FDA approval in the U.S. However, ZMS has achieved no revenues to date.
The following information should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes contained in this Annual Report.
HIGHLIGHTS
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company achieved the following:
● Expanded our sales force as we exceeded 500 sales reps at year-end. That represented a 227% increase over 2019 and allowed us to expand into 170 territories during 2020. We expect to have approximately 600 sales reps by the end of 2021;
● Achieved a 96% increase in order growth and a 76% growth in revenue from the prior year;
● Completed an equity offering in July 2020 which netted us $25.2 million. This allowed us to further strengthen our balance sheet without adding debt;
● Increased inventory on-hand at year-end by 263%, ensuring that we have enough product to meet future demand and serve more patients in pain; and
● Leased a 50,488 square foot warehouse facility, which will improve the efficiency of our production and assembly teams and allow us to scale our distribution operations. This new facility also allows expansion at our corporate headquarters to support the growth of our reimbursement, sales support, and other G&A functions.
SUMMARY
Net revenue increased 76% in 2020 to $80.1 million from $45.5 million in 2019. Net income was $9.1 million and $9.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net income decreased during 2020 as a result of an increased investment in our sales force and accompanying infrastructure.
We generated cash flows from operating activities of $0.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Increased orders for our devices and supplies and the related receivables and cash flows, along with an equity raise completed in July 2020, allowed us to grow our working capital at December 31, 2020 to $52.9 million, compared to $17.4 million as of December 31, 2019.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table presents our consolidated statements of operations in comparative format (in thousands).
The following table presents our consolidated statements of operations reflected as a percentage of total revenue:
Net Revenue
Net revenues are comprised of device and supply sales, constrained by estimated third-party payor reimbursement deductions. The reserve for billing allowance adjustments and allowance for uncollectible accounts are adjusted on an ongoing basis in conjunction with the processing of third-party payor insurance claims and other customer collection history. Product device revenue is primarily comprised of sales and rentals of our electrotherapy products and also includes complimentary products such as our cervical traction, lumbar support and hot/cold therapy products.
Supplies revenue is primarily comprised of sales of our consumable supplies to patients using our electrotherapy products, consisting primarily of surface electrodes and batteries. Revenue related to both devices and supplies is reported net, after adjustments for estimated third-party payor reimbursement deductions and estimated allowance for uncollectible accounts. The deductions are known throughout the health care industry as billing adjustments whereby the healthcare insurers unilaterally reduce the amount they reimburse for our products as compared to the sales prices charged by us. The deductions from gross revenue also take into account the estimated denials, net of resubmitted billings of claims for products placed with patients which may affect collectability. See our Significant Accounting Policies in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a more complete explanation of our revenue recognition policies.
We occasionally receive, and expect to continue to receive, refund requests from insurance providers relating to specific patients and dates of service. Billing and reimbursement disputes are very common in our industry. These requests are sometimes related to a few patients and other times include a significant number of refund claims in a single request. We review and evaluate these requests and determine if any refund is appropriate. We also review claims that have been resubmitted or where we are pursuing additional reimbursement from that insurance provider. We frequently have significant offsets against such refund requests which may result in amounts that are due to us in excess of the amounts of refunds requested by the insurance providers. Therefore, at the time of receipt of such refund requests we are generally unable to determine if a refund request is valid.
Net revenue increased $34.6 million or 76% to $80.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $45.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The growth in net revenue is primarily related to the 96% growth in device orders which led to an
increased customer base and drove higher sales of consumable supplies. During 2020, the Company increased its direct sales force by approximately 227% from 2019 and entered 170 new territories, which led to the significant increase in orders during 2020.
Device Revenue
Device revenue is related to the purchase or lease of our electrotherapy products as well as complimentary products including cervical traction, lumbar support and hot/cold therapy products. Device revenue increased $10.6 million or 99% to $21.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $10.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in device revenue is related to the growth in our device and complimentary product orders of 96% from 2019 to 2020 as a result of our increased sales force and additional territories as discussed above.
Supplies Revenue
Supplies revenue is related to the sale of supplies, typically electrodes and batteries, for our products. Supplies revenue increased $24.1 million or 69% to $58.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $34.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in supplies revenue is primarily related to growth in our customer base from higher device sales in 2020.
Operating Expenses
Costs of Revenue -Devices and Supplies
Costs of revenue - devices and supplies consist primarily of device and supplies costs, operations labor and overhead, shipping and depreciation. Costs of revenue increased $8.6 million or 97% to $17.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $8.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in costs of revenue is directly related to the increase in device and supplies orders. As a percentage of revenue, cost of revenue -devices and supplies increased to 22% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 19% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in cost of revenue - devices and supplies as a percentage of revenue was due to increased tariff and shipping costs during the year as well as an increase in labor as the company added an additional management layer within production to support its growing production workforce.
Sales and Marketing Expense
Sales and marketing expense primarily consists of employee-related costs, including commissions and other direct costs associated with these personnel including travel and marketing expenses. Sales and marketing expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased 130% to $34.1 million from $14.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in sales and marketing expense is primarily due to an increase of approximately 227% in our direct sales force by adding 304 additional salaried sales reps over the past 12 months. As a percentage of revenue, sales and marketing expense increased to 43% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 33% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase as a percentage of revenue is primarily due to our overall effort to expand our sales force and the related ramp-up period as territory managers build their sales territory.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense primarily consists of employee related costs, facilities expense, professional fees and depreciation and amortization. General and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased 71% to $18.3 million from $10.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in general and administrative expense is primarily due to the following:
● an increase of $5.5 million in compensation and benefits expense, including non-cash stock compensation expense, related to headcount growth. During 2020, the Company increased its headcount for its general and administrative activities by approximately 132%, or 162 employees;
● an increase of $1.6 million in other expenses, including professional fees and temporary labor costs; and
● an increase of $0.6 million in rent and facilities expenses as we further expanded our corporate offices in April 2020 to include all four floors at our current corporate headquarters.
As a percentage of revenue, general and administrative expense decreased to 23% for the year ended December 31, 2020 from 24% for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease as a percentage of revenue is primarily due to leveraging our investment in general and administrative functions from prior years.
The Company expects that general and administrative expenses will continue to increase through 2021 as the Company continues to expand its corporate headcount to accommodate continued order growth.
Other Income (Expense)
Other expense was $96,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, of which $19,000 was related to interest on our finance lease obligations and $77,000 was related to the dissolution of our ZBC subsidiary. The loss upon dissolution was the result of the non-controlling interest of $89,000, which was offset by a write-off of liabilities of $12,000. The Company dissolved ZBC due to inactivity, and the Company has no plans to re-start ZBC business activities.
Other income was $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 which was related to a deferred insurance reimbursement from the first quarter of 2016. The Company collected $0.9 million from an insurance company for accounts receivable. Subsequent to March 31, 2016, the insurance company verbally communicated to the Company that this payment was made in error and requested it be refunded to the insurance company. The Company recorded this $0.9 million as a deferred insurance liability.
During the first quarter of 2019, the Company recognized $0.9 million as other income and released the liability. The Company has included this amount in other income in order to ensure comparability of the Company’s operating income results for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018. Management’s legal determination that any refund obligation is remote was based on the facts and circumstances related to the dispute, which included reviewing the legal statutes within the jurisdictions the Company operates.
Income Tax Expense
We recorded income tax expense of $1.1 million and $2.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The effective income tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was 10% and 20%, respectively. The decrease in expense and effective rate during 2020 is primarily due to an increase in deductions related to stock-based compensation vesting and exercises. During 2020, discrete items related to stock-based compensation was $1.7 million as compared with $0.8 million in 2019.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
As of December 31, 2020, we had working capital of $52.9 million, compared to $17.4 million as of December 31, 2019. The increase in working capital is primarily due to the Company’s increase in orders and related receivables during 2020 along with the completion of a public offering whereby the Company received net proceeds of $25.2 million in July 2020. We generated $0.8 million in operating cash flows during 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We have historically financed operations through cash flows from operations, debt and equity transactions. As of December 31, 2020, our principal source of liquidity was $39.2 million in cash and $13.8 million in accounts receivables. The increased cash balance at December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the completion of a public offering in July 2020 which netted the Company proceeds of $25.2 million.
Our anticipated uses of cash in the future will be to fund the expansion of our business. The Company does not anticipate any large expenditures for capital resources over the next 12 months.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $0.8 million and $6.3 million, respectively. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to an increase in the amount of inventory the Company purchased during 2020 in order to keep up with increased demand and increased accounts receivable due to revenue growth.
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $1.0 million and $0.2 million, respectively. Cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to the purchase of computer and office equipment. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily related to the purchase of computer and office equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $25.3 million compared with net cash used in financing activities of $2.2 million for the 2019 period. The cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the completion of a public equity offering in July 2020 for net proceeds of $25.2 million along with net proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $0.1 million. The cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to the payment of a $2.3 million dividend in January 2019.
We believe our cash and cash equivalents, together with anticipated cash flow from operations will be sufficient to meet our working capital, and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next twelve months. In making this assessment, we considered the following:
● Our cash and cash equivalents balance at December 31, 2020 of $39.2 million;
● Our working capital balance of $52.9 million;
● Our accounts receivable balance of $13.8 million:
● Our profitability during the last 18 quarters; and
● Our planned capital expenditures of less than $1.0 million during 2021.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes the future cash disbursements to which we are contractually committed as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands).
We lease office and warehouse facilities under non-cancelable operating leases. The current office facility leases include our corporate headquarters and a production warehouse, both located in Englewood, Colorado. We also rent a small warehouse/office in Denmark. Rent expense was $1.7 million and $1.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
The Company also leases office equipment for its corporate and warehouse facilities under non-cancelable finance lease agreements.
Off - Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2020, and 2019, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements or obligations.
SUBSEQUENT EVENT
Appointment of Chief Operating Officer
On January 28, 2021, the Company announced the promotion of Anna Lucsok to Chief Operating Officer. Additionally, on such date, the Company entered into an employment agreement with Ms. Lucsok which was included as an exhibit to the Current Report on Form 8-K filed on the same date.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”).
We have identified the policies below as critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations.
Revenue Recognition and Accounts Receivable
Revenue is generated primarily from sales and leases of our electrotherapy devices and related supplies and complimentary products. Sales are primarily made with, and shipped, direct to the patient with a small amount of revenue generated from sales to distributors.
In the healthcare industry there is often a third party involved that will pay on the patients’ behalf for purchased or leased devices and supplies. The terms of the separate arrangement impact certain aspects of the contract with patients covered by third party payers, such as contract type, performance obligations and transaction price, but for purposes of revenue recognition the contract with the customer refers to the arrangement between the Company and the patient.
The Company does not have any material deferred revenue in the normal course of business as each performance obligation is met upon delivery of goods to the patient.
Device Sales
Device sales can be in the form of a purchase or a lease.
Revenue for purchased devices is recognized in accordance with ASC 606 - “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (“ASC 606) when the device is delivered to the patient.
Revenue related to devices out on lease is recognized in accordance with ASC 842, Leases. Using the guidance in ASC 842, we concluded our transactions should be accounted for as operating leases based on the following criteria below:
● The lease does not transfer ownership of the underlying asset to the lessee by the end of the lease term.
● The lease does not grant the lessee an option to purchase the underlying asset that the lessee is reasonably certain to exercise.
● The lease term is month to month, which does not meet the major part of the remaining economic life of the underlying asset. However, if the commencement date falls at or near the end of the economic life of the underlying asset, this criterion shall not be used for purposes of classifying the lease.
● There is no residual value guaranteed and the present value of the sum of the lease payments does not equal or exceed substantially all of the fair value of the underlying asset
● The underlying asset is expected to have alternative uses to the lessor at the end of the lease term.
Lease commencement occurs upon delivery of the device to the patient. The Company retains title to the leased device and those devices are classified as property and equipment on the balance sheet. Since our leases are month-to-month and can be returned by the patient at any time, revenue is recognized monthly for the duration of the period in which the patient retains the device.
Supplies
Supplies revenue is recognized once delivered to the patient. Supplies needed for the device can be set up as a recurring shipment or ordered through the customer support team or online store as needed.
Variable consideration
A significant portion of the Company’s revenues are derived, and the related receivables are due, from patients with commercial or government health plans. Revenues are estimated using the portfolio approach by third party payer type based upon historical rates of collection, the aging of receivables, trends in the historical reimbursement rates by third-party payer types and current relationships and experience with the third-party payers, which includes estimated constraints for third-party payer refund requests, deductions and adjustments. Inherent in these estimates is the risk that they will have to be revised as additional information becomes available and constraints are released. Specifically, the complexity of third-party billing arrangements and the uncertainty of reimbursement amounts for certain products from third-party payers or unanticipated requirements to refund payments previously received may result in adjustments to amounts originally recorded. Due to continuing changes in the health care industry and third-party payer reimbursement, it is possible our forecasting model to estimate collections could change, which could have an impact on our results of operations and cash flows. Any differences between estimated settlements and final determinations are reflected as an increase or a reduction to revenue in the period when such final determinations are known. Historically these differences have been immaterial and the Company has not had to go back and reassess the adjustments of future periods for past billing adjustments.
The Company monitors the variability and uncertain timing over third-party payer types in our portfolios. If there is a change in our third-party payer mix over time, it could affect our net revenue and related receivables. We believe we have a sufficient history of collection experience to estimate the net collectible amounts by third-party payer type. However, changes to constraints related to billing adjustments have historically fluctuated and may continue to fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year.
Stock-based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation through recognition of the cost of employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments, which is measured based on the grant date fair value of the award that is ultimately expected to vest during the period. The stock-based compensation expenses are recognized over the period during which an employee is required to provide service in exchange for the award (the requisite service period, which in the Company’s case is the same as the vesting period). For awards subject to the achievement of performance metrics, stock-based compensation expense is recognized when it becomes probable that the performance conditions will be achieved.
Income Taxes
Significant judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes. We assess the likelihood that our deferred tax asset will be recovered from future taxable income, and to the extent we believe that recovery is not likely, we establish a valuation allowance. We consider future taxable income projections, historical results and ongoing tax planning strategies in assessing the recoverability of deferred tax assets. However, adjustments could be required in the future if we determine that the amount to be realized is less or greater than the amount that we recorded. Such adjustments, if any, could have a material impact on our results of our operations.
We use a recognition threshold and a measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities.